S/2021/375

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 April 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 16 April 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by Ms.
Pramila Patten, Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence
in Conflict; Dr. Denis Mukwege, Nobel Peace Prize Laureate; Ms. Caroline Atim,
Director of South Sudan Women with Disabilities Network; and Ms. Beatrix Attinger
Colijn, Senior Women Protection Adviser at the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic, as well as the
statements delivered by the representatives of China, Estonia, France, India, Ireland,
Kenya, Mexico, the Niger, Norway, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Tunisia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the
United States of America and Viet Nam, in connection with the video-teleconference
on “Women and peace and security: sexual violence in conflict”, convened on
Wednesday, 14 April 2021.
In accordance with the understanding reached among Council members for
this video-teleconference, the following delegations and entities submitted written
statements, copies of which are also enclosed: Afghanistan, Albania, Argentina,
Australia, Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica,
Cyprus, Denmark, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, the European Union, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Indonesia, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Lebanon, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malta, Morocco, Myanmar, Nepal, the Netherlands, the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Pakistan, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic
of Korea, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine,
the United Arab Emirates and Yemen, as well as a statement by Argentina and
the Netherlands.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives
of the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the
light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease
pandemic, these briefings and statements will be issued as a document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Dang Dinh Quy
President of the Security Council

21-05261 (E) 210421 280521

*2105261*

S/2021/375

Annex 1
Briefing by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Pramila Patten
Today’s meeting is a critical opportunity to take stock of persistent and
entrenched, as well as new and emerging, challenges in our collective efforts to
eradicate the scourge of conflict-related sexual violence. Building on our debate last
year (see S/2020/727), which focused on turning commitments into compliance and
pursuing a survivor-centred, rights-based approach in all prevention and response
efforts, we now meet to assess and address the gaps that remain. Many of those
gaps and challenges have been exacerbated over the past year by a pandemic that
has arrested the attention of the world. Concerted efforts are needed to ensure that
survivors of sexual violence are not obscured beneath the long shadow cast by this
unprecedented crisis.
In that respect, I would like to sincerely appreciate the leadership of Viet
Nam for convening this debate, which shines a spotlight on the issue during dark
and difficult times. I warmly welcome the civil society briefer from South Sudan,
our Senior Women Protection Adviser from the Central African Republic and Nobel
Laureate Dr. Denis Mukwege, whose first-hand, front-line perspectives will enrich
our search for solutions.
We meet at a moment when this crime, which should have been consigned to a
closed chapter of history, is once again in the headlines. In the remote, mountainous
regions of northern and central Tigray, women and girls are being subjected to sexual
violence with a level of cruelty beyond comprehension. Health-care workers are
documenting new cases of rape and gang rape daily despite their fear of reprisals and
attacks on the limited shelters and clinics still in operation. The report (S/2021/312)
before us records allegations of more than 100 rape cases since hostilities erupted
in November 2020. It may be many months before we know the full scale and
magnitude — the extent and impact — of those atrocities.
There is no question that the Council has adopted ground-breaking resolutions
to combat sexual violence. But the question could be asked as to what those resolutions
mean right now on the ground in Tigray. When history looks back on this painful
episode, as part of the long litany of battles fought on the bodies of women and girls,
from Bosnia to Rwanda, Iraq, Syria and elsewhere, we will rightly be asked what
we did to honour our commitments. For its part, my Office has engaged with the
authorities at the highest level to offer technical assistance and support, and will
continue to closely monitor the situation, calling for restraint, humanitarian access,
provision of services and effective investigation.
The chasm between resolutions and reality, between aspirations and operations,
is also evident on every page of the twelfth annual report of the Secretary-General
before us today. The report covers 18 country situations and documents more than
2,500 United Nations-verified cases of conflict-related sexual violence committed
in the course of 2020. As in previous years, the vast majority, or 96 per cent, of those
incidents targeted women and girls. Reports of sexual violence against men and boys
were recorded in almost all of the countries examined, with the majority occurring
in detention settings. Eight verified cases were found to target lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender, queer and intersex individuals. While such figures convey the severity
and brutality of verified incidents, they do not reflect the global scale or prevalence
of that crime.
The chronic underreporting of wartime sexual violence due to stigma,
insecurity, fear of reprisals and lack of services, has been compounded by the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) containment measures. Lockdowns, curfews,
2/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

quarantines, fears of contracting or transmitting the virus, mobility restrictions and
limited access to services, as shelters closed and clinics were repurposed for the
pandemic response, added a layer of complexity to existing structural, institutional
and sociocultural barriers to reporting. Proactive measures to foster an enabling
environment for survivors to safely come forward and seek redress have become
more urgent than ever.
Many survivors have broken their silence, but many others have been broken
by the silence forced upon them. Shame, isolation, rejection and the anguish of
having nowhere to turn has shattered lives and livelihoods. Alongside the data, the
report also mentions human stories: the mother and daughter in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo who fled a rebel attack on their village only to be raped by
Government soldiers arriving to fight the rebels; the displaced families who live in
constant fear of being forced to marry their women and girls to armed elements in
the Central African Republic; the girl who was gang-raped by four armed men in
Tripoli whose family refused to file a complaint due to social norms around honour,
shame and victim-blame, coupled with fears of retaliation; the adolescent girl who
was gang-raped by three soldiers as she harvested fruit near a displacement camp in
Darfur; the survivors of captivity by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
who were forced to abandon their children conceived as a result of rape due to a lack
of social acceptance; and the Bosnian woman who was raped in 1995 and is still
seeking redress for the physical and psychological trauma that she endured.
Each of those cases cries out for justice. The survivor-centred approach
articulated in resolution 2467 (2019) demands that their voices be heard and heeded
in policy and programmatic decisions, that they be treated with dignity and provided
with quality, multisectoral assistance and that they be seen by their societies as the
holders of rights that will ultimately be respected and enforced.
Protection is tied to participation and power. Yet this is imperilled by a global
political climate of pushback on women’s rights and shrinking civic space, evident
in a disturbing trend of misogynistic attacks on women’s human rights defenders and
reprisals against women who are vocal and visible in public life.
At a time when the Secretary-General has called for a global ceasefire to
focus on defeating this disease, COVID-19 has given rise to new gender-based
protection concerns. The report records cases of sexual violence against women
detained for alleged violations of curfews and quarantines, as well as violations
by armed groups that have taken advantage of the pandemic to intensify their
operations and gain ground. The report makes a case for survivors’ rights, needs and
voices to inform national response and recovery plans as part of fostering a more
equitable post-COVID era. At the same time, the report recognizes that the United
Nations system, service providers and civil society organizations swiftly pivoted to
virtual approaches, such as hotlines, remote case management and new referral and
coordination networks, thereby avoiding a data black-out. Despite those innovations,
many of those hardest hit by the overlapping crises of conflict, displacement and
COVID-19 have also been the hardest to reach, notably in crowded displacement
settings where access to information and services is scarce and women are forced to
navigate the gendered digital divide.
Marginalized women tend to be left further and further behind in times of crisis
and social stress. To bring the structural root causes of sexual violence into focus, the
report views the issue through the lens of intersectionality, ensuring that survivors
are not simply treated as a homogenous group. It demonstrates how intersecting
forms of inequality, based on ethnic or political affiliation, age, disability, sexual
orientation and gender identity, income and migratory status, increase the risks
faced by diverse individuals in a context of historical power asymmetries, which are
structural and systemic.
21-052613/140

S/2021/375

The report illustrates the nexus between sexual violence, conflict-driven
trafficking in persons and violent extremism, which requires cross-border
cooperation and regional response capabilities, notably in the Lake Chad basin,
where the ongoing Boko Haram insurgency exacts a heavy toll on women and
girls. While some patterns of conflict-related sexual violence transcend national
borders, others persist at the subnational level. The intensification of entrenched,
localized conflicts is a concerning trend that perpetuates cycles of sexual violence,
including in the context of tensions over transhumance corridors, in the Central
African Republic and the Sudan. Community-based militias have used rape, forced
marriage and sexual slavery as part of identity and resource-based conflicts in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia and South Sudan, although that is rarely
acknowledged by global security bodies.
The lack of service coverage in isolated areas due to weak State presence and
infrastructure has become all the more acute during the pandemic. The report calls
for sexual and reproductive health care to be designated as an essential service in
order to avoid its defunding and de-prioritization in the light of the painful lesson
from past epidemics that more women die from a lack of access to reproductive
health care than from the disease itself. In rural and remote regions, the distance to
health structures is vast and transportation is limited, preventing many survivors
from accessing care within the 72-hour post-rape window needed to prevent HIV,
sexually transmitted infections and unwanted pregnancy.
Service delivery and material assistance cannot be dismissed as a secondary
issue for security stakeholders but are in fact the ultimate expression of political
will. Meeting the basic needs of survivors and communities at risk doubles as a form
of protection against exploitation and abuse. Greater attention must be paid to the
risk of desperate families resorting to harmful coping mechanisms, such as early or
forced marriage, in response to physical and financial insecurity.
As a critical pillar of prevention and deterrence, the report calls for enhanced
efforts to close the accountability and reparations gap. While important developments
took place at both the national and international levels in 2020, such as the trial and
conviction of notorious warlords Sheka and Lionso for war crimes, including rape
in North Kivu, and the first conviction by the International Criminal Court for the
crime of forced pregnancy against a member of the Lord’s Resistance Army, in other
cases investigations were stalled and prosecutions paralysed owing to COVID-19
restrictions. Although committed on a widespread and systematic scale by terrorist
groups, sexual violence has not been prosecuted in the context of counter-terrorism
trials. This means that no legal precedent has been set recognizing victims of sexual
violence as legitimate victims of terrorism on a basis of equality before the law.
In terms of transitional justice, momentum was observed in South Sudan,
where the authorities announced the establishment of the African Union Hybrid Court
for South Sudan. Last month, the Council of Representatives of Iraq adopted the
Yazidi Female Survivors Law, which provides support for victims of ISIL atrocities.
My Office has also developed model legislative guidance on conflict-related sexual
violence to assist States to harmonize domestic laws with international standards.
The report notes that in some cases the adoption of protective legal frameworks
stalled not only due to COVID-19 constraints, but following opposition from
traditional and religious leaders, as seen in Somalia. That highlights the need to
mobilize a broad constituency in both the formal and informal spheres to promote
social change. While reparations have been awarded in many cases, they generally
remain unpaid, leaving victims empty-handed, even as illicit arms and revenue flow
into the hands of the perpetrators.
This year’s report lists 52 parties credibly suspected of committing or being
responsible for patterns of sexual violence in situations on the agenda of the Council.
4/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Over 70 per cent are persistent perpetrators, having appeared on the list for five or
more years without taking remedial or corrective action. It is critical to ensure greater
coherence between the practice of listing and the practice of levying targeted and
graduated measures by sanctions committees. If applied in a timely and consistent
manner, sanctions can change the calculus of parties that operate on the assumption
that rape is cost-free, or even profitable, in the political economy of war in which
women are trafficked, traded and sold.
Sexual violence does not occur in a vacuum but is tied to broader security
dynamics, such as the resurgence of hostilities, the rise of violent extremism, arms
proliferation, population displacement and collapsed rule of law. These factors trigger
renewed patterns of sexual violence, which the report finds to be concentrated in
contexts of abduction, captivity, displacement, detention, in the vicinity of military
bases, in private homes during raids, at checkpoints and in rural areas where women
undertake livelihood activities. All tools must work in tandem to protect civilians
at risk, support survivors, reform security sectors and compel compliance by
parties. That comprehensive approach is reflected in the 11 joint communiqués and
frameworks of cooperation that my Office has signed with conflict-affected countries
to anchor national ownership. The most recent is the framework of cooperation that
I signed with the Government of the Sudan in March, which includes efforts to
address sexual violence as an integral part of the broader political and democratic
transition. In all contexts, it is critical to emphasize that policies of zero tolerance
cannot carry zero consequences.
Building back better in the wake of this pandemic requires an inclusive,
intersectional and gender-informed approach. Let us not miss, or misunderstand, this
moment. This is not just a point in time; it is a turning point in history. The pandemic
demands a paradigm shift: to silence the guns and amplify the voices of women;
and to invest in public welfare rather than the instruments of warfare. We need to
shift the leadership paradigm to ensure that women and survivors are represented.
We need to shift the public spending paradigm to reduce military expenditures and
strengthen institutions. And we need to shift the security paradigm to foster human
security and resilience amid social and economic shocks.
The pandemic has laid bare the intersecting inequalities that plague our societies
and are compounded by conflict, displacement and institutional fragility. The only
cure for these overlapping ills is an injection of political resolve and resources equal
to the scale of the challenge. It is not the time to return to the status quo, but rather to
dig deeper and tackle the root causes of this problem as never before.
From Tigray to Tripoli, from the Kivus to the camps of Darfur, women across
the world look to the Council to realize the vision set out in its 10 transformative
women and peace and security resolutions. A gender-responsive global pandemic
recovery is everyone’s business. It is unfinished business, but it cannot be business
as usual. It is time to write a new social contract in which no military or political
leader is above the law and no woman or girl is beneath the scope of its protection. It
is time for decisive action to mitigate the risks of sexual violence before it has begun.
As history has taught us, prevention is the best and only cure.

21-052615/140

S/2021/375

Annex 2
Briefing by Nobel Peace Prize Laureate Denis Mukwege
[Original: French]
I would like to thank the Permanent Mission of Viet Nam to the United Nations
for inviting me to speak at this open debate on conflict-related sexual violence.
The year 2020 marked the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) and
the women and peace and security agenda. We welcome the fact that our struggle for
the dignity of women survivors of sexual violence is on the international agenda and
that the issue of conflict-related sexual violence is finally gaining visibility among
policymakers and decision makers.
Nevertheless, advances in international law should not obscure the fact that
the scourge of sexual violence, which is truly a pandemic, persists in all conflict
contexts. Moreover, responses to it remain underfunded, and a climate of impunity
for sexual crimes is still more the rule than the exception. We are still a long way
from establishing a red line against the use of rape and sexual violence as a strategy
of war, domination and terror.
That is why our struggle for a world in which every woman and girl has
the right to live free from violence continues — as the overwhelming majority of
victims still do not receive the assistance and support they need, or receive justice
and reparations for the atrocities they have suffered.
The great challenge we face today is to effectively implement the existing
normative framework and to translate the many commitments made by the Security
Council into concrete realities for the benefit of survivors.
It is in that context that we welcome the determination of the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Representative to turn commitments into obligations and
resolutions into results. We have taken note of the determination expressed in various
recommendations contained in a recent report by the Secretary-General (S/2021/312)
aimed at filling the gaps in the global strategy to combat sexual violence and
concretely implementing the measures taken in the women and peace and security
agenda.
In that connection, the Secretary-General rightly made the sobering observation
that, during the first 10 years of the mandate establishing a Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, not a single person or entity
that perpetrated acts of sexual violence was subjected to the sanctions established by
the Security Council for that very purpose.
That is why we welcome the fact that, in August 2020, the Council imposed
sanctions on the leader of the armed Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation group in
the Central African Republic for planning, ordering or committing acts of sexual
violence, including rape.
We hope that this important precedent will not remain an isolated case, as
everyone recognizes that efforts to ensure accountability and justice are the best tools
for prevention. As long as these heinous crimes are not punished and sanctioned, they
will continue. This is the weak link in the strategies to respond to sexual violence
and deter potential perpetrators and their political and military chains of command
from committing these barbaric acts that bring shame on our common humanity.
I therefore reiterate my call to the international community and all States to
draw a red line against the use of rape and sexual violence as a weapon of war and
to punish the perpetrators and instigators of these odious crimes with blacklists,
economic, financial and political sanctions and legal proceedings.
6/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we at Panzi Hospital continue
our efforts to respond to conflict-related sexual violence according to a holistic
assistance model based on four pillars — medical, psychological, socioeconomic and
legal. This survivor-focused “one-stop centre” model aims to integrate all women’s
health needs in one place, within the primary health-care system, in order to avoid
discrimination and stigmatization.
But we must not only address the consequences of violence, we must also ensure
the non-repetition of crimes by strengthening efforts to fight impunity. Victims are
entitled to not only quality holistic care but also justice, truth and reparations.
Various Security Council resolutions have highlighted that impunity for those
allegedly responsible for the most serious crimes, including sexual crimes, remains
one of the main obstacles to peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and explains, in large part, the perpetuation of mass atrocities to this day in
the conflict provinces in the east of the country, notably Ituri and the Kivus.
That is the reason behind our advocacy efforts to implement the
recommendations of the mapping report on the most serious violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law committed in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo between 1993 and 2003 — one of the darkest periods in the country’s
modern history, during which women and girls paid a heavy price and all the fighting
forces — both Congolese and foreign — made massive, methodical and systematic
use of rape and sexual assault as a strategy of terror and subjugation.
However, more than 10 years after its publication by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, none of the report’s recommendations
aimed at putting in place all the tools of transitional justice have been implemented.
This is particularly shocking in view of the scale and seriousness of the crimes
committed against the civilian population for decades.
We would like to draw the attention of the members of the Security Council
to the fact that political and military solutions have thus far failed to ensure the
protection of civilians and to bring stability to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
While the Congolese authorities and the United Nations have begun
discussions on a strategy for the gradual and progressive withdrawal of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, we believe it is essential to place the fight against impunity and the use of
all transitional justice mechanisms at the heart of this strategy, thus emphasizing the
need to prioritize a profound reform of the security sector and the prosecution of the
most serious crimes through the establishment of international or internationalized
mechanisms for the prosecution and trial of the most serious crimes.
I am grateful for all efforts to end impunity and to support the implementation
of a holistic transitional justice strategy in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
This justice imperative is a prerequisite for breaking the cycle of violence and
instability and a sine qua non for moving forward on the path to sustainable
development and peace. Together we can end sexual violence and act for human
dignity, justice and peace.

21-052617/140

S/2021/375

Annex 3
Briefing by the Director of the South Sudan Women with Disabilities
Network, Caroline Atim
I thank you for the opportunity to deliver this statement on behalf of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security. I am Caroline Atim, Founder
and Executive Director of the South Sudan Women with Disabilities Network, an
organization that works directly with women with disabilities, including survivors
of gender-based violence. Today, as a deaf woman, I am speaking on behalf of those
survivors and on behalf of all women and girls with disabilities. My sign language
interpreter will be voicing my statement today.
Despite the peace deal, South Sudan remains engulfed by intercommunal,
ethnic, political and armed conflicts, where gender-based violence is deliberately
used as a tool of humiliation against women and girls. More than 65 per cent of
South Sudanese women have experienced sexual or physical violence, a figure that is
double the global average and among the highest in the world. Women and girls with
disabilities are at even greater risk of sexual violence during conflict.
A lethal combination of impunity for perpetrators and deep-rooted inequality
and discrimination means that gender-based violence, including sexual violence
against women and girls, is not taken seriously as a crime, and neither is its
devastating impact addressed. Even before the current conflict, rape in marriage
was considered acceptable, and more than 50 per cent of girls married before they
turned 18. The rates of child, early and forced marriage have only increased since
the conflict began and have been further exacerbated by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic. Survivors are often forced to marry their rapists. Girls are
sometimes raped to compensate for crimes of their relatives or as acts of revenge.
Women have been raped and forced to bear children to replace dead relatives. These
inhuman and unjust practices must end.
Globally, women and girls with disabilities are two to three times more likely
to experience gender-based violence, abuse and exploitation, especially during
conflict, as they face increasing isolation, lose access to support networks, may have
limited mobility or are left behind.
Let me share the example of a young girl whose heartbreaking story illustrates
the plight of women and girls with disabilities. In 2014, during the conflict in Bor,
a deaf 14-year-old girl was raped several times after being abandoned by family
members who fled the fighting. She was unable to communicate her trauma to
anyone or seek necessary health and other services in the immediate aftermath.
When I met her and was able to communicate with her in sign language, we were
able to understand what happened to her and provide her with immediate care —
only to find out that she was HIV positive. Had she had access to an interpreter and
timely medical care, she could have been helped sooner, but those necessary services
were not available to her and she had to suffer in silence. That is unacceptable.
This story illustrates some of the ways in which the suffering of women
and girls with disabilities is compounded by the discrimination they already face.
They are easy prey for rapists, who know they can act with impunity because
women with disabilities, even more than others, may not be believed if they report
that violence. They often struggle to access limited or otherwise inadequate health
facilities, safe shelters or even basic health and legal information when they need
them most. The COVID-19 pandemic has made these conditions even worse due to
lockdowns and interruption of services, which have kept women with disabilities
isolated in their homes.
8/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

And yet responses to gender-based violence often neglect the specific
needs of women and girls with disabilities, and very limited data is systematically
collected about our experiences, including by the United Nations. Instead, there is
a lack of understanding of our rights, combined with stereotypes that we cannot
make choices for ourselves and that our perspectives do not matter. For example, the
false assumption that women with disabilities are not capable of having consensual
relationships means many are never provided with information about their bodies or
their rights, in turn making them more vulnerable to abuse, unwanted pregnancies
and sexually transmitted infections.
In situations where survivors of sexual violence bear children, both the
children and the women who bear or raise them can face devastating consequences
due to deep-rooted gender inequality. They are both targets of extreme stigma
and discrimination. These women are often ostracized by their communities
and abandoned, left with few resources, and can face long-lasting physical and
psychological trauma. Some are forced out on the streets while others, especially
girls, are traded off for cattle. The only way to address the tragedy of these women
and girls and their children is to address prevailing inequalities and protect their
fundamental rights in areas of conflict.
The rights, experiences and voices of survivors must be at the centre of
any response to gender-based violence. That includes survivors with disabilities.
Survivors have fundamental rights that entitle them to services according to their
specific needs — they must have access to comprehensive and non-discriminatory
services, including psychosocial support, sexual and reproductive health and rights,
mental health care, access to legal services and training to develop livelihood skills.
That is what a robust survivor-centred approach looks like, and that is the standard
to which the Security Council committed itself through resolution 2467 (2019).
Currently, the widespread availability of firearms in our highly militarized
society leaves women at risk of all forms of gender-based violence. The sale of
illicit weapons must be stopped to ensure women’s safety. Those responsible for
crimes must be held accountable through the Hybrid Court for South Sudan, which
must be established and become fully functional, in accordance with Chapter 5 of
the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan. All
parties must prioritize the full, equal and meaningful participation and leadership of
women in all of their diversity, including those with disabilities, and in all aspects
of the current peace process, and must ensure that the 35 per cent quota provided
for in the Revitalized Agreement is met. South Sudan must respect its human rights
obligations under the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women and all relevant Security Council resolutions, including resolution
2475 (2019), on the protection of people with disabilities in armed conflicts, and all
resolutions on women and peace and security. Lastly, we urge all actors to ensure
that rights, inclusion and accessibility for women and girls with disabilities are at the
heart of all efforts to prevent and respond to gender-based violence.
For the sake of our humanity, our dignity and our future, we need an end to
war and violence in South Sudan. The lives of thousands of South Sudanese women
and girls, in Juba, in Malakal, in Bentiu, in Wau and Jonglei, cannot be traded away
for a fleeting respite from fighting. If their suffering is forgotten, our wounds will
never heal. That risks future conflict. For sustainable peace, we need inclusivity,
justice and reconciliation with the past.
In conclusion, I urge the Security Council to reinforce the fact that a holistic,
survivor-centred approach is, by definition, one that is rights-based, accessible and
designed in partnership with diverse women, including women with disabilities,
and to urge all Governments to uphold their obligations to provide services for
21-052619/140

S/2021/375

gender-based violence, including sexual and reproductive health services. In
accordance with resolution 2567 (2021), all parties to the conflict and other armed
actors must cease and prevent further sexual violence and adopt a survivor-centred
approach in their response in South Sudan. Additionally, the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan must fulfil its protection mandate to prevent and respond to genderbased violence wherever it is deployed and strengthen the capacity of the justice
system to fully prosecute all forms of such violence and human rights violations.
The Council must emphasize that justice and accountability efforts, including
compensation and reparations processes, must be rights-based, survivor-centred,
inclusive and non-discriminatory, and, above all, they must avoid exacerbating the
harm already done. Those responsible for crimes must be held accountable through
the Hybrid Court for South Sudan, which should be established and fully functional
in accordance with chapter 5 of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan.
The Council must urgently stem the flow of illicit weapons in order to establish
an environment conducive to implementation of the agreement.
It must also call on all actors to ensure that the rights and participation of,
and accessibility for, women and girls with disabilities are at the heart of efforts to
prevent and respond to gender-based violence. It should prioritize the implementation
of resolution 2475 (2019) in order to ensure that the rights and perspectives of women
and girls with disabilities are reflected across all country-specific agenda items,
including by mandating peace operations to take into account women and girls
with disabilities in protection of civilians and human rights monitoring activities,
and to support their full, equal and meaningful participation in peace, political and
humanitarian processes.
The Council must demand that all parties prioritize the full, equal and
meaningful participation and leadership of women in all of their diversity, including
those with disabilities, in all aspects of the current peace process. That includes
meeting the 35 per cent quota provided for in the agreement for women’s participation
at all levels.
It must call on the international donor community to adequately resource
civil-society organizations led by women and girls, particularly those with expertise
in disability rights, so that they can take on leadership roles throughout the
humanitarian-development-peace continuum.
The Security Council can and must fulfil its obligations to the people of South
Sudan and to the many women and girls in conflicts around the world to whom it
committed to ending, once and for all, all forms of gender-based violence.

10/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Annex 4
Briefing by the Senior Women Protection Adviser at the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic, Beatrix Attinger Colijn
I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for the invitation to speak at this important
event. It is a great honour.
Exactly one year ago today, I left Bangui on board the last commercial
flight to Europe, as a voluntary prevention measure due to the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic. With me were many colleagues from international nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), a number of them from organizations that
provide medical services to survivors of sexual violence. At that time, the prediction
was that the weak health system would not be able to deal with a general outbreak
of COVID-19.
Now, one year on, the official number of COVID cases in the Central African
Republic stands at 5,682 confirmed cases, with 5,112 recoveries and 75 deaths.
Within the United Nations family in the Central African Republic, we counted 749
cases and deplore six deaths. In the early summer of 2020, most of us who had left
returned to the country and resumed our work in the field. Internal flights have
long since resumed, and humanitarian services continue to operate. With testing
being rare, COVID-19 looms over the country with an unknown magnitude. The
general population does not wear masks, and moto taxis carry multiple passengers.
Despite continuous sensitization being carried out by the Mission, there is no social
distancing outside the work environment of international organizations. The virus
seems a neglected enemy in a place where so many other challenges exist.
I have served in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) for more than five years, and,
unfortunately, the COVID-19 crisis we are witnessing is not the only one affecting
service provision for victims of grave human rights violations, including sexual
violence. Over the past five months, the national army — the Armed Forces of the
Central African Republic — and bilateral forces carried out military operations
against armed groups, in particular against those groups that formed the Coalition
des patriotes pour le changement ahead of the first round of presidential and
legislative elections in December last year. Numerous installations of humanitarian
organizations were destroyed or occupied by combatants, and hospitals were looted,
bringing service provision to a halt. Humanitarian access to many regions has
become from risky to impossible owing to numerous thefts of vehicles and bridges
being deliberately destroyed by armed elements.
Those violent clashes in many parts of the country contrast with periods of
hope and positive developments. On 27 December I joined many of my colleagues
to observe the election day in Bangui. It was amazing to see the thousands of people
streaming to the voting centres, queuing patiently sometimes for hours to cast their
ballots. All of the women I talked to were keen to assure me that it did not matter
how long they had to wait so long as they would be able to exercise their civic
duty and vote. In March, during my field visit to Bambari, the women’s associations
assured me that they continue to support survivors of sexual violence despite the fact
that their office building could temporarily not be used. They had stored all their
equipment in a safe place, as a preventive measure, before the armed groups had
invaded Bambari in December.
As Senior Women Protection Adviser, my role is to advise and support
MINUSCA’s civilian, police and military components in implementing the Mission’s
Security Council mandate to prevent and respond to conflict-related sexual violence.
21-0526111/140

S/2021/375

In my work, I have come to understand two crucial areas that define the extent of the
response to conflict-related sexual violence: one is the social obstacles that impede
survivors from reporting violations; the other concerns access to justice.
In March, two non-governmental organizations reported the following:
“[One of] the most common forms of violence suffered by adolescents, which
has continued to affect the latter during the recent armed crisis in Boali and
Damara, [is] sexual violence. [The] attitude of indifference of the community
towards this problem … appears to further fuel the impunity enjoyed by
perpetrators. In the current crisis situation, this is exacerbated by insecurity
and hunger”.
Boali and Damara are less than 100 kilometres north of Bangui. Further afield
in more rural areas, other barriers prevent survivors of sexual violence from seeking
justice: these include stigmatization, rejection by the family and community, and
reprisals by the perpetrators. In the majority of locations outside Bangui, there is
no functional chain of justice, with courts non-operational and prosecutors absent.
Equally, in large parts of the country, access to health facilities is difficult or
impossible due to weak infrastructure and lack of transportation.
At this sad point, I want to speak about some of my most inspiring encounters
with civil-society members and survivors of sexual violence. Our mandate spells out
the role of civil society and community leaders in enabling access to services for
survivors and shapes our support to partners. While the Mission works to strengthen
the justice system in the long run, there also has to be a focus on immediate remedies
for survivors. One of the first is to restore their dignity.
As one NGO partner said to me:
“We want to show them they are not alone, that there are others in such a
situation, and give them something they can do to improve their confidence”.
Last year I visited a project in the north of Bria, in the centre of the country,
developed by the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic Community Violence Reduction programme. Men
and women, some of them survivors of sexual violence, were tending to their plots,
where they grew vegetables. The women did not want to speak about the violence
they had suffered, but they did proudly show me the growth of their plants, the
prospect of some income and personal independence: income-generating activities
to regain control of one’s life during the long wait for justice.
Travelling in the field can mean five hours for a few kilometres. And by
travelling in cars, we do not reach all the locations that are accessible only by
motorbike, on horseback or on foot. Roads are the veins of the country, which bring
support from the centres to the isolated areas. Where the population has no means
to travel, regular visits by the Mission and humanitarians connect them to essential
services. On our way back from the farming project, our convoy was stopped in a
small village along the axis. The village chief was waiting with the father of a girl,
a victim of rape, who had walked more than 15 kilometres to reach the main road,
waiting for us to pass, so he could report the crime.
I reported that case to the United Nations police, which then initiated an
investigation. And while that region still awaits the re-establishment of courts and
State authorities, our programmes and support for local partners are the first steps to
hear victims, provide assistance and restore their sense of confidence and belief in a
future where impunity will give way to justice and development.

12/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Annex 5
Statement by the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Zhang Jun
[Original: Chinese and English]
China wishes to thank Viet Nam for the initiative to hold today’s open debate.
We also thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Patten and the other
briefers for their statements; their comments and suggestions will help the Security
Council better discuss and handle this important issue.
In the midst of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, armed
conflicts and terrorist activities do not press the pause button, while humanitarian
and security crises have continued unabated. As the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2021/312) points out, sexual violence is still used as a tactic of war and
terrorism, with women in conflict bearing the brunt and suffering the most. China
firmly opposes the use of sexual violence as a means of war and strongly condemns
any acts of sexual violence against women and girls. China calls on the international
community to attach great importance to the issue and to implement integrated
policies to eliminate sexual violence in conflict and advance the women and peace
and security agenda so that fresh progress can be achieved.
First, we must focus on tackling the root causes and step up efforts aimed
at conflict prevention and at maintaining peace. Secretary-General Guterres once
emphasized in a report that the ultimate goal of the agenda to combat sexual violence
in conflict is not to make conflict free of sexual violence but rather to make the world
free of wars. So long as conflicts and wars continue, there will be the possibility that
sexual violence may be used as a tactic of war and terrorism.
The international community should focus on addressing the root causes of
sexual violence in conflict in order to completely eradicate the breeding grounds
therefor, follow such principles as non-interference in internal affairs and the nonuse of force, and remain committed to settling disputes through peaceful means. The
Security Council should actively promote the political settlement of hotspot issues
and play a greater role in conflict prevention and peacekeeping. Parties to conflict
should earnestly follow and effectively implement the Secretary-General’s global
ceasefire appeal and resolve their differences through dialogue and consultation.
Secondly, we must promote gender equality and women’s empowerment and
support women in playing a greater role in economic and social development as
well as peace and security. Sexual violence in conflict does not occur in a vacuum
but often reflects deep-rooted problems such as gender inequality and inadequate
development, among others. The COVID-19 pandemic has dealt a heavy blow to
conflict situations, putting women in an even more vulnerable position.
Within the overall framework of women’s empowerment and development, the
international community should respond to the issue of sexual violence in conflict in
an integrated manner so as to eliminate gender-based discrimination and differentiated
treatment, promote women’s development in tandem with social and economic
progress and create synergies with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. It
is necessary to continue to support women’s broader and deeper participation in peace
processes and in carrying out mediation, while giving women more opportunities to
participate in decision-making with an enhanced capacity and voice.
Thirdly, it is important to ensure the ownership of the countries concerned
and support their capacity-building. The countries concerned bear the primary
responsibility for preventing and combating sexual violence in conflict and protecting
women and children in their respective countries. The international community
21-0526113/140

S/2021/375

should encourage and support the countries concerned in advancing the women
and peace and security agenda according to their national conditions and in taking
strong actions to combat sexual violence in conflict. On the basis of respect for the
sovereignty and jurisdiction of countries concerned, the international community
should help with their security and judicial capacity-building, among other aspects.
The relevant United Nations entities should carry out their work based on their
respective mandates and expertise, do their best with existing resources, strengthen
coordination and forge synergies. It is necessary to support regional and subregional
organizations to leverage their unique advantages and to explore programmes and
practices based on the actual conditions of their regions. It is also important to
encourage women’s groups and civil society to play a constructive role.
Women and armed conflict is one of the 12 key areas of the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action. As the host country of the Fourth World Conference
on Women and as an advocate for gender equality and women’s empowerment,
China will continue to work with the international community to make greater
contributions to the elimination of sexual violence in conflict and to advancing
women’s development around the world.

14/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Annex 6
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I thank all briefers for their presentations and — even more crucially — their
daily tireless work. I also thank the Special Representative for the presentation of
the annual report on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2021/312) and welcome the
concrete recommendations therein.
This is the twelfth dedicated report by the Secretary-General, which clearly
shows that conflict-related sexual violence — unforgivable and still unpunished —
is widely used as a weapon of war across conflicts. We need to treat it systematically
as such, picking up its early signs, countering its use, making addressing it part of
ceasefires and peace agreements and making sure that its severity and impact is
not ignored and that those who commit it are punished and not included in amnesty
provisions. We also need to admit that the victims and survivors of conflict-related
sexual violence are victims and survivors of war. They deserve support and justice.
Neither as States nor as the Security Council can we address conflict-related
violence without recognizing the need to ensure the full enjoyment of human rights,
including sexual and reproductive health and rights, by women and girls. The report
of the Secretary-General confirms that gender inequality is a root cause and a driver
of sexual violence in times of conflict and peace. It turns women and girls into
targets and a means of waging war. It contributes to stigma, victim-blaming and the
underreporting of sexual violence. Gender inequality, compounded by harmful social
norms, also means that the price for sexual violence remains low or non-existent for
perpetrators and results in gaps in legal frameworks and services for survivors. The
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has exacerbated these inequalities, and
to even a greater extent for women and girls in conflict situations — as the Council
recognized in resolution 2532 (2020).
The Secretary-General has drawn attention to the reports of sexual
violence against women and girls in Tigray. We have acknowledged the Ethiopian
Government’s willingness to collaborate with international human rights experts,
and we urge it to guarantee an independent and credible investigation, including an
unimpeded access of experts, as well as access for humanitarian aid organizations
so that they can assist the survivors of sexual violence.
In Yemen, conflict-related sexual violence has been reportedly committed
by all parties, including in detention and internally displaced persons camps. We
welcome the adoption of resolution 2564 (2021), which designates an individual to
the Yemen sanctions list based on actions related to the systematic detention, torture
and sexual violence conducted against politically active women.
We reiterate our call for accountability for conflict-related sexual violence in
Syria, which is long overdue, as well as for violence committed by the Tatmadaw
in Myanmar.
As a member of the Security Council, Estonia will continue to underline the
fundamental importance of human rights, including women and girls’ human rights,
in combating conflict-related sexual violence. We continue to call for women’s full,
equal and meaningful participation in peace processes as well as in COVID-19
recovery. We have and will continue to underline the absolutely crucial importance
of accountability — through domestic systems of justice or, if appropriate, through
the International Criminal Court. Estonia continues its support for the Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, which in 2020 provided
technical assistance in the prosecution and trial of Ntabo Ntaberi Sheka.
21-0526115/140

S/2021/375

Redress and reparations for survivors are part of accountability. We support
the designation and use of sexual violence as a stand-alone criterion for sanctions
and for briefings by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General to Security
Council sanctions committees.
We encourage all parties to conflict to adopt specific commitments to addressing
conflict-related sexual violence. We continue to call for a non-discriminatory and
rights-based approach to assisting survivors of sexual violence, respecting their
diversity and their needs. This approach includes providing comprehensive services,
including psychosocial, legal, and sexual and reproductive-health services as well as
livelihood support.
We continue to support the mandating and deployment of women protection
advisers and look forward to their deployment in Libya and the Sudan. We see
sufficient capacity and funding as key for the functioning of monitoring and
reporting arrangements.
We will continue to call for the Council to speak up on reprisals and attacks,
including targeted sexual violence against women active in public life, women human
rights defenders and those providing assistance to survivors of sexual violence.
The shadow that conflict-related sexual violence casts is long: its memory
is carried forward, and it can fuel endless cycles of violence. Bringing justice and
addressing the rights and needs of the survivors of conflict-related sexual violence
is one step towards breaking this cycle.

16/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Annex 7
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
[Original: French]
Let me begin by welcoming Viet Nam’s commitment to addressing sexual
violence in conflict. I also thank the Special Representative, Mr. Mukwege and the
other representatives of civil society for their briefings.
France shares the concerns expressed in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2021/312) and in the briefings and statements made today. Conflict-related sexual
violence continues with impunity, particularly against the backdrop of the pandemic.
I am thinking in particular of the situations in Tigray, Ethiopia, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Syria and the Central African Republic.
The time has come, not to take stock, but to act. Our collective responsibility
is to ensure the implementation of all relevant Security Council resolutions. We must
also ensure that the commitments made by the parties concerned are respected.
France strongly condemns the use of sexual violence as a tactic of war and a
tool of terror. We also condemn any sexist, misogynistic or homophobic discourse
that exacerbates violence.
I wish to emphasize four points.
First, all forms of violence must be punished. The pandemic has reduced
access to police, justice and health services. Non-compliance and impunity remain
major problems. This is the case in Syria, in particular, where France is strongly
committed to ensuring that the perpetrators of such crimes are punished. France
believes in the importance of justice, reparation and guarantees that these violent
acts will not be repeated. We welcome the role of the International Criminal Court
for its contribution to the fight against this scourge and note in this regard the recent
trial court conviction in Uganda of Dominic Ongwen.
Secondly, we must adopt a survivor-centred approach and ensure
comprehensive care for survivors. They must have access to medical, psychological
and social follow-up to help them return to a normal life. This is why France is
maintaining its financial commitment in the amount of €6.2 million for the Global
Fund for Survivors of Sexual Violence, created by Nobel Peace Prize winners Mr.
Mukwege and Ms. Murad.
Thirdly, we must put an end to the obstacles to access to sexual and
reproductive-health and rights. We regret the politicization of these issues which
leads to losing sight of the best interests of women and girls. France is funding a €5
million project in Chad to empower women through better access to these services
as well as health and psychosocial care. The protection of these rights will be at the
heart of the Generation Equality Forum process, launched in Mexico City and which
will conclude in Paris from 30 June to 2 July.
Finally, the Security Council needs to do more. France will continue to
support the inclusion of the issue of conflict-related sexual violence in the Council’s
mandates, promoting the implementation of resolutions adopted under the women
and peace and security agenda and the provision of adequate resources for the teams
on the ground. In addition, the sanctioning of perpetrators of sexual violence is
necessary, and the Security Council must do more to this end.
This battle must be waged relentlessly and without compromise. France
will work towards this objective, particularly in the context of the Generation
Equality Forum.
21-0526117/140

S/2021/375

Annex 8
Statement by the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations, T. S. Tirumurti
At the outset, we thank Viet Nam for convening today’s open debate on this
important issue. We also thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2021/312)
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General Pramila Patten and all the
distinguished briefers for sharing their insights.
Sexual violence in armed conflicts, be they perpetrated by State and non-State
actors, is a weapon used to subjugate people. It fuels displacement, destabilizes and
traumatizes communities, weakens governance and imperils the opportunities for
post-conflict reconciliation and stability. Despite the strong framework put in place
by the Security Council over the past decade, the level of compliance by parties to
conflicts remains alarmingly low. The gap between what is recommended and the
reality in the field remains intact.
With a view to preventing atrocities, end the culture of impunity and
rehabilitate and reintegrate the survivors, my delegation wishes to highlight the
following points.
First, it is vital for States Members of the United Nations to develop
comprehensive legal frameworks in line with international standards, to ensure
the effective prosecution of sexual violence as a self-standing crime. National
Governments have the primary responsibility for prosecuting and deterring such
crimes in conflict situations on their territories, even if they are alleged to have been
committed by non-State actors. Where required, the United Nations could assist
Member States in augmenting their capacities to deal with this issue.
Second, Member States should adopt a victim-centred approach aimed
at preventing and responding to sexual violence in armed conflicts, in line with
resolution 2467 (2019). States must ensure adequate funding for comprehensive,
non-discriminatory and multisectoral assistance for victims of sexual violence, such
as medical, psychological, social and legal services.
Third, understanding the nexus between terrorism, the financing of violent
extremist groups, and human trafficking and sexual violence in armed conflicts
must inform Council action on this important matter.
Fourth, the sanctions regimes and other targeted measures by the Security
Council need to be strengthened in order to utilize their full potential to advance
women’s protection from sexual violence in situations of armed conflict, including
by listing individuals and entities involved in conflict-related sexual violence
against women.
Fifthly, greater participation of women in conflict resolution and post-conflict
reconciliation processes needs to be promoted to address deep-rooted inequality and
subordination in the society. For any peace process to succeed, it is important that
this be made a precondition.
Sixth, the mainstreaming of a gender perspective in peace operations and
increasing women’s representation in peacekeeping are prerequisites for prevention
and response.
Seventh and not least in importance, it is imperative to promote synergy and
effective coordination so as to avoid duplication in the working of various United
Nations organs. The issue of violence against women, including sexual violence,
is discussed by other United Nations bodies, including the Human Rights Council.
Deliberations at the Security Council should therefore remain focused on such
18/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

atrocities when they are perpetrated in situations of armed conflicts that threaten
international peace and security.
In 2017, Prime Minister Narendra Modi joined the Secretary-General’s circle
of leadership on the prevention of and response to sexual exploitation and abuse in
United Nations operations. India has also signed the Secretary-General’s Voluntary
Compact against Sexual Exploitation and Abuse.
India has the distinction of sending, in 2007, the first all-women formed police
unit contingent to Liberia. Not only did this unit manage controlling crime, deter
sexual and gender-based violence and help rebuild safety and confidence among the
Liberian population, but it also operationalized the spirit of resolution 1325 (2000)
into action. These courageous Indian women patrolled Monrovian streets at night,
taught Liberian women self-defence skills, conducted classes on sexual violence,
maintained calm during the Ebola crisis and devoted time and resources above and
beyond the call of duty to protect the local communities. The legacy these Indian
woman peacekeepers left behind was the next generation of female Liberian leaders
who are serving in the national police today.
Major Suman Gawani, an Indian woman peacekeeper deployed in the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan, received United Nations Military Gender Advocate
of the Year Award for 2019 for her role in mentoring over 230 United Nations military
observers and in ensuring the presence of women military observers in each of the
Mission’s team sites. She also trained South Sudanese Government forces and helped
them launch their action plan to prevent conflict-related sexual violence.
India welcomes the uniformed gender parity strategy to increase the number
of women peacekeepers. We also support increasing the deployment of women
protection advisers for effective monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements on
conflict-related sexual violence in the field.
Burdens on health-care systems and the economic fallout resulting from the
coronavirus disease pandemic threaten to put women and girls in armed conflicts
at even higher risk. States Members of the United Nations need to work together to
mitigate the impact of the pandemic on sexual violence in armed conflicts and to
preserve our hard-won progress in this field.
Let me conclude by acknowledging the progress that has been achieved by
United Nations entities in monitoring, reporting and listing persistent offenders
over the years. However, we need to continue focusing on closing the compliance
gaps through a range of context-specific and inclusive actions. India reaffirms
its commitment to actively contributing to the collective endeavour of effectively
tackling sexual violence in situations of armed conflict.

21-0526119/140

S/2021/375

Annex 9
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ireland to the
United Nations, Geraldine Byrne Nason
I thank the Vietnamese presidency for convening today’s open debate and
in particular for ensuring that civil society is so strongly represented among
the briefers.
I thank Caroline Atim and Denis Mukwege for being truth-tellers of the reality
of sexual violence when it is all too often shrouded in stigma and obscured. Their
focus on empowering survivors helps them to regain the sense of agency that these
violations so horribly undermine.
I also want to pay tribute to Special Representative Patten. Her work
in documenting the evidence of these heinous crimes and calling to account
their perpetrators makes an enormous contribution and serves to elucidate
our understanding. Importantly, evidence-based reporting reinforces our
ability to address impunity. Today’s work of documenting crimes will lead to
tomorrow’s convictions. The Special Representative’s work is badly needed and
deeply appreciated.
I was especially pleased to hear from Beatrix Attinger Colijn, the Senior Women
Protection Adviser who worked with the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic. In our view, ensuring the
adequate resourcing of women protection advisers from regular mission budgets is
crucial. The Security Council has an obligation to follow through on the promises it
makes — the promises that we make — in the establishment of mandates, including
women protection adviser posts. Indeed, to fully assume our clear responsibilities,
we should expand the deployment of women protection advisers.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/312) warns of the risk that the
coronavirus disease will reverse hard-won gains on gender equality, reminding us
that inequality is a root cause and driver of sexual violence in times of conflict.
Of course, it is also a driver of sexual violence in times of peace too. Let us be
clear: to eliminate sexual and gender-based violence, including in conflict, our most
fundamental task is to achieve gender equality at every level.
We should not fool ourselves that the shocking sexual and gender-based
violence in times of war, disease and disaster is somehow extraordinary or aberrant.
Let us not fool ourselves that things will “go back to normal” once the crisis has
passed. What we witness in times of conflict and crisis is the transfer of violence
from the private to the public sphere. We see the deliberate weaponization of the
gendered violence that one in three of us who are women will experience in our
lifetime. Most of the violence is suffered by women and girls from men they know.
This is a kind of normal no woman wants to return to. The kind of normal we cannot
afford to return to.
I echo therefore the words of the Secretary-General that recovery from
this pandemic demands us to “silence the guns and amplify the voices of women
peacebuilders, as well as to invest in public welfare rather than in the instruments
of warfare” (S/2021/312, para. 4). To succeed, we must support the courageous work
of grassroots and women-led organizations, as well as brave women human rights
defenders. At a minimum, we must protect them from reprisals.
Our recovery policies must also recognize the intersecting forms of
discrimination. The discrimination that compounds vulnerability to violence, as
Caroline so powerfully attested today. To build back better we need to advance
20/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

equality and participation for all, including those with disabilities, LGBTI+ persons,
migrants and refugees and members of racial and ethnic minorities.
And let us remember, the Security Council has the means to act. We have put
in place a robust framework to deal with conflict-related sexual violence over the
past decade. And yet, compliance by parties to conflict is appallingly, shamefully
low. Seventy per cent of the parties listed in the Secretary-General’s report have
been appearing on the list for five years or more without taking corrective action.
The fact is, we are failing in our responsibility if we do not ask ourselves why this is.
The Security Council can and must do more with the tools at its disposal. It is
our responsibility. To do what?
We believe that we must fully implement the recommendations of the Informal
Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security.
We believe that we should ensure that monitoring and early warning processes
on conflict-related sexual violence are incorporated into all peacekeeping and special
political missions that include a protection of civilians mandate.
We believe that we need to examine our use of targeted sanctions —
specifically, the designation criteria of conflict-related sexual violence and the listing
of sanctioned individuals. This is an underutilized tool to deter and punish sexual
violence in conflict. We need to bring together our work on sanctions and gender
more systematically. Ireland supports the call by the Secretary-General to invite the
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict to share information with
sanctions committees, and we will play our part in advancing that effort.
Sanctions are not our only tools for seeking accountability. As Special
Representative Patten has said, the fight against conflict-related sexual violence
is the fight against impunity. Rape and other forms of sexual violence are not
somehow lesser crimes. They can constitute war crimes, crimes against humanity
or constitutive acts with respect to genocide. Let us face it. The persistently paltry
record of investigations, prosecutions and convictions for conflict-related sexual
violence is fundamentally a failure of political will.
Today’s debate is not about some vague concept. It is about the reality of our
work on international peace and security.
The recent conviction by the International Criminal Court (ICC) of Dominic
Ongwen and its affirmation of Bosco Ntaganda’s conviction are encouraging
developments, as is the continued work of Colombia’s transitional justice mechanisms.
But they are all too rare, and we believe that the Security Council must reflect on its
failure to make effective use of the accountability tools at its disposal, including the
referral of situations to the ICC.
We can draw a straight line from impunity for sexual violence in the past to the
recurrence of violence in the future. In 2017, sexual and gender-based violence was
a hallmark of the Tatmadaw’s operations in northern Myanmar and in Rakhine —
today, they turn their guns on civilians.
As we heard from the Special Representative of the Secretary-General today,
deeply distressing reports of horrific sexual violence continue to emerge from
Ethiopia, including abuses perpetrated by armed actors in the conflict in Tigray.
The Special Representative of the Secretary-General has spoken of acts that may
amount to sexual atrocities. These and other violations must cease immediately. We
call on all armed parties to the conflict to fulfil their obligations under international
humanitarian and human rights law and end hostilities, which will also help to
facilitate humanitarian access. We call on them to ensure that their forces respect
21-0526121/140

S/2021/375

and protect civilian populations, particularly women and children, from all human
rights abuses and that they explicitly condemn all sexual violence. We welcome the
announcement by the High Commissioner for Human Rights confirming plans for a
joint investigation with the Ethiopian Human Rights Commission into human rights
violations in Tigray, including sexual violence. This is an urgent task to bring an end
to ongoing violations, and it is also vital for accountability to bring perpetrators to
justice, whatever their affiliation. We are in full support of the High Commissioner
in this critical undertaking.
As I conclude, the war correspondent Christina Lamb has noted the absence of
women’s names in war memorials. The stigma of rape in war belongs not to its victims,
but to its perpetrators. The stories of survivors of sexual violence, mostly women,
need to be told. Importantly they need to be truly heard. But that is not enough.
We must demand the prosecution of the crime of conflict-related sexual
violence on an equal basis with other war crimes and crimes against humanity. The
survivors of these crimes deserve nothing less than justice. They deserve redress,
they deserve access to comprehensive survivor-centred services, including sexual
and reproductive health. Above all, they are entitled to the right to participate on
a full, equal and meaningful basis in public life. That would be a fitting memorial.

22/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Annex 10
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Kenya to the
United Nations, Michael Kiboino
Kenya thanks Viet Nam for convening this open debate and all the briefers for
sharing their diverse perspectives. We also welcome the Secretary-General’s current
report on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2021/312), particularly the focus on
frameworks of cooperation with specific country and regional mechanisms.
Kenya strongly condemns gender-based violence and its manifestation in
sexual violence in all contexts and all situations. Kenya supports the upholding
and strengthening of protection against gender-based violence, including under
international human rights law.
Kenya is currently undertaking its second phase of the implementation of the
women and peace and security national action plan.
Kenya calls on the Security Council and the international community to
support regional efforts against conflict-related sexual violence. In particular, we
call on the Council to note and support the outcomes of the ministerial-level meeting
of the African Union Peace and Security Council on 22 March, chaired by Kenya, on
the theme “Women, Peace, Culture and Gender Inclusivity in Africa”. The resultant
communiqué, among others, underlined the need to build the required infrastructure
to provide medical and psychosocial care and trauma healing to victims and survivors
of sexual and gender-based violence and all other violations in conflict settings and
countries emerging from conflict. It also urges all Member States and partners
to invest in awareness programmes, to sensitize communities on the available
support and structures for victims and survivors of trauma aimed at addressing
stigmatization. The United Nations should and can support the implementation of
such infrastructure, particularly in Member States that are fragile from conflict.
Regarding the Security Council framework on women and peace and security,
Kenya welcomes the progress made in the advocacy and evolution of the normative
framework, addressing conflict-related sexual violence. Allow me to make two
observations in regard to gaps and opportunities within the sexual violence in
conflict agenda.
First, the gendered impact of intra-State conflicts needs more attention,
particularly where conflict-related sexual violence has the resultant effects of early
marriage, girls dropping out of school, forced displacements, increased refugee
and internally displaced persons living situations, and threats to local women
peacebuilders. This calls for strengthened coordination with communal and religious
leaders and the work of the Peacebuilding Commission.
Secondly, women and peace and security resolution 2242 (2015) recognizes
that acts of sexual and gender-based violence are part of the strategic objectives
and ideology of certain terrorist groups, including Al-Qaida, the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant, Al-Shabaab and Boko Haram. The Secretary-General’s current
report makes specific references to the link between sexual violence, trafficking in
persons, terrorism and violent extremism. For instance, the report cites efforts by
the United Nations multi-partner trust fund project in Somalia in support of women
formerly associated with Al-Shabaab, many of whom are survivors of conflictrelated sexual violence.
In view of these observations, we wish to make the following recommendations.
Resolution 2475 (2019), which underlines the rights and protection of
women and children with disabilities in conflict situations, needs to move from
21-0526123/140

S/2021/375

a disability-needs-based approach to the operationalization of full, equal and
meaningful participation of women with disabilities in leadership and decisionmaking at all levels.
The protection pillar should encompass not only the protection of women, but
also the protection of the grass-roots and national gains achieved by women in peace
negotiation processes.
Sexual and gender-based violence should be incorporated as a separate listing
criterion with concurrent targeted sanctions against specific perpetrators in the
mandates and sanction regimes that do not have such language.
Effective coordination between early warning mechanisms and national
and local community leaders should be emphasized to mitigate information and
reporting gaps.
A survivor-centred approach that factors in all victims, comprises the timely
reporting of offenses and accountability, and prioritizes medical, psychological,
psychosocial and economic support, in alignment with resolution 2467 (2019),
should be strengthened.
And, finally, stronger integration of the women and peace and security,
counter-terrorism and countering violent extremism agendas should be pursued to
ensure the accountability of perpetrators of sexual violence in conflict situations.

24/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Annex 11
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Mexico to
the United Nations, Alicia Buenrostro Massieu
[Original: Spanish]
Mexico thanks Viet Nam for convening this debate, as well as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for her briefing on the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2021/312), whose recommendations we support.
My country is deeply alarmed and outraged by the situation detailed in the
report on the increase in conflict-related sexual violence and its recurrent use as a
tactic of war, repression and torture by State and non-State armed groups, which have
taken advantage of the pandemic to continue committing atrocities. My country,
Mexico, condemns the very serious situation of sexual violence that we have seen in
many current conflicts, be they in Ethiopia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Somalia, the Sudan or South Sudan, to mention only a few regrettable cases.
Confinements and quarantines have significantly exacerbated sexual and
gender-based violence globally. When we add to this the unequal impact on women
and girls of the expanded power of those who control the weapons and perpetrate
sexual violence with impunity, the result is simply devastating. It is imperative to
address the correlation between the proliferation and trafficking in small arms and
light weapons and gender-based violence, which often results in sexual violence in
both conflict and post-conflict situations.
While we have frameworks and mechanisms in place to prevent and address
sexual violence in conflict, including the mandate of the Special Representative,
much remains to be done to transform the social norms that perpetuate patriarchal
domination, systematic discrimination, prejudice, gender inequality and the
stigmatization of victims.
In preventing and addressing sexual violence, we must put survivors —
women and girls, but also men, boys and LGBTI+ persons — at the centre of our
efforts and decision-making to ensure the provision of legal, medical and economic
livelihood assistance, based on their particular needs and with a human rights
and intersectional approach that takes into account the multiple barriers they face
because of their ethnicity, age, migration status, disability status, sexual orientation
and gender identity.
Moreover, considering that trauma and psychological effects can be severe
and can also deteriorate the mental health and psychosocial well-being of survivors,
we must incorporate access to such services and, more broadly, to all health services,
including sexual and reproductive health services, not only as a preventive measure,
but also as a cornerstone of rebuilding the social fabric. Women and girls with
disabilities should be a priority group with regard to access to those services.
We must recognize all victims of sexual violence perpetrated by armed and/or
terrorist groups and guarantee their access to multisectoral assistance, reparation and
redress for damages, processes that must be designed and implemented together with
the victims, ensuring their expeditious access to effective, independent, impartial
and gender-sensitive justice systems.
The lack of accountability on the part of perpetrators and the impunity they
enjoy contribute to the recurrence of sexual violence and, at the same time, to a lack
of confidence and fear on the part of survivors to report it. Legal and institutional
frameworks that ensure mechanisms for the reporting, investigation, prosecution
and punishment of perpetrators are therefore urgently needed.
21-0526125/140

S/2021/375

The Security Council has the obligation to make use of all the resources at
its disposal to prevent and address this scourge. It is essential that the sanctions
committees continue to incorporate sexual violence as a criterion for imposing
sanctions on perpetrators. But these will remain limited in scope if they are not
strengthened through cooperation and information sharing with other bodies, such
as the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security and the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
Sexual violence in armed conflict is a war crime, as stated in the Rome
Statute and confirmed by the jurisprudence of the International Criminal Court. The
Security Council must refer situations in which these crimes are committed to the
Court so that they do not go unpunished.
It is also important to incorporate specific provisions for the prevention of
and response to sexual violence in renewals of peacekeeping mandates, as well as to
increase the deployment of gender advisers.
Finally, we recognize the essential role of civil society, women peacebuilders
and women human rights defenders in preventing and responding to sexual violence
in conflict and humanitarian contexts, often providing services not provided by
States. And we commit ourselves to their protection from attacks and violence to
which they are subjected in the course of their commendable work.

26/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Annex 12
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Niger to the
United Nations
[Original: French]
I would like to begin by thanking the speakers whose statements have called
our attention to one of the most horrific consequences of conflict.
Thousands of people suffer inhuman sexual violence in times of conflict,
committed as a strategy of war, political repression, torture and terror. And the
recent report the Secretary-General on the matter (S/2021/312) confirms the
disastrous consequences of the coronavirus disease pandemic on the incidence of
conflict-related sexual violence, especially in terms of reduced access to justice and
to support services, weakened control and monitoring systems and the reduction in
allocated financial resources.
One of the most effective ways of combating conflict-related sexual violence
is prevention, including access to quality education. Attacks against educational
establishments and schools are increasingly worrisome. We must protect access to
education, in particular for girls, who, in countries affected by conflict, are half as
likely to be in school than those living in peaceful countries. They are also more
vulnerable to sexual and gender-based violence on their way to school.
The presidential statement on attacks against schools, adopted by the Security
Council in September 2020 under the presidency of the Niger (S/PRST/2020/8),
recalls the need to take into account the increased risk of sexual violence facing girls
deprived of access to education, including those who have been forcibly displaced
or are living in areas mired in localized violence — noting, moreover, that children
affected by a disability are particularly vulnerable.
I should like to draw the attention of the Security Council and of Member States
to the heightened vulnerability of women and girls who endure the compound effects
of conflict, forced displacement, at times exacerbated by the impacts of climate
change, and economic insecurity. In all phases of the cycle of forced displacement,
refugee and migrant women and girls are vulnerable to sexual violence, whether in
conflict zones, as they flee, in refugee camps, or even during their relocation.
On this issue, the Niger reiterates its concerns with regard to the conditions
of migrants and refugees intercepted at sea and disembarked on Libyan territory,
where women migrants in overcrowded detention centres face all sorts of violations,
including sexual violence. Given the heightened insecurity they experience, there is
a need to reconsider the policy of disembarking migrants and refugees intercepted
at sea on Libyan territory.
For several years, the countries of the Sahel have been facing a security
crisis aggravated by several factors, including the presence of armed terrorist
groups, the spread of light weapons, a lack of socioeconomic opportunity and
inter-communal tensions.
Emergency situations, humanitarian crises linked to natural disasters and the
resultant displacement of populations exacerbate the vulnerability of women and
girls. There have been reports from the Lake Chad basin region of terrorist groups,
such as Boko Haram, abducting girls and women, forcibly integrating among the
ranks of their prisoners of war and using them as sex slaves or suicide bombers.
Forced abductions from schools are a matter of concern demanding our
attention. It was on 14 April 2014, exactly seven years ago, that Boko Haram conducted
the mass abduction of 276 girls in Chibok, many never to see their families again,
21-0526127/140

S/2021/375

prevented from continuing their pursuit of knowledge and subjected to unimaginable
violence. In situations of insecurity, such serious incidents have consequences for
girls’ attendance of school, increasing the risk they will not be schooled, which
makes them more vulnerable to early and forced marriage, to early pregnancy and
other gender-based violence.
Aware of the need for holistic care for victims and survivors of sexual violence
in areas most affected by security crises, we have established specialist support
centres in this regard. With regard to children, especially girls linked to armed
groups, the Niger established a transit and orientation centre with demobilization
and reintegration programmes tailored to children survivors, many of whom have
been exposed to sexual violence.
My delegation strongly agrees that Member States and the United Nations
system must serve as an example in responding to matters of conf lict-related
sexual violence.
Recently, following allegations of violations against three women concerning
soldiers deployed in the three-border area, the authorities of the countries concerned
reacted promptly with the necessary follow-up, including by completing reliable and
swift inquiries, conducted in parallel by the National Human Rights Commission
and a mission by the Central Force Commander of the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel, as soon as the facts were brought to their attention.
While recalling those were isolated cases, we welcome the immediate steps
taken to investigate, protect civilians, support the victims and apply disciplinary
sanctions to the soldiers implicated. This tripartite collaboration, involving civil
society, including communities, States and judicial authorities, could serve as an
example for the implementation of a rapid-response system in many other situations
where allegations of sexual violence can go unanswered.
In the same vein, the culture of impunity for sexual violence, including
within the United Nations system, especially in conflict-affected areas, whoever the
perpetrator may be, must stop. The credibility of our missions and the fundamental
values we stand for depend on it. This is also a question of justice.
In this regard, we welcome the commitment of senior United Nations leaders
when it comes to victims’ rights and change in institutional culture, with zero
tolerance for sexual violence.
The Niger would like to make the following additional recommendations.
First, when it comes to adopting a survivor-centred approach, in keeping
with resolution 2467 (2019), it is important that Member States put in place or
strengthen judicial and legal assistance in addition to health, psychological, social
and economic support.
Secondly, given these specific consequences of conflict-related sexual violence
for children, there is a need to ensure an adequate presence of child protection
specialists in addition to the deployment of gender advisers. In this regard, the
survivor-centred approach must be not only multi-partner but also multidisciplinary,
with accessible and quality services taking into account gender-specific factors and
the manner in which multiple crises amplify the vulnerabilities of certain groups.
Thirdly, the implementation of effective programmes cannot be achieved
without reliable disaggregated data. In this regard, we advocate the strengthening of
data-collection systems through increased collaboration with local authorities and a
stronger role for civil society, including local human rights organizations.
Fourthly, as a troop-contributing country, the Niger calls for greater efforts
to ensure such questions are taken into due account in country processes, including
28/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

in strengthening early-warning systems. Member States could also enhance training
for defence and security forces on conflict-related sexual violence.
Finally, in conflict-affected areas, it is essential that Member States guarantee
that allegations and acts of sexual violence be investigated, with adequate follow-up,
and the perpetrators punished. Given the nature of these human rights violations, in
particular by armed groups, we recognize the need to reinforce cross-border response
and monitoring capabilities and to strengthen regional cooperation in this regard.
We must break the cycle of dual victimization of survivors, silence, taboo and
social stigma. That can be achieved only though local actions at the community level.
While we welcome the multi-partner trust fund and its contributions to implementing
projects in 16 countries affected by conflict, we would like to see greater support to
local organizations.
We must collectively tackle the root causes of sexual violence, including
sexual discrimination, the lack of economic opportunity and toxic masculinities.
Access to quality education, including in areas affected by conflict, remains crucial.
My country, the Niger, reiterates its commitment to fighting conflictrelated sexual and gender-based violence. It is a matter of collective responsibility
that not only do we ensure the gains achieved in this area over recent decades are
safeguarded, which requires appropriate funding, but also harness the current crisis
to move towards a new, fairer, more egalitarian era, in which conflict-related sexual
violence is but a thing of a past.

21-0526129/140

S/2021/375

Annex 13
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Norway to the
United Nations, Mona Juul
I thank the Special-Representative of the Secretary-General and our
distinguished briefers for sharing their important insights. The courageous leadership
of Dr. Mukwege and Ms. Atim is truly inspiring and crucial. Norway commends
them for their tireless work.
Conflict-related sexual violence is a violation of international humanitarian
law and a violation and abuse of human rights — one which primarily affects women
and girls, but also men and boys. It may also constitute a war crime or a crime
against humanity. Crimes of this gravity cannot simply be accepted as a side effect
of armed conflict.
Shortly after the adoption of resolution 2467 (2019), the Conference on
Ending Sexual and Gender-Based Violence in Humanitarian Crises brought
together a wide range of actors, making hundreds of commitments to end sexual
and gender-based violence in humanitarian crises and conf lict. Despite progress
made, the recent Secretary-General’s report (S/2021/312) confirms that sexual
violence continues to be deliberately used as a tactic of war, torture and terror.
These documented incidents represent just the tip of the iceberg. The report paints
a harrowing picture of sexual violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
South Sudan and Tigray. Women were also specifically targeted for their activism,
including in Afghanistan, Colombia and Yemen. We call on all parties to implement
the Secretary-General’s recommendations.
We note in particular the commitment by the Government of Ethiopia to
investigate the many accounts of brutal and systematic sexual violence in Tigray.
Credible and independent investigations are essential. We therefore call for
full use to be made of the support offered by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the office of Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Patten.
It is imperative that conflict-related sexual violence be addressed in ceasefire
and peace agreements, including in the definition of prohibited acts, and in ensuring
the monitoring and implementation of commitments. We must turn commitments into
compliance and resolutions into results. Resolution 2467 (2019) calls for strengthened
focus on justice and accountability and a survivor-centred approach. We must ensure
its full implementation by keeping the rights of survivors, in all their diversity, at the
forefront. Support to survivors must be age- and gender-sensitive and include access
to health care, sexual and reproductive health and rights, psychosocial support
and access to justice. And we must ensure survivors full, equal and meaningful
participation. We must also tackle intersecting inequalities and root causes.
We condemn the targeting of people based on disabilities and actual or
perceived sexual orientation or gender identity. We are also appalled by the increase
in conflict-related sexual violence against children. We reiterate that States carry the
responsibility to protect women and children from rape and sexual violence.
As Chair of the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, we call on
our fellow Council members to work to adopt strong and operational conclusions.
We also need more comprehensive, coordinated and targeted efforts by peace
operations in combating sexual violence. This is why we supported the production
of the policy and Handbook for United Nations Field Missions on Preventing and
Responding to Conflict-Related Sexual Violence, which provides practical guidance
30/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

to civilian, military and police components. We also look forward to the first
report on peacekeeping missions’ implementation of conflict-related sexual
violence mandates. Thankfully, we already have examples of best practice to build
on, including the ongoing work of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan in
supporting the implementation of the national action plan on conflict-related sexual
violence through capacity-building and awareness-raising. We are proud to count
Norwegian personnel among the United Nations police team supporting the South
Sudanese police in investigating sexual and gender-based violence.
In conclusion, I would like to make four points on how Norway believes we
should move forward.
First, we must ensure a survivor-centred approach — one that demands
the full, equal, and meaningful participation of women and survivors, in all their
diversity.
Secondly, protection against conflict-related sexual violence must remain a
key priority for the Council, and we must make use of all means at our disposal.
Sexual violence as a stand-alone designation criterion for sanctions must be applied
when applicable, and it should be a criterion in more sanction regimes. In this
respect, we welcome the recent decision by the Yemen Sanctions Committee to list
individuals on the basis of sexual violence.
Thirdly, our efforts must seek to prevent sexual violence. This includes fighting
impunity. We must do more to ensure that perpetrators be brought to justice. We
need an appropriate mechanism through which the Council can monitor compliance
by parties to conflict.
Finally, we must maintain the momentum from the Oslo Conference to
make the prevention of, and response to, sexual and gender-based violence key
humanitarian priorities.
The Security Council must be a strong voice. We cannot allow our political
commitments being reversed by the coronavirus disease.

21-0526131/140

S/2021/375

Annex 14
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Gennady Kuzmin
[Original: Russian]
At the outset, we would like to thank you for convening this meeting and to
commend the contribution of the briefers to this discussion.
The Security Council gathers annually to discuss measures against conflictrelated sexual violence. In their statements, speakers wholeheartedly condemn such
crimes and reiterate our shared commitment to combat this abominable phenomenon.
The Secretariat elaborates standardized statutory regulations and detailed plans to
that end, engages vast expert capacity and puts to use the Organization’s forces and
facilities in international peacekeeping presences and special political missions.
The problem is real, and the international community realizes it. All Security
Council Member States without exception agree that we must fight against this evil.
Then why is it the case that, year on year, the reports of the SecretaryGeneral basically state the lack of progress on this issue? Why is it the case that the
comprehensive, well-structured and thoroughly considered recommendations of the
Special Representative actually contradict the reality on the ground? For example,
what prevents the conflicting sides from “ensuring comprehensive and constructive
participation of women, girls and victims of sexual violence ... in decision-making
processes”, as the report would suggest?
The answer is often very simple. It is the state of war that prevents them. It is
the state of enmity and hatred in the society that is often propelled from the outside.
It is the state of having no rights, no justice and no capable power institutions. Such
a state is characterized by the rule of the gun, where might makes right.
We must do all we can to put an end to conflicts, eradicate their underlying
causes and rebuild resilient societies. Only a resilient society can combat lawlessness
and put an end to violence, including sexual violence.
We welcome the efforts of Ms. Pramila Patten, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. We appreciate her work to strengthen national capacities, promote
dialogue with religious and other traditional leaders, address the stigmatization of
victims of sexual violence and facilitate their rehabilitation. It is important that the
humanitarian work of her Office be entirely free of political bias, where one party to
a conflict is merely appeased and the crimes of the other are concealed. We therefore
call on the authors of the report to be very careful when considering the list of actors
with credible allegations of perpetrating sexual violence. All suspicions must be well
substantiated, all facts double-checked and all sources of information identified.
Despite the extra challenges created by the pandemic, we have not lost hope
that the current measures, including this debate, will help eradicate violence against
civilians, including sexual violence, for the sake of international peace and security.

32/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Annex 15
Statement by the Second Deputy Permanent Representative
of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to the United Nations,
Halimah DeShong
I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important meeting. We also
thank our briefers, Ms. Patten, Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Mr. Mukwege, Ms. Atim and Ms. Attinger Colijn for
their thoughtful, yet sobering briefings.
The world has been gripped by intersecting crises and inequalities of epic
proportions. These conditions have resulted in increased rates of sexual and genderbased violence in conflict, particularly against women and girls, and have compounded
their suffering. Today, we recommit to ending the enduring inequalities, protracted
conflicts and underdevelopment that contribute to unconscionable levels of conflictrelated sexual violence. In addition to the social and economic repercussions of the
coronavirus disease pandemic, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is facing a severe
crisis of explosive volcanic eruptions. We therefore speak with an even deeper sense
of pain, urgency and commitment to addressing the suffering of humankind.
First, we commend the invaluable contribution of women’s civil society
organizations. The women protection networks in Darfur, for example, facilitate
referrals and work to enhance the profiling of perpetrators of sexual violence.
Further, we condemn all attacks against women’s civil society networks.
Secondly, underreporting, resulting from fear of reprisals and shame, remains
an enduring challenge. With that in mind, we call for survivor-centred responses that
prioritize women’s and girls’ needs at various stages of their trauma and recovery
experience. Women’s civil society and community organizations that work to
prevent and respond to sexual violence must be consistently funded and supported,
as they perform critical prevention, response and recovery work with women, girls
and children.
We take note of several important actions taken to address conflict-related
sexual violence. Among these are the establishment of one-stop centres in South
Sudan; specialized courts in all 34 provinces in Afghanistan, with 32 headed by
women; the launch, by the United Nations, of the sexual and gender-based violence
helpline in the Democratic Republic of the Congo; and the ongoing support of the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, providing model legislative guidance to national authorities with regard to
conflict-related sexual violence.
Despite the important progress made, effective, comprehensive, women- and
girl-led actions to combat conflict-related sexual violence remain elusive. That
brings me to my third point, which is also related to the ongoing pandemic — with
funding being divested towards pandemic-mitigation measures, we urge authorities
to designate sexual and gender-based violence responses as central to pandemic
recovery, planning and funding. Displaced and refugee women and girls are among
the most affected during the pandemic. We call for the inclusion or retention of key
health and psychosocial services as national emergency response plans are adapted
over time. Such plans must also include adequate socioeconomic recovery and
reintegration support.
Further, continued collaboration between regional organizations and the United
Nations to support the development, operationalization and adaptation of survivorcentred national action plans remains crucial. Diverse women and girls, civil society
and community organizers must occupy central roles in decision-making, budgeting,
21-0526133/140

S/2021/375

design, implementation and the monitoring of compliance. The enduring effects of
rape, trafficking, sexual slavery and terrorism against women and girls by armed
terrorist groups operating across borders, further emphasize the need for national,
regional and multilateral cooperation. That includes joint cross-border monitoring
and response capabilities. Ongoing regional and multilateral support to strengthen
national accountability frameworks is necessary — not only to end impunity, but
also to ensure reparations for survivors and victims.
Finally, mandate authorizations, renewals and implementation must prioritize
gender analysis and gender justice, with the requisite focus on participation,
prevention, protection, relief and recovery, including the consistent deployment of
women protection advisers to all peacekeeping and political missions. Eliminating
conflict-related sexual violence requires multilevel, multi-actor approaches that are
tied to broader gender-responsive security and development actions.

34/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Annex 16
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Tunisia

to

the

At the outset, I would like to thank all the briefers for their insightful
comments, and would like to commend, in particular, the inclusive approach in the
selection of today’s briefers.
Conf licts always have a devastating impact on all civilians, without
exception. However, we must recognize the disproportionate impact of conf licts
on women and girls:
First, as the report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/312) indicates, in many
instances women and girls are utilized as a weapon of war or terrorism during
conflict. Such systematic targeting seeks to violate the dignity of women and girls
by subjecting them to sexual and gender-based violence such as rape, trafficking and
sexual slavery.
Secondly, the crimes committed against them are often not recognized
as a tactic of war or terrorism but rather as simple acts of violence. As a result,
the perpetrators are not properly held accountable in a manner that reflects the
seriousness of the crime.
Thirdly, access to justice and remedies is largely hampered by the absence of
gender-responsive services and the prominence of negative social norms that blame
and stigmatize victims. This reveals the multi-layered nature of violations against
the survivors, which start with the conflict itself and play out even in post-conflict
settings due to a lack of accountability.
Finally, women and girls are often marginalized in post-conflict peace
processes, accounting for only 13 per cent of negotiators, 6 per cent of mediators and
6 per cent of signatories in major peace processes around the world. For that reason,
all post-conflict peace processes are likely to overlook the particular vulnerabilities,
grievances and needs of women and girls in conflict and post-conflict settings,
including due consideration for the sexual and gender-based violence against them.
First and foremost, the best way to eradicate conflict-related sexual violence
is to put an end to conflicts themselves and to build peaceful and resilient societies.
In that regard, we welcome the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire and
the recommendation contained in his report to immediately cease all acts of sexual
violence in conflict, in keeping with resolution 2532 (2020), drafted by Tunisia
and France.
Tunisia strongly believes in a survivor-centred approach. In that regard,
we reiterate that survivors of conflict-related sexual violence do not constitute a
homogeneous group and that they require tailored measures and services that
respond to their varying needs and contexts. Most importantly, we need to provide
and sufficiently fund psychological, legal and medical service, including with regard
to victims’ sexual and reproductive health and rights, as well as socioeconomic
opportunities to ensure the reintegration and empowerment of survivors.
We also need to put an end to impunity by delivering justice to the victims
and survivors in a manner that restores their rights and preserves their dignity. It is
essential to put in place and strengthen robust national legal and judicial measures,
as well as targeted United Nations sanctions that reflect the seriousness of these
heinous crimes. Tunisia is committed to putting a stronger emphasis on conflictrelated sexual violence committed by terrorist groups as a tactic of terrorism, which
we included in the presidential statement adopted in January (S/PRST/2021/1) and
21-0526135/140

S/2021/375

will continue to advocate for during the ongoing review of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, as well as in other upcoming processes for different
subsidiary organs of the Security Council.
It is important to reflect on why sexual violence, among other things, is being
weaponized during conflict. We see this phenomenon as being deeply rooted in
historical and structural gender inequalities and unequal power relations between
men and women. Patriarchal and negative social norms increase the vulnerability
of women and girls in the face of conflict. We can therefore prevent conflict-related
sexual violence by tackling its underlying drivers, promoting gender equality and
human rights, bringing national legislations in line with international norms and
standards and implementing the existing normative framework on women and peace
and security.
That undertaking requires a whole-of-Government and whole-of-society
approach where civil society organizations, local communities, feminist groups,
girls’ and youth-led organizations, the private sector and all other relevant
stakeholders are given an active role as partners to promote gender equality and
the full, equal, effective and meaningful participation and leadership of women and
girls in all public and private spheres. In that regard, it is of the utmost importance
to ensure the continuity of the necessary funding mechanisms within the United
Nations system and for civil society actors.

36/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Annex 17
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations,
Barbara Woodward
We thank today’s briefers for their compelling and informative testimonies.
The United Kingdom is proud to be a partner in this vital work.
Sexual violence is a feature of conflict in countries around the world. We are
particularly concerned about the credible and widely corroborated reports of rape
and sexual violence in Tigray. We urge Ethiopia to work closely with the Office of
the Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict to address that issue.
Ms. Caroline Atim’s briefing reminded us, too, of the disproportionate impact
of gender-based violence on women and girls in South Sudan. There have been
ambitious commitments, but little peace dividends for women and girls in South
Sudan. We look to South Sudan to expedite the establishment of the Hybrid Court,
and to partner with the United Nations to deliver justice.
In these and other post-conflict situations, survivors carry the effects of
their trauma, while perpetrators most often walk free. I would like to make several
remarks in that regard.
First, I want to underline the United Kingdom’s commitment to tackling
sexual violence in conflict. We are the only country with a Prime Minister’s Special
Representative on Preventing Sexual Violence in Conflict, with a dedicated team and
funding. Since 2012, we have committed over £48 million to supporting survivors,
tackling stigma and reducing impunity, supporting projects across 29 countries.
Secondly, I want to emphasize, as we have heard from our speakers, the
importance of a survivor-centred and human-rights-based approach that prioritizes
the rights and needs of survivors. That includes the right to accessible sexual and
reproductive health-care services and access to justice that take into account the
specific needs of victims and survivors living with disabilities, lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender, queer and intersex individuals and other at-risk groups.
The United Kingdom has committed £1.3 million to the Global Survivors
Fund, run by Mr. Mukwege, which works to ensure that survivors of conflict-related
sexual violence have access to reparations and other forms of redress in conflict and
post-conflict countries.
In the past year, the United Kingdom has also launched two key tools to
support survivors. First, in June, Lord Ahmad, the Prime Minister’s Special
Representative, launched the draft Global Code of Conduct for Investigating and
Documenting Conflict-Related Sexual Violence, also known as the Murad Code,
for global consultations. This is a code of behaviour for those collecting evidence in
order to respect survivors’ rights and ensure investigations are safer, more ethical
and more effective.
Secondly, in November, Lord Ahmad inaugurated the Declaration of humanity
by leaders of faith and leaders of belief, which calls for the prevention of sexual
violence in conflict and denounces the stigma faced by survivors, including children
born of rape.
Finally, alongside supporting survivors, we must do all we can to ensure
accountability for the use of sexual violence as a weapon of war. As the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General said, zero tolerance cannot have
zero consequences.
21-0526137/140

S/2021/375

Resolution 2564 (2021), the recent resolution imposing sanctions against
Sultan Zabin demonstrated that the international community can and will take action
against perpetrators of torture and sexual violence in conflict.
But there is more we can do to strengthen accountability for these crimes in
United Nations-supported international and hybrid criminal courts and tribunals so
that perpetrators are justly prosecuted.
As we have heard, there are millions today who are affected by conflictrelated sexual violence — survivors, children born of sexual violence, families
and entire communities. I thank the presidency for convening this debate and our
briefers for highlighting the problem and what can be done. I assure the Council of
our continuing support to end the use of sexual violence in conflict and as a weapon
of war.

38/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Annex 18
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Linda Thomas-Greenfield
I thank the President for convening this very important debate. I want to
also thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence
in Conflict for her remarks and comments, as well as all of the briefers for their
interventions today. It is great to see Mr. Mukwege, as it has been a while since we
have seen each other.
The United States greatly appreciates the work of the United Nations on this
issue and, in particular, the work done by the Office of the Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict. We are extremely proud of our continued support for
the Office of the Special Representative and our contributions to her Office in order
to help facilitate their important work, and we strongly encourage other Member
States to provide support.
Around the world, sexual violence is used as a deliberate tactic in armed
conflict — whether to terrorize, destabilize or break bonds within communities.
That makes conflict-related sexual violence a security issue and a human rights
issue, and it demands collective action.
In particular, right now the Security Council needs to pay attention to the
deeply disturbing reports of mass sexual violence occurring in Ethiopia’s Tigray
region. We as the Council must address reports of women being forced by military
elements to have sex for basic commodities, and reports of sexual violence
against women and girls in refugee camps, among other horrific information. The
international community must work to ensure that all those involved respect their
obligations under international human rights law and international humanitarian
law. The international community must establish immediate protection mechanisms,
humanitarian aid and other needed services for survivors. Independent, credible
investigations must be conducted to hold accountable the perpetrators of those and
other human rights abuses and violations committed in Tigray.
In Burma, where the same military leaders responsible for a campaign of
sexual violence in Rakhine state have now returned to power, women and girls
across the country are facing even graver risks.
Of course, gender-based violence is a crisis around the world. One in every
three women will experience physical or sexual violence in her lifetime. That is
beyond a crisis; that is a calamity. The pandemic has made the situation even more
dire. Social isolation and financial desperation have led to a spike in gender-based
violence this past year, especially intimate partner violence and violence against girls.
So I should like to talk about three ways in which we can address that emergency.
First, we can help prevent sexual violence by elevating women and putting
them into positions of power. It is absolutely essential that women fully, equally and
meaningfully participate in peace and security processes. After all, women make
the world more peaceful. That is not anecdotal; that is a fact. By promoting women’s
participation and leadership — in politics, in mediations and in negotiations — we
promote more security and peace. And by doing that, we will help prevent sexual
violence in conflict from ever happening in the first place.
Secondly, the best way to address gender-based violence after it happens,
especially when it is used as a weapon of war, is to take a survivor-centred approach.
That means providing survivors with access to medical care, particularly clinical
management of rape, psychosocial support and sexual and reproductive health
services. It also means providing survivors with social support and legal services,
21-0526139/140

S/2021/375

all to create a supportive environment in which a survivor’s rights are respected and
the survivor is treated with dignity and respect.
For our part, President Biden has committed the United States to providing
sexual and reproductive health care and services for women around the world,
especially women who have been impacted by conflict-related sexual violence.
Thirdly and finally, we must pay special attention to underexamined and
underreported forms of sexual violence. In many places, for example, the LGBTQI+
community faces outsized levels of sexual violence. We must more closely examine
what can be done to safely identify survivors and provide the necessary support for
that community, particularly medical care and psychosocial support.
Also underreported and underexamined is the impact of sexual violence on
men and boys. In Afghanistan, for example, the terrible practice of bacha bazi —
the commercial and sexual exploitation of boys — is well documented as occurring
within the security forces and is exacerbated by the country’s conflict. The scourge
of sexual violence must be eradicated in all of its forms — especially as a weapon
of war.
Speaking more broadly on gender-based violence, the United States has called
the increased rate of violence over the last year “the shadow pandemic”. Well, I
would say that it is time to bring gender-based violence out of the shadows. Together
we have to work to shine a light on it. Let us treat this like an emergency, with the
urgency that it demands.

40/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Annex 19
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
We would like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Patten for her insightful briefing. We would also like to thank the other briefers for
bringing their valuable experiences to the discussion.
Over the years, sexual violence continues to occur in global conflicts, with
traumatizing impacts on the victims, particularly vulnerable women and girls.
We are concerned about the tremendous suffering of victims as a result of the
physical and psychological injuries, discrimination and social exclusion associated
with sexual violence. Lacking access to education, livelihood and economic
opportunities, those victims are also easily subject to stigmatization, human
trafficking and armed-group and terrorist recruitment, which prolong the vicious
circle of violence and suffering.
While the international community has given increasing attention to and made
numerous commitments with respect to the issue, it is regrettable that the situation
in the past year has remained alarming and has been exacerbated by the coronavirus
disease pandemic. As reflected in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/312),
among others, gender-based inequality, which is a root cause and driver of sexual
violence in times of conflict, has been amplified. The pursuit of justice and redress
has been further complicated, while new concerns on gender-specific protection
have arisen.
Against that backdrop, we agree with many of the points raised by other
members and would like to stress the following.
First, we emphasize the need to take a comprehensive perspective and
redouble our efforts to prevent and respond to sexual violence in conf lict. In that
regard, timely assistance and access to services are of critical importance to victims
of sexual violence. These may include health care, psychological and legal support,
vocational training, employment opportunities and socioeconomic reintegration. At
the same time, measures aimed at addressing the root causes of sexual violence in
conf lict remain critical, too. In that process, the consideration of a survivor-centred
approach, as mentioned in the report of the Secretary-General, should always be
the focus.
Secondly, Viet Nam underscores the importance of promoting gender equality
and women’s political, social and economic empowerment. We recognize the link
between sexual violence and gender inequality. The full and equal participation of
women in decision-making and peace processes is a prerequisite for the prevention
of conflict and sexual violence in conflict. That would ensure that national policies
could adequately address the needs and interests of victims, raise greater awareness
and overcome stigma and discrimination. It is also important to enhance women’s
economic empowerment to assist victims in their recovery and reintegration.
Thirdly, while States have the primary responsibility in that regard, the
international community, particularly United Nations agencies, programmes
and peacekeeping missions, can provide much-needed development assistance,
capacity-building, technical support and training. We encourage the inclusion of
conf lict-related sexual violence prevention and response in mandate authorizations
and renewals of peace operations as well as the accelerated deployment of
women’s protection advisers to United Nations peace operations and offices where
mandated. Women protection advisers, who work closely among communities on
the ground, should be provided with the resources necessary to fulfil their tasks in
peacekeeping operations.
21-0526141/140

S/2021/375

We also encourage the international community to undertake a united
and collective response in order to effectively implement the existing normative
frameworks on the women and peace and security agenda and on the prevention
of and response to conflict-related sexual violence. Victims of sexual violence can
become resilient survivors when they are supported and empowered.
Viet Nam stands ready to engage with Member States and the relevant United
Nations agencies in that endeavour.

42/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Annex 20
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan to the
United Nations, Adela Raz
I would like to thank the Permanent Mission of Viet Nam for holding this
important meeting of the Security Council on sexual violence in conflict. I would
also like to thank Ms. Pramila Patten, Dr. Denis Mukwege, Ms. Caroline Atim and
Ms. Beatrix Attinger Colijn for their very valuable interventions.
Addressing sexual violence in conflict, particularly through the protection
of women and girls, is an urgent and timely topic of discussion for the Council.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has exacerbated existing violence
and underlined the need for States to enhance progress on the protection of women
and girls. While the United Nations, including the Security Council, has worked to
address this problem through action on the ground and the adoption of landmark
Security Council resolutions, including resolution 2467 (2019), more effort is
urgently needed.
Before the pandemic, the Afghan Government had made great strides in
working to address this issue, including by mainstreaming the women and peace
and security agenda throughout its activities. Our national action plan on resolution
1325 (2000) has effectively worked to translate our international commitments and
constitutional values into actionable policies and programmes that have aimed to
empower women in our peace and security efforts while combating the problem of
conflict-related sexual violence.
Most notably, we have seen the implementation of a reformed penal code,
which entered into force in February 2018, and a subsequent law on the elimination
of violence against women. That has led to enhanced criminal accountability on
issues of violence against women through specialized prosecution offices in all 34
provinces and a zero-tolerance approach on this matter. Our action plan also resulted
in an expansion of the role of women in the judiciary and the security sectors through
efforts led by the Afghanistan Independent Administrative Reform and Civil Service
Commission. Their work has led to an increase in the number of female prosecutors
and judges, and recruits in our armed forces and national police.
We have also focused on assisting survivors of sexual violence. For example,
we have established family guidance centres throughout the country to provide
survivors with legal advice, health and psychosocial services. The Government
has also worked to educate various segments of the population on the importance
of eliminating domestic violence, particularly violence against women. That has
included lectures by religious figures and other actors on the ground, including
elements of civil society.
The Government has also redoubled its efforts to ensure that women can
access referral mechanisms and other tools to serve them during these difficult times
of COVID-19. To expand access to justice and protection, we have begun offering
services via chat, text and telephone and have hosted a radio programme with the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan to communicate the relevant
information and messages on domestic safety.
Afghanistan has also taken concrete steps to implement the SecretaryGeneral’s appeal for peace in the home on the ground. The Ministry of Women’s
Affairs has led a series of campaigns under the theme “Make Afghanistan free of
violence through cohesion, coordination, financial support, and accountability”. We
have also begun working with the Spotlight Initiative following its recent launch in
Central Asia and Afghanistan and remain confident that that partnership will help
21-0526143/140

S/2021/375

improve the safety of Afghan women. At the global level, Afghanistan is proud to
have joined and actively engaged with the Group of Friends for the elimination of
violence against women and girls.
In addition to challenges from the pandemic, we have observed a sharp increase
in targeted attacks against women since the beginning of the peace process. Such
attacks seek to silence women’s voices as negotiations move forward. In the past
couple of months, we have seen attacks against a female member of our negotiating
team, Supreme Court judges, journalists and other prominent women from our civil
society. Those cowardly attacks underscore the necessity of not just maintaining but
promoting and expanding the rights and protections women in Afghanistan enjoy,
and ensuring the effective and consequential participation of women throughout
peace negotiations in Afghanistan.
Addressing sexual violence in conflict and protecting women and girls requires
a cohesive and coordinated approach that brings the international community together
around the same message. As such, we call on the international community and all
Member States to redouble efforts to empower women, particularly those in conflictaffected countries, and to eliminate all violence against women and girls. We must
emphasize that the gains of women in Afghanistan and elsewhere are not negotiable
and that the international community is united in its efforts to protect progress and
enhance the long-term safety of all those vulnerable to these heinous acts.

44/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Annex 21
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Albania to the
United Nations, Besiana Kadare
The use of sexual violence in conflict as a devastating tactic of war and
terrorism has been recognized as a legitimate threat to peace that requires an
operational security and justice response. Owing to the pervasive way in which it
impedes reconciliation and undermines the prospect of peace and reconstruction,
sexual violence is among the worst of crimes.
In terms of international legal and normative instruments, we have a good
global understanding of that scourge and the tools required to take significant action,
including seven Security Council resolutions. But laws and resolutions do not mean
much if in practice those crimes are left unpunished.
The unacceptable reality is that despite our collective efforts and international
outrage, conflict-related sexual violence continues unabated and largely unpunished.
In fact, as the report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/312) shows, in some cases it
has even escalated.
The outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has not only amplified
gender-based inequality but has also demonstrated how fragile the achievements we
have made in this field are. As a result of the pandemic, access to service provision
for victims of sexual violence, including access to sexual and reproductive health
care, has become more difficult.
As we are slowly starting to recover from the COVID-19 crisis, we should not
forget that this pandemic is a gendered crisis. Hence it is imperative to include the
survivors of sexual violence at all stages of decision-making processes and planning
efforts. Building back better after the COVID-19 crisis should serve as a unique
opportunity to build more gender-responsive institutions able to provide a survivorcentred approach. Survivors must be recognized as legitimate victims of conflict,
entitled to equality before the law as well as reparations.
In order to effectively prevent such an atrocity crime from happening and to
empower the survivors of conflict-related sexual violence, we need to do more in
four main areas.
The first area is acknowledging and documenting all cases where sexual
violence has been used as a tactic of war and terrorism targeting civilians. We
strongly believe that all victims of sexual violence in conflict, including men and
boys, must be recognized and offered the support to which they are entitled. In that
context, we encourage and support the further deployment of women’s protection
advisers in all United Nations field missions.
Secondly, we need to strengthen accountability and put an end to impunity for
violations and abuses. That must be a priority for all of us, both within inside and
outside the Council.
Thirdly, we need to achieve greater cooperation and synergies among
Governments, United Nations agencies and civil society partners, especially to
mobilize funds to support joint catalytic activities. In this context, we believe that
the Conflict-related Sexual Violence Multi-Partner Trust Fund will help to advance
the survivor-centred approach, address the root causes of conflict-related sexual
violence and support comprehensive services for survivors and children born of
wartime rape.

21-0526145/140

S/2021/375

Fourthly, we need to establish and integrate monitoring arrangements and
early-warning indicators of conflict-related sexual violence into the mandates of all
United Nations peacekeeping and special political missions.
Coming from a region that in the recent past has been the venue for major
conflicts and human suffering, we have witnessed how sexual violence has been
used as a tactic of war against civilians. In this context, I would like to mention the
case of Kosovo, where civilian-targeted rape was deliberately and repeatedly used as
a weapon during the war in the late 1990s. More than 20,000 survivors, isolated by
stigma, discrimination and fear, still suffer the consequences in silence. The lack of
accountability and recognition for such crimes remains a devastating legacy of this
brutal conflict.
We regret that the current report of the Secretary-General continues to fail
to mention Kosovo among the post-conflict countries that suffer the consequences
of sexual crimes, and we call upon the Secretary-General to include Kosovo in
future reports. This would help to acknowledge the survivors and to combat the
prejudice and shame they face. It would also highlight Kosovo’s valuable experience
in supporting survivors as a good example for the region and beyond.
If elected to the Security Council for the 2022-2023 term, Albania will
champion the women and peace and security agenda across the full breadth of the
Council’s work. We will also work closely with all like-minded countries to support
the incorporation of sexual violence as a stand-alone designation criterion in United
Nations sanctions regimes.
It is our collective responsibility to closely cooperate and take concrete
actions to prevent sexual violence, protect survivors and bring perpetrators to
justice. To foster deterrence, justice must be done — not only in the courtroom, but
also in the community.

46/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Annex 22
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Argentina to the
United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
Argentina thanks Viet Nam for organizing today’s Security Council open
debate and appreciates the briefings made by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten; Nobel Peace
Prize Laureate, Mr. Denis Mukwege; and the Director of the South Sudan Women
with Disabilities Network, Ms. Caroline Atim.
Argentina appreciates the efforts made in recent years by States Members of
the United Nations, the United Nations itself, intergovernmental organizations and
local and international civil society organizations to prevent and respond to sexual
violence. We also continue to strongly support the efforts of the Secretary-General
and the Office of the Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
reiterate our support for their work, which is firmly rooted in the women and peace
and security agenda, which finds its origins in resolution 1325 (2000).
We especially welcome the latest report of the Secretary-General on conflictrelated sexual violence (S/2021/312). In particular, we share the concern that the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has amplified gender inequality, which
is one of the main causes of sexual violence in both conflict and peace contexts,
as well as the impact that COVID-19 has had on the access of survivors of sexual
violence to essential health and assistance services. We are also concerned about the
additional complications that the pandemic has generated in the search for justice and
reparation for victims following the implementation of measures that have affected
the normal functioning of mechanisms in judicial and accountability systems.
Argentina categorically condemns acts of sexual violence in armed conflict,
supports efforts aimed at preventing them and promotes accountability and
punishment of those responsible. It is for these reasons that Argentina has supported
all resolutions adopted since resolution 1325 (2000) to combat sexual violence
in conflict as well as specific Council resolutions complementary to it, namely,
resolutions 1820 (2008), 2242 (2015) and 2467 (2019). In this regard, we assist and
support the work being done to establish zero tolerance for acts of sexual violence
in conflict. Argentina believes it is crucial to prevent and punish the use and threat
of sexual violence perpetrated by various actors and armed groups, both State and
non-State alike.
With respect to prevention, our country understands that one of the key
actions in this context is addressing the risk factors and underlying conditions that
place women and certain groups in situations of greater vulnerability and risk to
sexual violence, structural discrimination and forms of gender-based violence, with
climates of impunity and insecurity acting as triggers for this serious crime. With
regard to acts of sexual violence per se, Argentina believes that such conduct is a
crime of the utmost gravity that must be combated within legal frameworks and
the use of the tools and mechanisms available, including the sanctions regimes of
the Security Council, which should include sexual violence as a specific criterion
for the imposition of sanctions, and the referral of cases to the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court. With respect to access to justice and accountability
for the commission of these crimes, Argentina believes that it is essential to establish
greater cooperation and share good practices in the areas of investigation, assistance
to victims, extradition and legal assistance, in order to put an end to the climate of
impunity that contributes to the proliferation of these crimes.
21-0526147/140

S/2021/375

In pursuit of these objectives, our country is a member of the international
cooperation mechanism known as Justice Rapid Response, whose purpose is to
provide prompt assistance to States and international organizations that require
the assistance of experts in the gathering of information that may be useful in the
investigation and prosecution of international crimes. In this context, Argentina
highly values its partnership and joint work with UN-Women, which guarantees the
inclusion of gender specialists in the investigation of crimes.
With regard to the protection of victims of sexual violence in conflict,
Argentina understands that it is essential to create mechanisms that protect, contain,
assist and reintegrate all survivors of such violations, in collaboration with women’s
organizations and other civil society organizations. This assistance should address
the needs and protect the dignity and human rights of the victims through measures
to eliminate the multiple forms of discrimination, marginalization and stigmatization
that victims often suffer in socioeconomic and cultural processes of reintegration
into their families and communities of origin.
The aforementioned elements should be taken into account when defining the
mandates of peacekeeping operations and special political missions, as well as in the
peacebuilding efforts of the Security Council, within the framework of resolution
1325 (2000) and its complementary resolutions. Argentina would therefore like to
stress the importance of having women protection advisers in peace operations
in order to improve coordination and the quality of the information available for
monitoring and preventing sexual violence in conflict.
It should also be noted that in the area of women and peace and security,
Argentina is a member of the Council’s Women, Peace and Security National Focal
Points Network and the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security, in Geneva,
and has joined the Elsie Initiative for Women in Peace Operations, promoted by
the Canadian Government to ensure an increase in the number of women deployed
in peace operations, mainly because these entities are considered to be suitable
mechanisms for combating gender inequality, thereby undercutting one of the main
sources of sexual violence in armed conflicts. Likewise, together with more than 80
countries, Argentina has joined the voluntary compact on preventing and addressing
sexual exploitation and abuse.
In conclusion, sexual violence in conflict situations constitutes one of the
most abhorrent scourges to human dignity as it undermines efforts aimed at restoring
international peace and security. As a corollary, Argentina believes that, even in
the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, further efforts must be made to combat
this serious crime, taking into account the risk factors that contribute to it being
committed, undoing structural discrimination and impunity, increasing cooperation
in the investigation of and punishment for the crime, and building up mechanisms to
assist, protect and reintegrate victims.

48/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Annex 23
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Australia to the
United Nations, Mitchell Fifield
Australia thanks Viet Nam for its ongoing leadership on the women and
peace and security agenda, both at the Security Council and as 2020 Chair of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations. Australia welcomes the analysis and
recommendations presented in the Secretary-General’s recent report on conflictrelated sexual violence (S/2021/312).
The women and peace and security agenda remains crucial to meaningfully
addressing sexual violence in conflict. It recognizes the disproportionate impact
of conflict on women and girls and that gender inequality is a critical indicator
of a country’s risk of conflict and a direct cause of sexual violence. As the
Secretary-General notes in his report, rebuilding better must integrate the voices
and experiences of survivors who have suffered the effects of intersecting crises.
We strongly encourage all parties to include these diverse voices in peacebuilding
efforts, including those of Afghan women in the various processes under way in their
country. Women are powerful agents of change and their full, equal and meaningful
participation and leadership in decision-making is essential to sustainable peace.
Australia remains deeply concerned that armed groups are using sexual
violence as a tactic of war, particularly against women and girls, human rights
defenders and individuals on the basis of their perceived political affiliation, sexual
orientation or ethnicity. During the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic,
the shadow pandemic of gender-based violence has been even more acute for those
living in conflict, crisis and humanitarian settings, with increased risk of trafficking
and sexual exploitation. Survivors’ access to support services has concurrently
been limited by lockdown measures, and the diversion of dedicated resources
has compounded existing gendered institutional, structural and socioeconomic
disadvantages.
A pervasive climate of impunity prevents survivors from reporting and
gaining access to justice. We must build systems to hold perpetrators to account
in a timely manner and reinforce the rule of law. Australia remains an active and
steadfast advocate for this view across international forums, including with regard
to past and recent atrocities in the conflict in Myanmar.
We strongly urge action that brings perpetrators of sexual violence to justice
in the conflict there and in others where abuses occur. Our response must promote
and protect the rights of women and girls. Sexual and reproductive health and rights
are human rights of central importance for all people in conflict and humanitarian
settings, particularly for survivors of sexual violence. Access to the full range of
support, including psychosocial, legal and sexual, reproductive and other health
services, is critical for survivors’ recovery, dignity and bodily autonomy.
Our actions must be survivor-centred and recognize the diversity of
experiences and needs. They must not revictimize or retraumatize survivors
seeking redress or remedy. For example, children born of rape and their mothers
have particular needs, and male survivors, including boys, have their own barriers
to gaining access to services.
Gender advisers in peace operations are critical to promoting gender-sensitive
planning, resourcing and operations and to advancing prevention, protection,
compliance, accountability and justice for survivors. As of the end of January 2021,
Australia has trained over 290 military and civilian gender advisers for deployment
in military, humanitarian, relief and recovery operations. We also support the Elsie
21-0526149/140

S/2021/375

Initiative for Women in Peace Operations, promoting the meaningful representation
of uniformed women across all levels of United Nations peace operations.
Australia is proud to work with diverse civil society organizations, multilateral
institutions, academia and our regional and global partners to address sexual
violence in conflict. We have promoted such innovative practices as the PeaceFem
App, mapping gender provisions in peace agreements to ensure that practitioners
effectively negotiate and integrate gender considerations into peace processes,
including services and justice for sexual violence.
We are pleased to continue to fund UN-Women’s Women, Peace and Security
Global Facility and the Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund in support of those
working at the front lines of conflict and crises to advance gender equality and the
women and peace and security agenda. We commend the United Nations for its own
ongoing implementation of the women and peace and security and the youth, peace
and security agendas.
Australia is a proud founding member of the Call to Action on Protection from
Gender-Based Violence in Emergencies and a leader in supporting crisis-affected
communities with life-saving sexual- and reproductive-health services and supplies,
through partners including the International Planned Parenthood Federation and the
United Nations Population Fund. We also advocate preserving and strengthening
international commitments for sexual and reproductive health and rights through
our co-chairing of the coordinating committee for the NEXUS Initiative for 2021.
As COVID-19 exacerbates risks for sexual violence in conflict, Australia
continues to champion the rights of survivors, victims and those on the front lines
of conflict, including women human rights defenders. We remain committed to the
women and peace and security agenda and our collective efforts aimed at combating
sexual violence in conflict as a pathway to sustainable peace and security.

50/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Annex 24
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Bangladesh to the
United Nations, Rabab Fatima
I thank the Viet Nam presidency for organizing today’s open debate on this
important subject. I also express my sincere appreciation to all the briefers for their
valuable remarks.
We thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report (S/2021/312),
which reveals deeply concerning trends of continued use of sexual violence as a
weapon of war. We are particularly disturbed by the lack of compliance with the
Security Council’s normative framework, by both State and non-State parties
to conflicts. We support the Secretary-General’s call for the Council to enforce
compliance by “translating commitments into compliance and resolutions into
results” (ibid., para. 69).
We appreciate the focus of today’s debate, which is the provision of assistance
and access to services for the victims of sexual violence, including their needs for
rehabilitation, justice and reintegration. It is evidently clear that the scars of sexual
violence continue to destroy lives, and justice and redress for the victims remain
elusive. Urgent reinforcement for a victim-centred response to sexual violence in
conflict is needed
Bangladesh itself went through the painful experience of sexual violence in
conflict during its war of liberation in 1971. Over 2 million women bore its brunt.
Despite numerous challenges in rebuilding a war-ravaged country, we
prioritized the needs of the victims, and in 1972, right after independence, a
Women’s Rehabilitation Board for relief for war-affected women and reconstruction
was established. The Board collected information about the women and children
abused during the war and arranged for their rehabilitation. This national board
also addressed the physical condition of many women by offering safe deliveries of
unwanted pregnancies that resulted from rape. The victims were also offered choices
in respect of their reproductive health through emergency medical procedures.
It did not end there. The perpetrators of sexual violence have been brought
to justice through a trial process. The contribution of victims has also been
officially recognized.
Our commitment to this issue has also been reflected in our national action
plan on women and peace and security. Taking into account Bangladesh’s contribution
to United Nations peace operations, the action plan includes specific provisions to
increase the number of women peacekeepers and also to strengthen the knowledge
and compliance of obligations related to sexual violence in conflict. The action plan
recommends specific activities for updating and localizing modules and training
materials for peacekeepers for the implementation of related mandates.
Our Government has also been providing critical support to the victims of
sexual violence in Myanmar, as we are hosting now over a million forcibly displaced
Rohingyas in Cox’s Bazar, a large majority of whom are women and children.
The national action plan recognizes the need for the capacity-building of local
humanitarian actors on gender-responsive and victim-centred humanitarian actions.
The humanitarian assistance programmes for the Rohingya people take into account
the specific protection needs of victims of sexual violence.
In order for the Security Council to implement its relevant resolutions,
particularly resolution 2467 (2019), we would like to suggest the following actions.
First, the compliance framework suggested by the Council’s resolutions need
to be fully implemented, especially by regular monitoring at the field level and
21-0526151/140

S/2021/375

engagement by the Office of the Special Representative through United Nations
country teams. We see merit in the recommendations to strengthen targeted measures
against those who do not implement existing obligations and who commit, command
or condone sexual violence in conflict. Coherence between sexual violence in
conflict and targeted measures would indeed send a clear signal underlining the
gravity of these violations.
Secondly, increased sensitivity towards the needs of victims, including
their physical, psychological and livelihood needs, is critically important. Equally
important is building the capacity of the State to cater to those needs. In this
regard, relevant national institutions and stakeholders need to be empowered and
supported so that the victims can be provided with rehabilitation and reintegration
services. Mandated United Nations entities should be adequately resourced to
support such measures.
Thirdly, accountability and justice systems need to be strengthened to address
more effectively sexual violence, especially in the conflict and post-conflict contexts,
as unaccounted for cases normalize the crime and build a culture of impunity. The
national legal frameworks and justice mechanisms need to be strengthened. The
Security Council needs to use its mandate and authority when national justice
mechanisms are unable to deliver.
Fourthly, we believe that the issue of sexual violence cannot be addressed
sustainably if the root causes are not addressed. Discrimination, persecution and
subjugation weaken vulnerable and marginalized communities and reduce their
ability to prevent incidents of sexual violence in the hands of the parties to conflicts.
For that to change, the United Nations must prioritize support for the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda in specific country settings. Only 89
Member States have so far developed national action plans under resolution 1325
(2000). One practical method could be to pursue universalizing the national action
plans more vigorously. National action plans could serve as an important yardstick
to measure progress.
Finally, other United Nations mechanisms should complement the Council’s
work on the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda. The
sexual violence in conflict commitments need to be internalized by the entire
United Nations system, including at the ground level, by the resident coordinators
and other United Nations agencies in the country teams. This would address the
capacity gaps in the security sector, justice system and overall political process for
increasing women’s participation at all levels of the peace process. Greater synergies
are also needed between the mandated United Nations entities and the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women towards ensuring
compliance with general recommendation No. 30, which obliges its 189 States parties
to report on resolutions related to sexual violence in conflict.

52/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Annex 25
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Belgium to the
United Nations
Belgium thanks Viet Nam for organizing this important debate on the
prevention of and response to conflict-related sexual violence. My country welcomes
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/312) and recommendations in this
regard, and remains extremely concerned about the high prevalence of conflictrelated sexual violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the horrific acts of
sexual violence in the Tigray region and many other cases mentioned in the report.
They painfully demonstrate the need to intensify our efforts and strengthen the tools
to put an end to these terrible human rights violations. We welcome the tireless
efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, her Office, the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict and women’s protection advisers in this regard.
In this context, Belgium wishes to draw attention to sexual violence against
children affected by armed conflict. The Security Council has identified this as one
of the six most serious violations. Belgium, as the previous chair of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, has given particular attention to the fight
against rape and other forms of sexual violence against children. Data on sexual
violence against children in conflict continue to be alarming and reported violations
against children are increasing. Belgium has worked closely with other Member
States, civil society and the United Nations system, including the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
to address this scourge.
Belgium also recalls the importance of one of the key elements of resolution
2467 (2019), namely, a survivor-centred approach. All mechanisms to combat
sexual violence must focus on survivors in order to protect their rights, ensure
justice and facilitate their rehabilitation. This includes comprehensive services
and care for victims, including services related to sexual and reproductive health
and rights, psychosocial services, legal assistance that supports survivors in their
quest for redress and accountability, as well as gender-sensitive transitional justice
mechanisms, reparations and socioeconomic support. Data collection is paramount
to guiding these efforts. We all know that cases of sexual violence are systematically
underreported owing to stigma, retaliation and insecurity. Therefore, it is crucial
that survivors have a safe environment in which to come forward and seek redress.
Moreover, we cannot accept impunity. The perpetrators of these crimes must
be brought to justice. This is an indispensable step in building a lasting peace. The
fight against impunity, including the prevention of new crimes, is a long-standing
objective of Belgian foreign policy.
We must obviously take into account the coronavirus disease crisis and its
impact. In addition to well-known obstacles, such as stigma and the lack of access to
essential services, the combination of the pandemic with conflict and displacement
have further compounded the difficulties of survivors. Hard-won gains in support
have been undermined by the redirection of funds and detour of international
attention. Sustainable funding is essential. Belgium is proud to fund the conflictrelated sexual violence multi-partner trust fund and the Team of Experts on the Rule
of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict and to support specific programmes, such as
the Programme de lutte contre la violence sexuelle en République démocratique du
Congo, which takes a multisectoral approach that considers medical, psychosocial,
legal and socioeconomic care.
21-0526153/140

S/2021/375

Finally, we must realize that sexual violence crimes will stop only if we address
the root causes of sexual violence. This paradigm shift translates on the ground into
continued efforts for gender equality, the inclusion of women’s empowerment at the
heart of prevention measures and, more generally, increased support for civil society
organizations and women’s human rights defenders. Belgium wishes to reiterate its
commitment to gender equality and to the promotion, protection and fulfilment of
all human rights of women and girls.

54/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Annex 26
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Brazil to the
United Nations, Ronaldo Costa Filho
First, allow me to congratulate the Vietnamese presidency of the Security
Council on convening this important debate on sexual violence in conflict in the
broader context of the women and peace and security agenda.
It is important to reiterate the message of unity of the international community
against sexual violence in conflict and also to update the efforts undertaken by the
Security Council to that effect since the last time this body met to address this
pressing issue (see S/2020/727).
Sexual violence is a scourge regardless of where and when it takes place,
but it is especially repulsive when used as a tactic and a weapon of war in conflict
and post-conflict situations, whereby victims are generally more vulnerable and
impunity tends to run amok.
While the United Nations has set up a working architecture to fight sexual
violence in conflict, it is urgent that words uttered in the Security Council Chamber
be translated into action on the ground. It is therefore incumbent on the organ tasked
with maintaining international peace and security to use the toolkit at its disposal
to prevent, avert and fight sexual violence in conflict. It is our hope that today’s
debate helps to identify gaps and loopholes where the Security Council can step in
to prevent and combat sexual violence in conflict.
In its written statement presented on the occasion of the debate on the issue
in July last year (S/2020/727, annex 18), Brazil pointed out that, among the manifold
impacts on international peace and security, the coronavirus disease pandemic
creates a challenging environment for survivors of sexual violence in conflict,
including the risk of impunity for potential perpetrators.
While resolution 2467 (2019) demands concrete progress in fighting conflictrelated sexual violence, resolution 2532 (2020) has paved the way for a necessary
global ceasefire and the humanitarian pause during the efforts to combat the
pandemic. It is imperative that their prescriptions be entirely followed through by
all involved actors.
Brazil lends its support to the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, established in 2009 with the goal
of raising awareness and coordinating a system-wide response to the issue. It is only
fitting that Special Envoy Pramila Patten addresses the Council in this debate, and
we thank her for her insight, as well as her efforts.
Brazil also applauds various initiatives aimed at advancing standard
procedures in the fight against conflict-related sexual violence, such as the Murad
code. Moreover, Brazil fully endorses the Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy,
which provides a coherent framework to deal with sexual violence in the context of
peacekeeping operations.
We are proud of the overall track record of Brazilian Blue Helmets in
their performance, especially of their strict observance of conduct and discipline
protocols. Brazilian predeployment practices are widely considered to be exemplary
in the prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse in the operational environments of
peacekeeping operations.
If predeployment training plays an important role in inhibiting sexual violence
in the context of peacekeeping, the deployment of women peacekeepers is also a major
factor in deterring and combating such crimes. Women peacekeepers tend to be able
21-0526155/140

S/2021/375

to reach out to more segments of the local population than their male counterparts.
The presence of women Blue Helmets on the ground can encourage the reporting of
cases of sexual violence and forge stronger ties between the peacekeeping operations
and the communities. Hence, it is essential that the Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy
2018-2028 be fully implemented, leading to the significant expansion of the number
and proportion of uniformed women deployed in peacekeeping operations.
Another valuable instrument in preventing sexual violence in conflict is the
deployment of gender advisers in peacekeeping operations. Brazil is especially proud
of the contributions of two of its women peacekeepers — Commander Márcia Braga
and Commander Carla Araújo — distinguished with the United Nations Military
Gender Award, in 2018 and 2019, respectively, for promoting mixed teams in patrols
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the
Central African Republic, which have helped reduce sexual violence in that country.
Brazil remains deeply committed to the advancement of the women and
peace and security agenda. It is our view that the Security Council ought to remain
engaged and mobilized to fulfil without delay the promise of eliminating sexual
violence in conf lict.

56/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Annex 27
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Bulgaria to the
United Nations, Lachezara Stoeva
Bulgaria aligns itself with the statement of the European Union (annex 37)
and the statement presented by Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security (annex 28). I would also like to express our appreciation to Viet
Nam for organizing this timely open debate. Bulgaria welcomes the focus on the
prevention of sexual violence in conflict, as well as the recently released report of the
Secretary-General on this critical topic (S/2021/312), which has a strong emphasis
on survivors.
While last year we marked the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action and the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, the world also had to face
an unprecedented pandemic. As recognized in the report of the Secretary-General,
the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has demonstrated how delicate
the progress in the field of women’s rights is and that political commitments can
be reversed, if we lose focus or redirect resources, as has been the case with the
COVID-19 emergency. Moreover, the pandemic has amplified vulnerabilities and
exacerbated gender inequality, which is one of the root causes of sexual violence,
resulting in a global spike in sexual and gender-based violence, while further limiting
access to essential services for survivors.
The Secretary-General's report indicates that women and girls have been
disproportionately impacted by the pandemic, while women in displacement settings
and in conflict-affected areas have been among the hardest hit and most difficult
to reach in terms of support. This is why Bulgaria believes that it is crucial that
survivors be at the very centre of our response, including by ensuring their sexual
and reproductive health and rights. This is why we also need to address the nexus
between trafficking in persons and conflict-related sexual violence.
Furthermore, we share the view of Special Representative Patten that we
should also take firm action against reprisals against civil society organizations, for
they provide critical support to survivors.
In 2020, Bulgaria joined the universal consensus on gender equality as a main
predictor of peace by adopting its first national action plan on women and peace
and security, for the period 2020 to 2025. This critical step illustrates my country’s
commitment to the women and peace and security agenda, while promoting a peoplecentred approach with regard to survivors of conflict-related sexual violence.
Bulgaria is deeply concerned that, despite all our efforts, the occurrence
and threat of conflict-related sexual violence persist in such high numbers, and are
used as tactics of war, torture, terror and political repression. We need to galvanize
support to stop impunity. In this regard, in December 2020, Bulgaria joined the
Group of Friends for the Elimination of Violence against Women and Girls, which
was conceived to coordinate efforts at the United Nations. Moreover, we support
the Secretary-General’s view on the establishment of survivor-centred transitional
justice mechanisms in post-conflict settings, ensuring the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in their design and implementation. There are cases where
sexual violence in conflict amounts to crime against humanity and should be
addressed in the right context.
In conclusion, Bulgaria recognizes that gender inequalities exacerbate
conflict-related sexual violence. Therefore, Member States need to achieve gender
equality and realize women’s full enjoyment of human rights, while also ensuring
21-0526157/140

S/2021/375

women’s full and equal participation. In this regard, Bulgaria remains committed to
the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda and the promotion
of the survivor-centred approach.

58/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Annex 28
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Canada to the
United Nations on Behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace
and Security
This statement is delivered on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace
and Security, an informal network of 64 interested Member States, representing all
five regional groups at the United Nations, and the European Union.
We thank Viet Nam for organizing this important debate on sexual violence
in conflict. We welcome the most recent report of the Secretary General on conflictrelated sexual violence (S/2021/312) and thank his Special Representative for her
ongoing efforts. During this open debate, the Group would like to emphasize three
main points.
First, the Group recognizes the ongoing and disproportionate impacts of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic on all victims and survivors of conflictrelated sexual violence, who are disproportionately women and girls. During this
difficult time, their needs cannot be put on pause and must be taken into account
in all aspects of the COVID-19 response. Appropriate and predictable funding for
these aspects of pandemic responses is critical. Gender-responsive protection needs
arising from the pandemic must be met and access to essential services ensured,
including sexual and reproductive health-care services, in line with the survivorcentred and human rights-based approaches. We reiterate the importance of ensuring
universal access to sexual and reproductive health and reproductive rights, as agreed
in accordance with the Programme of Action of the International Conference on
Population and Development and the Beijing Platform for Action and the outcome
documents of their review conferences.
Secondly, the Group is outraged by the persistent and widespread perpetration
of sexual violence in conflict by State and non-State actors. Far too many people
continue to be affected by the threat, occurrence or legacy of conflict-related sexual
violence. We recognize that addressing conflict-related sexual violence has been
made more complex by intersecting crises and intersecting inequalities. Such
heinous acts must be put to an end. We must increase our collective efforts to prevent
sexual violence and ensure that victims and survivors can access the comprehensive
support they need to fully recover from these violations, meaningfully participate
in decision-making on prevention and response and be able to reintegrate into their
societies without fear of stigma or further abuse. During this open debate, the Group
would notably like to highlight the importance of addressing the specific needs,
perspectives and wishes of victims and survivors living with disabilities and those
of the most vulnerable.
Thirdly, to address sexual violence in conflict, the Group reiterates the
importance of prevention, fighting against impunity and ensuring accountability.
This responsibility lies with us, the States Members of the United Nations. We must
redouble our efforts to ensure that robust legal and institutional arrangements be
in place to address sexual violence in armed conflict and that steps be taken to
investigate and prosecute perpetrators. In this regard, we encourage the Security
Council to look to explicitly incorporate and apply sexual violence as a designation
criterion in United Nations sanction regimes in areas where such crimes are
persistently perpetrated. We call for the full implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent resolutions on women and peace and security.
In conclusion, the Group recognizes that inequalities, and in particular gender
inequality, give rise to and exacerbate conflict-related sexual violence. It is therefore
21-0526159/140

S/2021/375

incumbent upon all Member States to redouble their efforts to achieve gender
equality, realize women’s and girls’ full enjoyment of human rights and ensure they
can all participate fully, equally and meaningfully in their societies.

60/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Annex 29
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Canada

to

the

[Original: English and French]
It is over 20 years since the Security Council adopted resolution 1325 (2000)
and first called on States and other parties to conflict to take special measures
to prevent conflict-related sexual violence. There has been progress since then,
including an improved understanding of the extent and multifaceted nature of such
violence and, although insufficient by far, an increased number of prosecutions and
convictions.
The impacts of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic remind us of
how fragile this progress is. While the use of sexual violence as a tactic of war,
terror and torture has continued, the pandemic has further complicated the pursuit of
accountability and justice. The pandemic has created new, gender-specific protection
concerns, including those linked to curfews, checkpoints and border closures, and
has restricted the operating space for organizations delivering medical, psychosocial
and legal services to victims and survivors. We must do better, and we must stay
focused on addressing the gaps.
As Member States, we must investigate credible allegations and hold
perpetrators to account, allow unhindered access for independent third parties to
document violations and provide comprehensive support and meaningful justice for
victims and survivors.
We must also address the root causes of such violence. Whether acts of
sexual and gender-based violence constitute conflict-related sexual violence, sexual
exploitation and abuse, sexual harassment or other types of sexual and gender-based
violence, they represent an abuse of power. Often, these acts are also an expression
of misogyny, intolerance, discrimination and racism, and sociocultural norms that
condone, enable and perpetuate sexual and gender-based violence.
Too often, victims and survivors are targeted on the basis of their actual or
perceived sexual orientation or gender identity. We welcome the participation of the
LGBTI Core Group, of which Canada is a member, in this open debate — a first in
the Security Council. This is real progress that will bring much-needed attention in
the Security Council to the issue of conflict-related sexual violence against lesbian,
gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex persons.
Canada thanks the NGO Working Group for facilitating the input of a
representative from the South Sudan Women with Disabilities Network to share her
expertise with the Council. Her account highlights the importance of an intersectional
approach in addressing conflict-related sexual violence, and of a response informed
by all victims and survivors.
Gender inequality, conflict and fragility are inextricably linked. Almost all
countries that feature at the bottom of global gender equality indexes are also fragile
or conflict-affected. Inclusive and gender-equal societies are safer for everyone.
Many of the best examples of leadership during the pandemic came from women. Yet
women led fewer than 7 per cent of countries at the pandemic’s onset, and a survey
of 30 countries with COVID-19 task forces showed that only 24 per cent of members
were women. In conflict-affected countries, they represented 18 per cent.
Canada is proud to co-lead the Generation Equality Forum’s Action Coalition
on Feminist Movements and Leadership and to be a catalytic member of its Women,
Peace and Security and Humanitarian Assistance Compact. The Generation Equality
21-0526161/140

S/2021/375

Forum is a unique civil society-centred initiative that will secure a set of concrete,
ambitious and transformative commitments to achieve progress towards gender
equality.
Canada’s feminist foreign policy seeks to ensure that human rights, gender
equality, diversity and inclusion are front and centre in all our international efforts
and engagements. This includes efforts to advance women’s participation and
leadership in conflict resolution, United Nations peace operations and peacebuilding.
Canada launched an advocacy campaign this year — Peace by Her — to
recognize, support, protect and include women peacebuilders. Too often, women
peacebuilders lack adequate funding and are generally underrecognized, excluded
from formal peace processes and targeted by gender-based threats and violence for
their work building peace and fighting repression. In addition to this campaign,
Canada is providing $5 million specifically to support grass-roots women
peacebuilders.
Canada also seeks to prevent sexual and gender-based violence at home,
including by addressing the disproportionate levels of violence targeting indigenous
women and girls. Ending all forms of gender-based violence and systemic
discrimination against indigenous women and girls and two-spirit, lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender, queer, questioning, intersex and asexual plus people in Canada
is an integral part of the Government of Canada’s commitment to reconciliation.
Lastly, Canada commends the Secretary-General for his report (S/2021/312)
and encourages the Security Council to follow its recommendations, including to
continue to incorporate sexual violence as a stand-alone designation criterion for
sanctions, including when used as reprisal against women in public and political life;
continue to invite the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict to share information with sanctions committees; and to support
the accelerated deployment of women protection advisers to peace operations.
These recommendations are crucial for achieving greater coherence to, and
efficiency in, the United Nations response to conflict-related sexual violence.

62/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Annex 30
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Chile the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
Chile wishes to thank the Permanent Mission of Viet Nam for convening the
Security Council to consider the issue of sexual violence in conflict.
Our country associates itself with the statements submitted in writing by the
Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security (annex 28) and the LGBTI Core
Group (annex 70), which today makes its first intervention in the Security Council.
At the outset, Chile expresses its concern regarding the situation of victims
of sexual violence in conflict, since, as the Secretary-General’s report (S/2021/312)
clearly indicates, the figures therein are but the tip of the iceberg. However, what we
do know for sure indicates that sexual violence in conflict, including rape, sexual
slavery, forced prostitution, forced pregnancy, forced abortion, forced sterilization,
forced marriage and other forms of conflict-related sexual violence, continues, as
does the impunity perpetrators enjoy.
Such criminal attacks against the integrity and human rights of the their
victims, especially when used as a brutal tactics of war, have a range of devastating
consequences on survivors and their families, a situation exacerbated for women and
girls in particular with the outbreak of the pandemic.
Moreover, it is worrisome that 70 per cent of the parties listed as perpetrators
of sexual violence in conflicts in the annex to the Secretary-General’s report, despite
recognition and condemnation by the international community for violating their
victims’ human rights in the contexts of armed conflict, are persistent perpetrators,
who for five or more years have not taken reparation measures or shown a change in
behaviour. This not only reflects the long way to go in terms of accountability, but
also leaves much to be said about the commitment of these actors to reducing and
preventing sexual violence.
Against this alarming backdrop, Chile expresses its repudiation and
condemnation of all acts of sexual exploitation and abuse in conflict situations and
as tactics of war, which threaten the right of all people to a life of dignity, and our
collective peace and security. At the same time, it is important to address the way
in which sexual violence is used in conflicts, as well as its various implications,
impacts and consequences for victims and survivors.
In addition, it should be noted that, for monitoring and reporting purposes, it
is clear that the number of incidents of sexual violence reported in conflict situations
increases significantly as peacekeeping and humanitarian operations increase their
presence on the ground. This shows that, in order to make informed decisions, it is
essential to strengthen the experience and capacity of child and women’s protection
personnel to safely and ethically document accurate, reliable and timely information,
disaggregated by sex, on sexual violence in conflict situations.
In the words of the Secretary-General:
“The pandemic demands a paradigm shift: efforts must be made to silence
the guns and amplify the voices of women peacebuilders, as well as to invest
in public welfare rather than in the instruments of warfare. In this context,
service delivery is not a secondary issue, but rather the ultimate expression of
political will.” (S/2021/312, para. 4)
In that regard, it is a priority to ensure that the rights of survivors be respected and
that all victims of sexual violence have access to justice, assistance, compensation
21-0526163/140

S/2021/375

and comprehensive support and reparation systems. This includes access to
comprehensive specialized services, including psychosocial services, health-care
and sexual and reproductive health services and livelihood support for survivors
of sexual and gender-based violence, tailored to their needs and provided without
discrimination and with due consideration.
Finally, given the urgency of combating sexual violence in conflict, it is
necessary to move from aspirations to obligations, and from commitments to
implementation. Therefore, Chile fully supports the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda to increase the support and reparations to survivors
and their empowerment, including by increasing the full, equitable and meaningful
participation of local women in negotiation and peacebuilding processes and
decision-making with regard to peace and security at all levels. Chile also reiterates
the need to address and eradicate the scourge of sexual and gender-based violence,
including in conflict situations, particularly in the context of the pandemic, and to
ensure that those responsible be held accountable for their actions.

64/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Annex 31
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Costa Rica
to the United Nations, Maritza Chan Valverde
I thank the Permanent Mission of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam as
President of the Security Council for the month of April for organizing this open
debate on women and peace and security, which aims to highlight the brutality and
devastation of sexual violence in conflict. I would also like to thank the briefers for
their valuable insights on this pressing issue. Costa Rica reiterates its unwavering
support to the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict and its mission.
Costa Rica aligns itself with the statement submitted by Argentina and the
Kingdom of the Netherlands on behalf of the LGBTI Core Group (annex 70).
Despite the increased international recognition of the serious impact that
sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict situations poses to international peace
and security, initiatives to prevent or mitigate these hideous acts continue to fall
short. Women and girls, members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer and
intersex community, and other vulnerable groups continue to be targeted with sexual
and gender-based violence. Although resolution 1820 (2008) has led to remarkable
progress in addressing sexual violence in conflict, lagging implementation and
narrow interpretations of what constitutes conflict-related sexual violence continue
to limit its impact. In this regard, Costa Rica would like to stress three key points.
First, conflict-related sexual violence is not merely a women’s issue, but a
security issue with much wider peace and security implications than particular
instances of rape. This point is particularly important for Costa Rica as we strive
to link such issues to other components of the broader gender equality and human
security agenda, including those established by Sustainable Development Goals 5
and 16. Not only can rape serve as a precursor to conflict, a diagnostic of preconflict conditions and a symptom of impunity, it is also evidence of a weak and
insufficient security sector. In this regard, Costa Rica urges that conflict-related
sexual violence should be addressed as a central aspect of any peace agreement. This
includes ensuring that crimes of sexual violence not be amnestied and that victims
receive the reparations and livelihood support that they need to rebuild their lives.
Sexual violence considerations should be part of any peacebuilding, reconstruction,
transitional justice and truth and reconciliation arrangements.
Secondly, there is a clear correlation between the prevention pillar of the
women and peace and security agenda and disarmament and arms control. However,
the ready availability of small arms undoubtedly facilitates grave crimes, such as
sexual and gender-based violence, which are quite often committed at gunpoint.
Better arms control mechanisms, including robust implementation of the Arms
Trade Treaty, as well as the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, in addition
to national laws and policies instituting gender-responsive small arms control, are
essential to a more dependable security sector and, in turn, conflict prevention,
protections against sexual violence and greater participation opportunities.
Thirdly, as Special Representative Pramila Patten has stated “sexual violence
is not an inevitable byproduct of conflict. It is a preventable crime.” Costa Rica
regrets that impunity for wartime sexual violence continues to be the rule, that
justice remains elusive and accountability the exception, as we have not seen a
single successful prosecution for sexual violence committed by either State actors
or terrorist groups. Truly ending impunity requires that all actors involved in the
commission of atrocities, including State actors, be held to account. And it is every
21-0526165/140

S/2021/375

State’s responsibility to do so. Costa Rica urges the Security Council to consistently
apply sanctions for sexual violence crimes as a critical aspect of deterrence and
prevention, utilizing the stand-alone designation criteria on sexual violence, as
articulated in resolution 2428 (2018). We also encourage referring those crimes to
the International Criminal Court. Sanctions and judicial accountability measures
must work together. Moreover, unless we adopt a holistic approach to policy and
programming that deals with both the root causes of sexual and gender-based
violence and its consequences, we risk simply being reactive, by which point it is
already too late for the millions of victims and survivors.
As is often said by proponents of the women and peace and security agenda,
there is no security without women’s security and the aim is not only to protect
women from violence, but to also encourage their active participation in political
and economic life. A robust institutional framework will indubitably support such
participation, as well as enhance protection mechanisms needed to eliminate such
sexual violence in and out of conflict.

66/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Annex 32
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Cyprus

to

the

This statement complements that of the European Union (annex 37) and offers
some concrete suggestions towards combating sexual violence in conflict.
The prohibition of rape and other forms of sexual violence by customary
international law, in both international and non-international armed conflicts, as
well as the wide recognition of such acts as war crimes since the first codification
of the laws of war in early military manuals and as crimes against humanity in
current international legal practice, provides a strong framework for combating
sexual violence in conflict. The fact that sexual violence continues to be prevalent
as a weapon of war and humiliation points to non-implementation as one of our
biggest failures. In addition to non-implementation, impunity can only be perceived
by perpetrators as a shield. Having experienced aggression and conflict, Cyprus is
well aware of the profound scars of sexual violence on women and girls and how
these scars are compounded by impunity.
The Security Council has an indispensable role to play. First and foremost, it
must do better at upholding the prohibition on the use of force. It can contribute to
improved monitoring and the implementation of relevant international obligations,
which it must accompany with repercussions for States and non-State actors who
fail to uphold them. It should sanction perpetrators and routinely refer situations
where atrocity crimes have been committed to the International Criminal Court.
The Council should also reject peace agreements that confer amnesties for atrocity
crimes, including sexual violence and other gender-related crimes. Furthermore,
the Council should enhance the mandate of peacekeeping operations regarding
the protection of civilians to, first, prevent sexual and gender-based violence and,
secondly, to report such crimes. Peacekeeping operations could also assist the host
country, without prejudice to its primary responsibility to protect civilians, with the
collection of evidence, particularly in areas where the host Government does not
exercise effective control.
We also need to step up our efforts as States. Sexual violence in conflict cannot
be addressed in isolation, and neither can it be separated from the status of women and
the deeply rooted gender inequalities afflicting them. The fact that patriarchy is still
deeply rooted in our societies leaves women and girls vulnerable to different forms
of discrimination and violence. So does the fact that the security sector continues
to be male-dominated and often permeated by a culture of toxic masculinity. Many
victims of sexual violence are left behind, without proper access to sexual and
reproductive health care following their ordeal and without adequate psychosocial
support. In addition, their chances of seeing any kind of justice or perpetrators
being held accountable are negligible. Access to sexual and reproductive health,
rehabilitation and reparation for victims, in line with their sexual and reproductive
rights, should be enacted as an obligation by States. Sexual and reproductive health
rights should also crystallize further as an international obligation for States. National
jurisdictions should ensure that no statute of limitations exists for such crimes, and
special prosecutors should be appointed within national criminal justice systems to
prosecute sexual and gender-based violence during and post conflict. States should
also hold their military commanders accountable for their own compliance and that
of their subordinate combatants.
Lastly, international actors, including the International Committee of the
Red Cross, international and regional organizations, as well as the United Nations
and other peacekeeping operations, should assist the host State in the fight against
impunity by facilitating the collection of evidence and the administration of justice.
21-0526167/140

S/2021/375

Annex 33
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Denmark to the
United Nations
I deliver this statement on behalf of Norway, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and my
own country, Denmark.
Allow me to thank Viet Nam for organizing today’s open debate, as well as to
express sincere gratitude to Special Representative of the Secretary-General Pramila
Patten and her Office for their important work and ceaseless commitment to ending
sexual violence in conflict.
Conflict-related sexual violence is a horrifying reality. It is always a violation
of international humanitarian law and may constitute international crimes, such
as war crimes or crimes against humanity. It is a pervasive and life-threatening
health, human rights and protection issue. It remains a cruel tactic of war, terror,
political repression and torture, aggravated by the global coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, which has gone hand in hand with a spike in sexual and
gender-based violence worldwide. Survivors have lost access to essential services,
training of judicial and security actors has been suspended, humanitarian access
has been limited and sociocultural and structural impediments to reporting have
been amplified. The needs of survivors at this challenging time should be taken into
account, including in all aspects of COVID-19 responses.
We, the international community, have a responsibility to provide protection,
uphold human rights and address these setbacks. The fight against sexual violence is
key in our work to secure international peace and security.
In 2019, the Nordic countries, together with representatives from 100 States,
organizations, survivors and experts, came together and made several hundred
commitments to end sexual and gender-based violence in humanitarian crises at the
Oslo Conference, a number of which have been fulfilled. Much remains to be done
in the field of the implementation of sexual violence responses and the wider women
and peace and security agenda.
We must acknowledge the urgent need for concrete action. It is important to
respond to the needs of victims and survivors in, among other places, Ethiopia, South
Sudan and Yemen. We must not be afraid to try innovative approaches. We need to
increase partnerships with local communities and with survivor-focused women’s
rights organizations. We must promote their safe and meaningful engagement and
full, effective and meaningful participation in decision-making. This includes
ensuring that they receive flexible and sustainable financial support.
We must ensure that efforts to fight sexual and gender-based violence are
integrated into all action dealing with conflict situations and crises. To do this,
survivors — women and girls, men and boys — must be at the centre of shaping
prevention and response. As recognized in resolution 2467 (2019), a survivorcentred approach is crucial for preventing and responding to sexual violence in
conflict and post-conflict situations, and survivors of sexual violence must receive
non-discriminatory access to services, such as medical and psychosocial care. The
Nordic countries call for a strengthening of services for survivors of sexual violence,
including through ensuring comprehensive sexual and reproductive health and rights,
such as access to emergency contraception and the safe termination of pregnancies.
It is key to fight impunity and hold perpetrators accountable. We must establish
credible systems of accountability, including by supporting law enforcement
institutions to fight impunity, not least through the collection of documentation and
evidence, as well as capacity-building for national judicial systems. We recall the
68/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

important role that the International Criminal Court plays at the international level,
complementing the work undertaken at the national level. Accountability mechanisms
must be informed by survivors. The Nordic countries call on the Security Council
to include and apply sexual violence as a designation criterion in United Nations
sanctions regimes in contexts where such crimes are continuously committed, as this
can act like an effective deterrent.
Moreover, we must address root causes and adopt preventive measures to
address the structural gender inequalities that underpin sexual and gender-based
violence. To this end, we must focus on the full implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda and an increased use of intersectional approaches — for
example, gender, age and disability disaggregated data and knowledge to inform
policy and action. Frameworks and mechanisms function only if they receive the
necessary priority and funding. This calls for political will at the highest level.
Let me highlight the work of the global network of the Call to Action on
Protection from Gender-based Violence in Emergencies, which Denmark is currently
leading. The network includes more than 90 member States, donors, United Nations
organizations and non-governmental organizations that have come together to
advocate and implement concrete actions to prevent and respond to conflict-related
gender-based violence. We aim to amplify our voice and promote improved action
on the ground; we hope that many more partners will join the network. The Nordic
countries continue to advance these goals in our bilateral work, in collaboration with
a wide range of partners and in our active multilateral cooperation.

21-0526169/140

S/2021/375

Annex 34
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Egypt to the United Nations
At the outset, we would like to thank Viet Nam for organizing this open debate
on sexual violence in conflict. We also extend our appreciation to the briefers for
their informative presentations.
Egypt welcomes the efforts of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, especially her cooperation with African
States. We also welcome the measures undertaken by the Secretariat regarding
increasing the number of women protection advisers in peacekeeping missions, as we
believe that conflict resolution cannot be separated from efforts to empower women
and girls, as well as to prevent and eliminate sexual violence in armed conflict.
In this regard and on the national level, Egypt is developing the first national
plan to monitor and implement resolution 1325 (2000). The Cairo International
Center for Conflict Resolution, Peacekeeping and Peacebuilding organizes a series
of workshops for Egyptian forces and forces from Arab and African countries
participating in United Nations peacekeeping operations to train them to deal with
crimes related to sexual violence in armed conflicts.
Egypt reiterates its commitment to the Secretary-General’s initiative on
zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse. We will continue working with
the Security Council and the Secretariat to eliminate all forms of violence against
women in the context of peacekeeping operations.
His Excellency the President of the Arab Republic of Egypt was one of the first
leaders to join the Circle of Leadership initiative to prevent sexual exploitation and
abuse in United Nations peacekeeping operations. Raising awareness about sexual
exploitation and abuse is an integral part of the comprehensive training received by
Egyptian forces prior to their deployment in peacekeeping operations.
Egypt takes pride in having initiated and championed the negotiation on
General Assembly resolution 71/278, adopted on 10 March 2017, which advocated
a system-wide response — involving United Nations and non-United Nations
personnel — aimed at forging a collective commitment to the zero-tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse throughout the United Nations, prioritizing
prevention, promoting accountability and providing justice for victims.
We also call for the mobilization of human and financial resources to
assist implementation by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict. We believe that the situation of women under foreign
occupation, especially the situation of Palestinian women, should not be left out of
our discussions on women and peace and security.
Respect for the societal and cultural context of each country is paramount
when implementing the women and peace and security agenda, especially when
combatting sexual violence. We call on the Secretary-General to focus his reports
on sexual violence only in zones of armed conflict. His reports should not include
controversial concepts lacking international agreement.
We commend the efforts of the United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of
Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, especially those related to capacity-building
for States in conflict or post-conflict situations.
Egypt would like to highlight the important role of building capacities of
religious and local leaders to raise awareness regarding ending stigma for victims of
sexual violence. While thanking the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict for her work, we call on her to resume the dialogue
70/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

launched with the Al-Azhar Al-Sharif University and the League of Arab States
regarding the correction of religious discourse and the renouncement of violence
against women and girls, especially in armed conflicts.

21-0526171/140

S/2021/375

Annex 35
Statement by the Permanent Mission of El Salvador to the
United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
El Salvador takes note of the latest report of the Secretary-General on conflictrelated sexual violence (S/2021/312) and regrets that, despite the Secretary-General’s
appeal for a ceasefire in 2020 and significant progress in terms of prevention,
violence in all its forms and manifestations, in particular sexual violence, continues
to be used as a cruel tactic of war, terror, torture and political repression by some
parties to conflict.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has significantly impacted the
efforts of the various institutions and actors involved at various levels in the areas
of prevention, accountability and access to justice relating to sexual violence. The
socioeconomic impacts, social tensions and the weakening of institutions resulting
from the COVID-19 pandemic have led to the possibility of new gaps opening up that
may facilitate impunity, whereby survivors may face additional obstacles in fleeing
situations of violence or in accessing protection orders and/or essential services that
can save lives.
El Salvador firmly condemns all forms of violence, especially sexual violence
in conflict, since such crimes make it more difficult to achieve sustainable peace
and result in humiliation, stigma and irreparable life-long consequences for victims
and survivors of this scourge, undermining or nullifying their full enjoyment of their
human rights and fundamental freedoms. El Salvador welcomes the fact that sexual
violence is considered no longer to be a secondary effect of conflict, but a real threat
to international peace and security. We call on the international community and the
United Nations system to move towards a survivor-centred gender and human rights
approach that ensures those who survive sexual violence in conflict situations are
not forgotten. In our view, it is essential that comprehensive support be provided to
victims and survivors, including access to all essential services, in particular health
services, including sexual and reproductive health services, as well as psychological
and socioeconomic assistance, access to justice and effective legal resources and
services, including protection, rehabilitation and reintegration.
In our view, the most vulnerable and marginalized people, such as women and
girls, migrants and refugees, lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex people,
people with disabilities and the elderly, are more likely to be victims of violence,
including sexual violence. In this regard, it is essential that those groups be included
in support programmes, opportunities, access to services and justice, without any
discrimination, and with full respect for their human dignity.
In the light of the foregoing, we commend resolution 2467 (2019) for having
included, for first time, an approach focused on protecting and empowering survivors,
while also encompassing justice and reparations for victims — components that have
had positive effects in peacebuilding processes in a number of countries and regions.
At the same time, we believe that survivors’ experience should be built upon to
better shape early-warning and prevention plans against future violations, which is
why their full and effective inclusion when establishing such plans is essential.
We strongly support the Security Council’s early-warning and reporting
mechanisms on sexual violence, such as the periodic reports of the Secretary-General
on each peace mission, the reports and activities of his Special Representative for
Sexual Violence in Conflict, and the Informal Expert Group on Women, Peace and
Security. We believe that their strengthening and financing should be priorities,
72/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

along with their inclusion as essential components of the mandates and accountability
mechanisms of the peace missions mandated by the Security Council.
Once crimes have been identified, impunity is not an option; perpetrators
must be held accountable so as to render justice to victims and survivors and
to deter the repetition of such acts in future. It is the responsibility of States to
investigate, prosecute and punish those who commit such crimes. International
justice mechanisms, such as the International Criminal Court, play an important
role to that end, such that closer cooperation between the Security Council and the
International Criminal Court could be of great benefit.
In this regard, we underscore the need to step up cooperation, coordination
and information-sharing between the United Nations system and regional and
subregional organizations, which have a better understanding of local contexts and
can therefore play an important role, offering solutions specific to each situation and
context. Likewise, international support is crucial to advancing efforts to ensure
that national laws are harmonized with international standards and that national
institutions, including those entrusted with public security and justice, take gender
issues into consideration in their efforts to promote equality, eradicate the scourge
of sexual violence and prevent conflict.
El Salvador continues to strongly believe that prevention is the most effective
response in combating conflict-related sexual violence, and that universal access
to quality education, free from any discrimination, is an indispensable tool for
reducing and eliminating cases, as well as for enhancing reporting. That is why,
as a country that contributes troops and police to peacekeeping operations, we
incorporate capacity-building in human rights, gender equality, sexual diversity,
human trafficking and modern slavery, and the sexual exploitation and abuse of
minors into our various predeployment trainings through both the Ministry of
National Defence and the National Civil Police Directorate-General in the Ministry
of Justice and Public Security.
Our personnel also benefit from psychological training and evaluation,
enabling them, beyond prevention, to support the processes launched by peace
missions in various countries and regions around the world. These institutions
also have internal codes of ethics, which, should sexual violence arise, provide for
resolution through sanctions corresponding the severity of the incident.
Finally, El Salvador is committed to acting in the interests of peace and
to making progress towards upholding full respect for the human rights of all
persons, in support of the prevention and punishment of sexual violence, as well
as accountability, access to justice and reparations for the victims and survivors of
this scourge.

21-0526173/140

S/2021/375

Annex 36
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ethiopia to the
United Nations, Taye Atskeselassie Amde
We thank the presidency of Viet Nam for organizing this important open
debate on “Women and peace and security: sexual violence in conflict”, as it remains
imperative for us to continue to deliver on our commitments to addressing the issue
of sexual violence against women, who make up half of humankind. I would also like
to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Pramila Patten,
for her briefing and for her Office’s continued engagement with the Government of
Ethiopia to facilitate support in areas of capacity-building and technical assistance
pertinent to sexual violence.
We believe that this open debate presents an opportune moment to garner
much-needed cooperation among all relevant stakeholders to create a mechanism that
enhances the protection and safety of women in conflict areas and to tackle impunity
for sexual violence in conflict. This also calls for the constructive engagement of
the Security Council with Member States to resolve issues of conflict, which, more
often than not, leave vulnerable sections of society, such as women and girls, to bear
the brunt of sexual violence.
In this regard, we take note of the Secretary-General’s report (S/2021/312),
which contains useful recommendations, particularly on the significance of engaging
with national authorities and the provision of victim-centred support spanning
different sectors, from the socioeconomic to security and protection. The Ethiopian
Government realizes its primary responsibility for safeguarding the well-being of
its citizens, as per its constitutional obligations, and will certainly make use of the
recommendation contained in the report to that effect.
Nevertheless, we are concerned about parts of the report mentioning
individuals allegedly being forced to rape members of their own family. This is
an unsubstantiated allegation that diminishes the sincere effort exerted by my
Government to investigate human rights abuses, including sexual violence, allegedly
committed in the Tigray region and to bring perpetrators to justice.
The report also states that women were forced to have sex by military elements
in exchange for basic commodities. This allegation does not accord with the military
doctrine, training and discipline of our army — the very army whose members
have for years been deployed to conflict-affected regions of the world to maintain
peace and order. I want to assure the Council that my Government is investigating
allegations of human rights abuses, including sexual violence, and it will certainly
take corrective measures if there is any misconduct at all by members of the
national army.
It would be only fair of me to share some facts to set the record straight
pertaining to the causes of sexual violence against women in Tigray. The Tigray
People’s Liberation Front clique, once it realized that it had lost its legitimacy both
in the country’s political arena and in the fight against the federal Government,
deliberately released more than 10,000 imprisoned criminals, aiming to harass and
terrorize the people, thereby advancing its selfish political interests. The terrorist
group cunningly managed to defame the federal defence forces, who have been doing
nothing but upholding law and order, by fabricating unheard-of stories featuring
immoral acts of sexual violence, such as the ones mentioned in the report.
The report, while overlooking the part played by the Tigray People’s Liberation
Front group in the accounted allegations, also fails to recognize a range of human
rights violations committed by the same group. Neither the brutally murdered
74/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

national defence army members nor the civilians, including women and children,
who were gruesomely massacred in Mai-Kadra are mentioned in the report, which
defies the principle of non-selectivity when considering human right issues.
The Ethiopian Government, however, feels strongly about the reported
allegations. In this regard, a task force has been set up by relevant Government
authorities and deployed to investigate the allegations. The Ethiopian Human Rights
Commission, as part of its obligation to carry out independent investigations into
abuses committed by all actors, has signed an agreement with the United Nations
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights to jointly conduct investigations
to ensure accountability and bring perpetrators to justice. In the meantime, I appeal to
all concerned to recognize the steps taken and await the outcome of the investigation
without making any judgments that might jeopardize the process.
I would like to further highlight some of the activities carried out in response
to the reported sexual violence against women in Tigray. Based on assessments
undertaken in collaboration with the United Nations agencies, capacity-building
trainings have been given to civil servants, police officers, social workers and nurses
on a number of issues covering emotional resilience, policy and legal frameworks to
enable them provide psychosocial services to rape victims.
To assist victims, trainings on minimum initial-service package for sexual
and reproductive health have also been given to medical directors, legal personnel,
social workers and focal nurses in five hospitals to prevent the transmission of, and
reduce morbidity and mortality due to, HIV and other sexually transmitted diseases
and unintended pregnancies. Moreover, five one-stop centres have been established,
in Mekelle, Aksum, Adigrat, Maychew and Shire towns, to provide access to holistic
services for rape victims.
On prevention, a multisectoral task force has been established and regular
consultations have been taking place with nine internally displaced person centres,
religious leaders and local humanitarian organizations. An anti-gender violence unit
has also been established in the police force and trainings have been given to 1,400
police force members to address service gaps and prevent sexual violence against
women and girls.
Ethiopia is determined to rebuild the region by addressing the humanitarian
needs of the people, restoring infrastructure and services, and, most importantly,
deterring conflict-related sexual violence from further taking place and providing
the necessary support to victims. We call on the international community to rally
behind the Government in its effort to respond to the ever-rising humanitarian needs
throughout the country by scaling up wide-ranging assistance to meet the needs of
the affected population.
Finally, I would like to conclude by reiterating our commitment to the zerotolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse and to ensuring accountability
for those who are found to have been involved in committing such egregious acts.
While further affirming Ethiopia’s unwavering commitment to addressing the root
cause of sexual violence, we call on the Council to play a constructive role within its
mandate by assisting countries in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations
and supporting national mechanisms to effectively enable States to safeguard the
well-being of their citizens.

21-0526175/140

S/2021/375

Annex 37
Statement by the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations, in its capacity as observer
This statement is delivered on behalf of the European Union (EU) and
its member States. The candidate countries the Republic of North Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia and Albania, the country of the Stabilization and Association
Process and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine, and
Georgia align themselves with this statement.
We thank Viet Nam for keeping this important topic on the agenda of the
Security Council. We owe that to all victims and survivors of conflict-related sexual
violence who expect us to move urgently from commitments to action.
Exactly one year ago, the Secretary-General called for a cessation of violence
both on battlefields and in homes. Despite efforts, his latest report (S/2021/312) shows
that sexual and gender-based violence has spiked globally during the coronavirus
disease crisis and that conflict-related sexual violence remains a cruel and rampant
tactic of war, torture, terror and political repression. The pandemic has further
exacerbated vulnerabilities, made access to essential services even more challenging
for survivors and increased the challenges and risks, particularly for women
health workers.
We are deeply concerned about the impact on women and girls of recent
events, including the use of sexual violence in the Tigray region in Ethiopia, as
described in the Secretary-General’s report, and the persisting threat and occurrence
of sexual violence in conflict in many countries, as also highlighted in the report.
We call on the international community to do more, and better, to prevent such
crimes and human rights violations, stop impunity and support the survivors and
their families, including children born out of rape. The EU also stresses the need
for a survivor-centred approach, where survivors are at the centre of shaping
policy and response. In that regard, we support the Secretary-General’s call for the
establishment of survivor-centred transitional justice mechanisms in post-conflict
settings and ensuring the full, equal and meaningful participation of women in their
design and implementation.
Reprisals, including in the form of intimidation, harassment and violence,
online and offline, continue to be perpetrated against civil society actors, activists,
women peacebuilders, women human rights defenders and women journalists. For
example, the Secretary-General notes the specific targeting of women activists in
Yemen, Afghanistan and Colombia. Those actors are at the front line to support
survivors of conflict-related sexual violence and often take great risks to report on
the reality of such issues. We join Special Representative Pramila Patten in calling
for enhanced protection of those actors, as well as accountability for all forms of
reprisals perpetrated against them.
To succeed in eliminating conflict-related sexual violence, we must work
together with all partners. That is a priority for the EU. The EU-United Nations
Spotlight Initiative is the largest global effort to eliminate violence against women
and girls and has already played a pivotal role in supporting survivors of sexual
violence and in transforming social norms to prevent and address that issue.
In New York, the EU, alongside Argentina, Morocco, Mongolia, Namibia,
New Zealand and Turkey, established the Group of Friends for the Elimination of
Violence against Women and Girls in December 2020. The Group aims to coordinate
efforts at the United Nations to eliminate sexual and gender-based violence in all
settings. The Group has been joined by nearly 100 States, highlighting the strong
international commitment to tackling the issue together.
76/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Furthermore, the Generation Equality Forum is key to mobilizing
partnerships and resources to prevent and address sexual violence in conflict and its
recommendations will provide a blueprint to step up our actions in that regard. The
EU is honoured to take part in that engagement by co-leading the Action Coalition
on Gender-based Violence, and we encourage all stakeholders to participate in
that process.
Substantial EU support has been provided to the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
to carry out related programmes, as well as for the invaluable work of Dr. Denis
Mukwege and Nadia Murad.
Going forward, greater efforts should be made to ensure that all State and
non-State parties to a conflict comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law. In that respect, the EU has included international humanitarian
law in the training curricula for local security forces in EU civilian and military
training and capacity-building missions.
The European Union firmly supports zero tolerance and full accountability
through the criminal justice systems worldwide, in particular the International
Criminal Court as an important instrument of the international community to ensure
that such heinous crimes and human rights violations are thoroughly investigated.
Perpetrators have to be brought to justice and victims have to receive access to
health, justice and reparations. We note with concern the persistent impunity for
conflict-related sexual violence, including in situations such as Syria and Myanmar.
That responsibility lies with us, the States Members of the United Nations. We must
redouble our efforts to ensure that robust legal and institutional arrangements are
in place to address sexual violence in armed conflict and that steps are taken to
investigate and prosecute perpetrators. In that regard, we urge the Security Council to
systematically and explicitly incorporate and apply sexual violence as a designation
criterion in United Nations sanctions regimes where such crimes are persistently
perpetrated. We remind Member States that in some cases sexual violence in
conflicts can constitute a crime against humanity. We call on all countries to support
international mechanisms, such as the International Criminal Court, and to align
their national criminal legislations with international criminal law.
The European Union remains committed to the promotion, protection and
fulfilment of all human rights and to the full and effective implementation of the
Beijing Platform for Action, the Programme of Action of the International Conference
on Population and Development and the outcomes of their review conferences, as
well as to sexual and reproductive health and rights in that context. With that in
mind, the EU reaffirms its commitment to the promotion, protection and fulfilment
of the right of every individual to have full control over, and decide freely and
responsibly on, matters related to their sexuality and sexual and reproductive health,
free from discrimination, coercion and violence. The EU further stresses the need
for universal access to quality and affordable comprehensive sexual and reproductive
health information, education, including comprehensive sexuality education, and
health-care services.
The EU reaffirms its commitment to the full implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda, in line with the EU Action Plan on Women, Peace
and Security 2019-2024, and to promoting the provision of survivor-centred medical,
psychosocial, legal and safety support to all victims and survivors of conflict-related
sexual violence.
Achieving gender equality is critical to addressing conflict-related sexual
violence in the long term. The United Nations can continue to rely on the engagement
21-0526177/140

S/2021/375

and support of the European Union to accelerate action on gender equality and the
full implementation of the women and peace and security agenda to ensure that
women and girls are free and safe to enjoy all their human rights and deploy their
full potential.

78/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Annex 38
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Germany to the
United Nations
Germany aligns itself with the statements submitted by Canada, on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security (annex 28), and by the United
Nations LGBTI Core Group (annex 70).
Twenty years after the adoption of the landmark resolution 1325 (2000), on
women and peace and security, the outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
has exposed, and even exacerbated, the shocking degree of gender inequality around
the globe, one of the root causes and a major driver of sexual and gender-based violence
in times of conflict, as well as in times of peace. Survivors of sexual and genderbased violence already had difficulty trying to access health care and justice systems
before the pandemic. Now it has often become impossible. Lockdowns, curfews,
quarantines, the fear of contracting or transmitting the virus and limited access
to first responders compounded existing structural, institutional and sociocultural
barriers to filing police reports or seeking sexual and reproductive health care.
Resolution 2467 (2019) put the survivors of sexual violence at the centre of all
considerations for the first time. Their rights, health, well-being, empowerment and
survival need to guide all our actions in preventing and responding to conflict-related
sexual violence. The work of Nobel Peace Prize Laureate Dr. Denis Mukwege at his
Panzi hospital in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is an inspiring example of
that survivor-centred approach. Germany is proud to cooperate with the Dr. Denis
Mukwege Foundation with a view to strengthening survivors´ access to reparations
and other forms of redress. That is also why we are directly supporting the Panzi
hospital with medical staff.
Survivors have told us repeatedly that accountability is crucial to empowering
them to deal with their trauma, rebuild their lives, become a true survivor and
perhaps even help others who have been through a similar experience. It is simply not
acceptable that crimes of sexual and gender-based violence can still be committed
without any consequence; commanders fail to discipline their troops; rape is still
being used as a tactical means of warfare; terrorists sell women, girls and boys as
sex slaves to raise money for their criminal activities; and detainees continue to be
raped in prisons. For all those crimes, each and every perpetrator needs to be held
accountable, regardless of who or where they are.
Last year, a man accused of being a member of the so-called Islamic State
went on trial in Frankfurt. He is indicted on charges of genocide, human trafficking
of a Yazidi woman and her daughter and torturing and causing the death of the fiveyear-old girl. This is the first trial that has raised the charge of genocide in relation to
the Yazidis. The German Prosecutor-General brought charges based on the principle
of universal jurisdiction. That sends a clear message: no perpetrator will be safe
from investigations anywhere, anytime.
We are deeply committed to supporting the fight against sexual and genderbased violence in conflicts worldwide, and to helping accountability take root
even in the most fragile contexts. Germany is one of the main supporters of the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International
Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. In South Sudan,
Germany has been a key partner to the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) in setting up the Reconciliation, Stabilization and Resilience trust fund,
having provided €13 million to date. Empowering women and young people is a key
objective of the fund, including through support services for survivors of sexual and
21-0526179/140

S/2021/375

gender-based violence. UNMISS also plays a key role in providing support to mobile
courts bringing perpetrators of conflict-related sexual violence to justice.
Accountability goes beyond the individual perpetrator. Leaders who
condone or order sexual violence as a tactic of warfare or terrorism also need to
face consequences. Germany concurs with the assessment of the latest report of the
Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2021/312) that delivering
effective responses, based on reliable reporting, to that historically “hidden” crime
requires dedicated human and financial resources equal to the scale of the challenge.
The deployment of women protection advisers responsible for monitoring, analysing
and reporting on conflict-related sexual violence in the field ensures the continued
availability of information. For that reason, as co-penholder on the mandate
authorization for the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in
the Sudan in 2020, Germany successfully advocated for the deployment of women
protection advisers.
Since resolution 2467 (2019) was adopted, there have been two listings that
include accounts of sexual and gender-based violence. However, so far, there have
been no listings in any sanctions committee solely for the crime of sexual violence.
When we have all the information that we need, why do we fail to act more often?
At the same time, we need to acknowledge that sexual and gender-based
violence was a scourge long before the outbreak of COVID-19. The underlying cause
is an imbalance of power and control, which stems from inequality between men and
women, discriminatory attitudes and beliefs, gender stereotypes and social norms
that tolerate and perpetuate violence and abuse. If we want to eradicate inequality
and discrimination, we need to develop longer-term strategic approaches that tackle
those underlying causes.
Without education, women’s participation in decision-making, conflict
prevention and peacebuilding are severely diminished. One way to ensure that
more women and girls are safe at school is by more States joining the Safe Schools
Declaration, which is an important tool for ensuring safe education and preventing
conflict-related sexual violence. To date, 107 countries have joined the Safe Schools
Declaration, which represents more than half of all States Members of the United
Nations, including two thirds of the current Security Council members. While that
is encouraging, it is not yet enough.
It is only once gender equality becomes a reality, women’s human rights are
guaranteed, those violating such rights face the consequences of their actions and
those fighting for such rights are protected that we will finally win the battle against
conflict-related sexual violence.

80/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Annex 39
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Greece to the United Nations
Greece wishes to thank Viet Nam for convening, in its capacity as the current
President of the Security Council, today’s open debate on sexual violence in conflict.
While fully aligning with the statement submitted by the European Union (annex
37), Greece would like to share some additional remarks.
The Secretary-General, in his latest report on conflict-related sexual violence
(S/2021/312), clearly illustrates the devastating impact of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic on gender-based social inequalities, which constitute root
causes and drivers of sexual violence whether committed in times of conflict or peace.
Undoubtedly, conflict-related sexual violence constitutes a blatant and unacceptable
violation of the rights of victims, as well as a threat to peace and security, since it
may result in further violence and impunity when left unaddressed. In that vein,
COVID-19, as a threat multiplier, has not only exacerbated conflict-related sexual
violence, but also impeded the unhindered access of survivors to health, justice and
reparations systems due to the imposition of the measures taken in response thereto.
Against that backdrop, global action to address conflict-related sexual
violence should be coherent, gender-responsive and focused on the survivors in
their full diversity. This entails the protection of all their human rights, including
sexual and reproductive ones, according to their actual needs, on the basis of age,
race, gender, sexual orientation, disability, religion, refugee status, et cetera. In that
regard, their relief and recovery, as well as zero tolerance and full accountability for
the perpetrators, are deemed essential. At the same time, a survivor-centred approach
should address the multidimensional threats to human security, including but not
limited to personal, health, economic and environmental security, through contextspecific, prevention-oriented, people-centred and gender-responsive solutions.
Prevention of and protection as well as relief and recovery from conflict-related
sexual violence contribute to the empowerment of survivors as agents of peaceful
change. Accordingly, gender-equal representation, participation and leadership in
decision-making at all levels not only lead to gender-responsive policies but also
contribute to long-lasting, sustainable peace. In that vein, local ownership entails
investing in women’s collective power, that is to say, giving voice to and engaging
meaningfully with women’s organizations, women human rights defenders and
women working at the grass-roots level.
Greece is a staunch supporter of the global action to end gender-based and
sexual violence once and for all, whether it is committed in times of conflict or
of peace. To that end, Greece prioritizes preventing and combating gender-based
and sexual violence through the implementation of its national action plans on
gender equality as well as on women and peace and security, which is expected
to be adopted shortly. In November 2020 Greece published its first annual report
on violence against women, which focuses on national actions taken to respond to
gender-based violence during the COVID-19 pandemic. Greece remains committed
to enhancing international cooperation with like-minded partners in order to end
gender-based and sexual violence in all its forms, protect and empower survivors
and bring perpetrators to justice.
As a final note, Greece firmly believes that ending conflict-related sexual
violence entails coherent global action in order to turn commitments into tangible
results and leave no one behind, through transformative, gender-inclusive and genderresponsive intersectional policies. Only in that way can we achieve the development
of gender-equal, secure and sustainable societies.
21-0526181/140

S/2021/375

Annex 40
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Guatemala to the
United Nations
[Original: English and Spanish]
Guatemala expresses its appreciation to the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam,
in its capacity as President of the Security Council during the month of April, for
having convened this open debate on sexual violence in conflict. It expresses further
appreciation to the briefers for their presentations.
Today’s discussion must address the current challenges faced by women in
conflict situations. The risk of regression in the hard-won progress made to date and
the additional burden caused by the coronavirus disease COVID-19 pandemic are
reflected in the spike registered in gender-based violence worldwide. Joint efforts
and sustainable solutions must be put forward to address effectively the remaining
challenges in the protection of women and girls and the achievement of true gender
equality and peace.
Guatemala attaches the utmost importance to this issue. Sexual violence as
a tactic of war, torture and terrorism is a flagrant violation of human rights and
international humanitarian law. Measures must be taken in order to stop sexual
harassment, slavery, trafficking in persons and other forms of violence. We strongly
condemn all those acts and call for their complete cessation by all parties to armed
conflict. Due consideration must be given to the early warning signs of sexual
violence and the monitoring of global crises, especially in relation to rising violent
extremism, terrorism, gender-based hate speech and widespread insecurity.
Guatemala takes note of the Secretary-General’s latest report on conflictrelated sexual violence (S/2021/312). We reiterate the importance of the full and
meaningful participation of women and girls, in particular sexual violence survivors,
in the decision-making processes that concern them. Socioeconomic reintegration,
assistance and treatment with dignity and due consideration for the principles of
safety and confidentiality are sine qua non conditions for their protection. The
Council must tackle the root causes of conflict-related violence and make the efforts
necessary to ensure the prosecution of perpetrators implicated in sexual violence —
guaranteeing the ability of law-enforcement and judicial authorities to investigate,
prosecute and adjudicate those crimes, including by referring situations to the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court.
We cannot wait to take action; attention to victims remains greatly insufficient.
The effects of sexual violence on human rights, public health, peacebuilding and
development make our collective response more urgent than ever. Along those lines,
as stated in paragraph 4 of the Secretary-General’s report,
“efforts must be made to silence the guns and amplify the voices of women
peacebuilders, as well as to invest in public welfare rather than in the
instruments of warfare”.
Let us jointly translate commemorations and commitments into realworld results.
In closing, Guatemala firmly believes that women are agents of change and
have an important role as facilitators of dialogue and reconciliation in their societies.
Through the continued and holistic discussion of this agenda item in the Council,
we can further contribute to the interdependence of the pillars of peace and security,
development and human rights, and we must strive to build back better after the
consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic.
82/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Annex 41
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of Indonesia to the
United Nations, Mohammad Koba
Let me begin by thanking Viet Nam for having organized this meeting. I also
thank today’s speakers for their briefings and moving testimonies.
The Security Council must continue to condemn and stand firm against all
acts of sexual violence perpetrated against women and children. Despite a decade
of concerted focus in the Council to end that crime, the level of compliance by all
parties to conflict remains low. The risks of sexual violence are likely to increase,
especially during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
Against that backdrop, I would like to focus my statement on three
fundamental points.
First, I would touch on the importance of ensuring accountability to fight
against sexual violence in conflict. The primary responsibility for preventing and
combating sexual violence in conflict lies in the hands of national authorities.
Governments should also provide maximum protection for the victims, with full
respect for their human rights. Therefore, strengthening the reach and capacity
of national authorities is vital to facilitating access to justice and ensuring that
perpetrators are held accountable.
As women play an incredibly significant role in society, we believe that
victims of sexual violence must be supported in the process of regaining confidence
in themselves. The stigma of being the victims of such heinous crimes often prevents
them from coming forward and seeking justice. We particularly commend the efforts
of some Governments to put in place a more protective legal and policy frameworks
for women and children at risk.
Secondly, it is important to craft a tailor-made reintegration process into
society. According to resolution 2467 (2019), we need to treat them as survivors
rather than victims. Using that approach, connecting survivors of sexual violence
to society through justice and productive avenues can empower them to reintegrate
into society. A survivor-centred approach will help national authorities to provide
better reintegration programmes that cover legal assistance, psychological support
and employment.
Unfortunately, these forms of assistance have been hampered by the COVID-19
pandemic. Such support should therefore be restored as soon as possible.
Thirdly, I would stress the need for the full participation of women in
combating such crimes. Indonesia believes that involving more women peacekeepers
is an important element of addressing sexual violence in conflict. Women
peacekeepers may encourage victims to feel more secure by working with them and
thereby help to eliminate crimes of sexual violence. Victims of sexual violence may
feel comfortable enough to come forward with their situation if they are helped by
women peacekeepers.
Nevertheless, the solution lies in cooperation between both men and women.
Therefore, we strongly encourage the troop- and police-contributing countries to
continue building the capacities of peacekeepers to enable them to be better equipped
to deal with the victims of sexual violence.
Today’s debate is about standing up for justice and equity. We stand behind
the brave survivors of sexual violence. We stand up for their human rights.
Indonesia attaches great importance to efforts to eliminate conflict-related
sexual violence with the full support of a reintegration process for the survivors of
such crimes.
21-0526183/140

S/2021/375

Annex 42
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Iraq to the United Nations
Allow me to congratulate the presidency of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
on having convened this important open debate on the issue of sexual violence in
conflict, which is of great importance to Iraq. I am confident in the wisdom and able
leadership of Viet Nam in leading the Council through the month of April. I would
also like to thank Ms. Pramila Patten, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and other briefers for their valuable insights.
The women and peace and security agenda is one of the priorities of the
United Nations as a whole. The issue of sexual violence in conflict remains specific
and particular to this day. In 2014 the world was faced with new methods of modern
slavery and sexual violence in conflict, a tactic of war used by terrorist groups such
as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), posing a threat to international
peace and security. Thus that tactic should be addressed in a comprehensive manner,
taking into account the best interests of the victims and national realities.
The Iraqi Cabinet launched the second national plan that mainly focuses
on three pillars: first, women’s active participation; secondly, the protection of
women and girls victims of sexual violence in conflict while ensuring justice and
accountability for the perpetrators of such crimes; and, thirdly, prevention.
Iraq is committed to implementing the joint communiqué signed in partnership
with the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, and to that end it included elements of the communiqué in its second
national plan to ensure its implementation through the creation of a safe and enabling
environment for women and girls and to combat the scourge of violence.
On 1 March 2021, the Iraqi Council of Representatives passed the Yazidi
survivors bill, which is comprehensive and inclusive and comprises a series of
articles. The bill, which is a milestone in the direction of recovery and rehabilitation,
considered the heinous crimes committed by ISIL as genocide and crimes
against humanity.
The bill also contains articles on accountability and justice, with no amnesty
being granted to those perpetrators who abducted Yazidis and held them captive. The
draft bill sets out various reparation measures for survivors of abduction, captivity,
sexual slavery and violence. As President Barhim Salih tweeted:
“The vote on the bill is a victory for our daughters who have been subjected to
the most heinous violations and crimes of ISIS genocide”.
National laws and legislations allow survivors of all forms of violence,
including sexual violence in conflict, to pursue legal action in national courts, as was
the case in March 2020, when Ashwaq Haji Hameed, a Yazidi victim and survivor of
ISIL atrocities, bravely decided to testify and face her kidnapper and rapist in court.
Her bravery continues to empower women and girls survivors of sexual violence and
to protect their rights, as well as to assist the Iraqi authorities concerned to hold more
members of ISIL accountable on charges of sexual violence.
ISIL members continue to be brought before the law for the atrocities they
committed against Iraqis. In that regard, Iraq is committed to achieving accountability
for victims of sexual violence in conflict; it cannot tolerate such acts. It would like
to note that when sufficient evidence has been gathered, that can further help to hold
accountable the perpetrators of crimes of sexual violence.
Iraq believes that by mobilizing public awareness and eradicating negative
social norms and the stigma surrounding victims of sexual violence, greater
84/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

progress can be achieved. The Iraqi Government, religious leaders and civil-society
organizations continue to play a vital role in stressing the importance of supporting
survivors of sexual violence, combating stigma and ensuring that the members of
ISIL are held accountable for their crimes.
To conclude, Iraq continues to seek further engagement from the office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict to
build the capacity of the respective authorities to ensure the provision of services,
livelihood support and reparations for survivors, thus promoting their betterment
and their ability to access rehabilitation programmes and psychosocial support.

21-0526185/140

S/2021/375

Annex 43
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Italy to the United Nations
Italy aligns itself with the statement submitted by the European Union (annex
37) and would like to add the following remarks in its national capacity.
We thank Viet Nam for having organized this open debate, which keeps the
topic of sexual violence in conflict high on the agenda of the Security Council.
The protection and promotion of women’s and girls’ rights and the eradication
of the scourge of sexual violence in conflict should be one of the key priorities of the
international community, yet year after year the picture remains gloomy, as can be
seen in the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/312). All too often, sexual
crimes continue to be used as part of a global strategy of war by States and non-State
actors, and States continue to face setbacks when exercising their responsibility to
protect their own citizens.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak has exacerbated pre-existing
issues, undermining social cohesion and fuelling conflicts, and has not proved to
be gender-neutral. On the contrary, the restrictive measures taken to contain the
spread of the pandemic have provoked a remarkable rise in sexual and gender-based
violence and have further limited women’s access to education, legal protection and
health services, including sexual and reproductive ones. People living in conflict
settings are especially vulnerable to the effects of the pandemic, and it is women
and girls who are disproportionally affected, as they face multiple risks and barriers.
Sexual violence represents a major hindrance to women’s empowerment: no
gender equality can be achieved until we eradicate that scourge. It is key to tackle
the root causes of violence, as the prevention of systematic sexual violence begins in
times of peace, when national laws should be so robust as to prevent abusive attitudes
in wartime. We need a paradigm shift in order to encourage the affirmation of a full
culture of gender equality, which promotes women’s empowerment and participation
in the decision-making process and mainstreams a gendered perspective on society.
Promoting gender equality must go hand in hand with deterring violence.
United Nations peacekeeping missions play a crucial role in that regard as they are
tasked with protecting civilians. Providing troops with targeted training on gender
issues is key to effective deterrence, as is establishing a stronger presence by women
among peacekeeping ranks. Women play a fundamental role in enhancing the
delivery of mandates, enhancing the protection of civilians as well as the safety and
security of peacekeepers and humanitarian actors. They have proved to be extremely
successful in accessing communities and creating relationships of trust with local
populations, in particular with the most vulnerable categories — women, children
and older people — who are often the main victims of violence in conflicts.
At the same time, it is fundamental to assist conflict-torn countries in
reforming their judicial systems and strengthening the rule of law and their
accountability mechanisms for gross human rights violations and for serious crimes
under international law. Fighting against impunity and holding the perpetrators
accountable should be a matter of primary concern in order to deter further violations
and allow survivors to gain access to justice. Accordingly, we consider that the work
of the Security Council should benefit from a more systematic involvement of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), with the Office of the ICC Prosecutor receiving
the necessary resources to conduct swift investigations. We continue to promote the
widest possible implementation of the Istanbul Convention of the Council of Europe
against all forms of violence against women, including domestic violence.

86/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Preventing sexual violence in conflict is a top priority for Italy. Back in
2013, we joined the Call to Action on Protection from Gender-Based Violence in
Emergencies, and, in 2017, this issue was at the core of our mandate on the Security
Council and of our presidency of the Group of Seven. Last year, together with
more than 100 States Members of the United Nations, we supported the SecretaryGeneral’s appeal to end gender violence during the pandemic.
Italy is devoting specific attention to fighting all forms of violence against
children affected by armed conflicts, with specific attention on girl children, as
these violations can have long-lasting impacts on girls’ physical and psychological
development and undermine their ability to actively shape their futures. In order to
raise awareness on this specific issue, at the sixty-fifth session of the Commission on
the Status of Women, Italy hosted a side event on accountability for violence against
girl children in armed conflicts.
Our country spares no effort and resources in providing assistance to victims,
as we strongly believe that a survivor-centred approach should provide victims with
the services they need to cope with the consequences of conflict-related sexual
violence, including medical services, legal assistance and psychological support.
This year, we pledged €25,000 in support of the United Nations Conflict-related
Sexual Violence Multi-Partner Trust Fund. Furthermore, we are engaged in financing
humanitarian projects implemented by local non-governmental organizations,
specialized United Nations agencies and the International Committee of the Red
Cross, aimed specifically at responding to the needs of women and at assisting
victims of violence. In particular, Italy recently supported sexual and gender-based
violence projects in several conflict and emergency contexts, such as the Syrian
crisis, Libya, Palestine, Afghanistan, Ethiopia, including the Tigray region, Mali
and Somalia.
In Syria, we have been supporting the United Nations Population Fund
(UNFPA) and the United Nations Development Programme in a joint project aimed
at providing sexual and gender-based violence response and prevention services in
Al-Raqqa governorate, coupled with livelihood support to the most affected people
in the targeted areas. Owing to the COVID-19 pandemic, the project had to adapt
accordingly, and it currently provides gender-based-violence case management,
psychological first aid, individual counselling and psychosocial support remotely.
In the Sudan, with the technical support of UNFPA, we partnered with
the local Ministry of Labour and Social Development to establish a gender-based
violence helpline for case management, which is a straight-forward mechanism
designed to facilitate access to phone-based health, security and legal services,
including referrals and telecounselling.
Italy endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration and encourages more Member
States to do the same in order to ensure safe access to education for women and girls
and reduce sexual violence by armed parties at school. We encourage Member States
to strengthen the monitoring and reporting of attacks on education, including sexual
violence by parties to conflict occurring at or on route to schools, to investigate
and prosecute attacks on education, including sexual violence committed against
students and teachers, and to hold perpetrators accountable.
Let me conclude by reaffirming Italy’s strong commitment to the prevention
and tackling of sexual violence in conflicts. We will continue to support the work
of the Secretary-General and that of his Special Representative in order to pursue
better and increasingly tangible results in this field.

21-0526187/140

S/2021/375

Annex 44
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations, Ishikane Kimihiro
I would like to express my appreciation to the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
for convening today’s important open debate on sexual violence in conflict.
As the Secretary-General sets forth in his report (S/2012/312), sexual violence
in conflict is being exacerbated by the coronavirus disease pandemic and is taking
a heavy toll on new victims. The human security crisis caused by the pandemic is
making the implementation of resolution 2467 (2019) all the more urgent. I would like
to explain Japan’s efforts to address the issue of sexual violence in armed conflict,
focusing on the priorities of resolution 2467 (2019), namely, the need for a survivorcentred approach and the prosecution of perpetrators.
First, on the survivor-centred approach, Japan became a board member of
the Global Fund for Survivors of Conflict-Related Sexual Violence in 2020, and
it contributed €2 million to ensure that survivors have access to reparations and
redress globally. Since 2014, Japan has been contributing to the Trust Fund for
Victims, which provides relief to the victims of crimes under the jurisdiction of
the International Criminal Court, and it has earmarked most of its contribution for
support for survivors of sexual and gender-based violence.
Furthermore, through the United Nations Action against Sexual Violence
in Conflict, a network of 15 United Nations entities chaired by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict with the
mission of preventing conflict-related sexual violence and responding effectively to
the needs of survivors, in 2020, Japan contributed to a project aimed at providing
mental health, psychosocial and economic support to women victims in Somalia.
Secondly, on the prosecution of perpetrators of sexual violence, Japan has,
since 2014, provided financial support for the work of the Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, which operates under the auspices
of the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. The Team has been conducting its work in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Central African Republic, Somalia and Iraq, with the
mandate of supporting investigations and prosecutions, legislative reform and
capacity-building for judicial and security authorities, in close cooperation with the
respective Governments, United Nations missions and country teams. For example,
the Team’s tireless efforts in the Central African Republic have resulted in 22 cases
of conflict-related sexual violence being brought to criminal court in 2019. Japan
will continue working with the Team of Experts to hold perpetrators accountable and
to bring justice to survivors.
Japan’s support for the work of the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict extends beyond the prosecution
of perpetrators. For example, a recent contribution to the United Nations Action and
the Team of Experts is supporting their work in addressing the needs of children in
Iraq born of sexual violence, including the issue of citizenship. As outlined in the
Secretary-General’s report, this issue can be a hard nut to crack, but we will continue
to provide support for the recovery of the dignity of the children and their mothers
and their reintegration into their communities.
Translating resolution 2467 (2019) into action is the first step in restoring
the dignity of victims, providing them with appropriate protection and offering
empowering opportunities to all who are affected. Japan will continue to actively
contribute to this end. Furthermore, Japan is committed to continuing to provide
88/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

comprehensive support to women in conflict and post-conflict areas globally through
the Japan International Cooperation Agency, the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, UN-Women, the United
Nations Population Fund and other international partners, with the conviction that
the promotion of gender equality and women’s economic empowerment are the keys
to preventing the occurrence and recurrence of sexual violence.

21-0526189/140

S/2021/375

Annex 45
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the
United Nations, Amal Mudallali
Allow me first to congratulate you on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of April and to thank you for organizing this debate on sexual
violence in conflict. Allow me as well to thank the respective speakers for their
thorough briefings.
Despite all efforts, sexual violence is still a grim reality of today’s conflicts.
This sombre picture is well-reflected in the latest report of the Secretary-General
on conflict-related sexual violence, where he confirms that in 2020 “sexual violence
was employed as a tactic of war, torture and terrorism in settings where overlapping
humanitarian and security crises ... continued unabated” (S/2021/312, para. 12).
The report reflects as well the striking reality that impunity for sexual
violence still reigns, with over 70 per cent of the parties on the list annexed to the
report being persistent perpetrators, having appeared on the list for five or more
years without taking remedial or corrective action. The report is in line with the
victim- and survivor-centred resolution 2467 (2019), in which the Security Council,
in paragraph 5, reiterated its grave concern that
“violence, including sexual violence, against women and children in situations
of armed conflict ... continue to occur, often with impunity, and in some
situations have become systematic and widespread, reaching appalling levels
of brutality”.
Unfortunately, the coronavirus disease pandemic has added an additional
layer of complexity and exacerbated sexual violence in conflicts. The pandemic has
amplified and heightened all existing inequalities, including gender-based inequality,
which is a driver of sexual violence both in times of conflict and peace.
We need to intensify our efforts to focus on preventing these atrocities, raise
awareness of the need to put an end to conflict-related sexual violence, ensure
accountability and access to justice and end impunity. We must stand in solidarity
with the victims and survivors of sexual violence around the world, respond
effectively to their needs, amplify their voices and encourage them to come forward
and speak up, especially given that many survivors never report the crime for many
reasons, including their fear of stigmatization, rejection or exclusion.
We should give particular attention to sexual violence perpetrated against
children. In her 2020 report to the General Assembly, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict reaffirmed that sexual
violence against children continue to be perpetrated frequently in the context of
other grave violations and that rape and other forms of sexual violence remain
significantly underreported, particularly when perpetrated against boys.
When we usually address the issue of sexual violence in conflict, we tend to
focus almost exclusively on women and girls. Yet there are many men and boys who
are victims of sexual violence in the context of conflicts, and who remain silent due
to the extreme shame and stigma surrounding the issue. They too deserve our focus
and attention.
We welcome the concerted efforts of the United Nations to address sexual
violence in conf lict, specially via the United Nations Action against Sexual Violence
in Conf lict network, through which multiple United Nations entities are working as
one with the goal of ending conf lict-related sexual violence, as well as the work of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conf lict
90/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

and of the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conf lict.
We welcome the deployment of women’s protection advisers as well in many United
Nations peace operations, who provide substantive guidance to United Nations field
missions to prevent and respond to conf lict-related sexual violence in an integrated
manner.
The world watches and learns from the United Nations, which should be
setting an example in the fight against sexual violence. In this arena, we welcome the
commitment to improve the way the United Nations prevents and addresses sexual
exploitation and abuse, as well as the efforts to strengthen the system-wide response
and ensure the full implementation of the zero-tolerance policy.
We also recognize the tremendous contributions of civil society and human
rights defenders, including women human rights defenders, who face multiple
challenges while working in conflict and post-conflict situations.
A year ago we celebrated the twentieth anniversary of the landmark resolution
1325 (2000), on the women and peace and security agenda, and the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. Unfortunately,
despite hard-won gains for women’s rights during these 20 years, sexual violence in
conflict remains a crucial and urgent issue that requires the attention of the United
Nations and the international community. It is high time to end this scourge and to
prevent sexual violence from being used as a weapon of war.
In her autobiography, The Last Girl: My Story of Captivity and My Fight Against
the Islamic State”, the 2018 Nobel Peace Prize winner, Nadia Murad, writes “I want
to be the last girl in the world with a story like mine.” Let us not fail the victims and
survivors of sexual violence in conflicts. Let us live up to their strength and courage.
Let us put an end to impunity. And let us do it now.

21-0526191/140

S/2021/375

Annex 46
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Libya to the United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
My delegation once again commends you on your presidency of the Security
Council and thanks you for organizing this open debate on women and peace and
security, with a specific focus on sexual violence in situations of armed conflict. We
welcome the Council’s readiness to continue to draw attention to the issue in order
to strengthen the political will of the international community to redouble its efforts
to address and reduce the incidence of this growing phenomenon.
This debate comes at the right time, as United Nations reports confirm that
violence against women is on the rise worldwide. Especially in armed conflict
situations, media outlets convey to us harrowing images that elicit grave concern,
given the extent to which the rights and dignity of victims are being violated, causing
them serious psychological and social harm. Victims are being driven to despair
about the possibility that their rights might one day be safeguarded and their hopes
and aspirations fulfilled.
Although sexual violence has been perpetrated during armed conflict
throughout history, the use of this brutal and abhorrent behaviour as a weapon of
war and revenge has become increasingly common in some conflict zones, even
persisting in the aftermath of conflict. It is perpetrated with near total impunity.
These actions not only constitute a flagrant violation of human rights; they also
exacerbate and prolong conflicts and inflict on victims and their families pain
and suffering that are difficult to forget, often hampering confidence-building,
reconciliation and peacebuilding efforts.
There appears to be an urgent need to promote efforts to act decisively and
tangibly to tackle this phenomenon by better understanding the different dimensions
of the problem, finding ways to prevent it and addressing its consequences. In that
regard, we believe that the following points are important.
First, preventive diplomacy must play a more prominent role in preventing
armed conflict and keeping conflicts from degenerating. The Security Council
should call for an end to detrimental foreign interference, which often contributes to
fuelling conflicts, tearing societies asunder and increasing the incidence of violent
and vengeful acts, all of which conspire to create a climate conducive to acts of
sexual violence. There is also a clear need to raise a broader awareness of the rules
of international humanitarian law, implement resolutions on the protection of women
and ratify the relevant international instruments.
Secondly, the best way to protect women from sexual violence is to make them
stakeholders and partners in defending their rights. That is why women must take an
integral part in social reconciliation, confidence-building and peacemaking processes,
and amnesty laws should not make it possible for criminals to escape punishment.
Thirdly, in order to apply the rules of international humanitarian law to
the protection of women in armed conflict, there is a need for the implementation
mechanisms and mechanisms to monitor progress and assess existing problems
and difficulties. For instance, the four Geneva Conventions and their Protocols
Additional, which provide for the protection of women in armed conflict, need
to translate into tangible action on the ground. Furthermore, it is also crucial to
enact new laws that respond to evolving forms of this phenomenon. In addition,
it is important to remember that violence against women in armed conflict is an
extension of the violence perpetrated against them at various levels in peacetime and
of the persistent gender discrimination they suffer.
92/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Fourthly, while following up the review of the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) is an important element of the effort to eradicate sexual violence,
there is an urgent need for more interaction between the Council and the General
Assembly, which has adopted several important resolutions by consensus, including
the resolution containing the 1974 Declaration on the Protection of Women and
Children in Emergency and Armed Conflict (General Assembly resolution 3318
(XXIX)). According to that Declaration, all forms of repression and cruel and
inhuman treatment of women and children committed by belligerents in the course
of military operations or in occupied territories shall be considered criminal. The
Peacebuilding Commission, in accordance with its mandate, also has an important
role to play in addressing this phenomenon.
Fifthly, combating impunity is a top priority in the effort to seek reparations
and address the suffering of victims and their families, which persists after conflicts
have ended. Since this phenomenon is a security problem that requires a securityoriented response, there is a pressing need to build and develop the human and
institutional capacities of countries in need, at their requests, so as to enhance their
abilities to prosecute and punish the perpetrators of these crimes. In that regard, it
must be recognized that if the international community does not address the culture
of impunity, more and more women, children and men will fall victim to these crimes
as new conflicts erupt.
Sixthly, there is an urgent need to establish a reliable database of cases of
sexual violence to inform the adoption of objective policies to address this issue.
The relevant United Nations entities and international organizations should not only
report cases to civil society institutions and non-governmental organizations; they
must also heed the input of the competent national authorities in order to ascertain
the magnitude and dimensions of sexual violence and identify effective ways to
address it.
Lastly, in spite of the difficulties and challenges Libya faces during this
transitional period, my Government remains determined to continue cooperating
with the international community to combat and eradicate all forms of violence
against women, particularly sexual violence, so that together we can determine how
best to fulfil this humanitarian obligation.

21-0526193/140

S/2021/375

Annex 47
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Liechtenstein to the
United Nations, Christian Wenaweser
I thank you, Mr. President, for focusing this debate on conflict-related sexual
violence on victim and survivor assistance and access to services, a dimension that
all too often remains neglected.
Far too few victims and survivors receive the medical, legal and psychosocial
services they so urgently need. Underreporting of sexual violence crimes due to
stigma, fear of retaliation and weak rule-of-law institutions compound the situation.
At the same time, we can draw on decades of experience, lessons learned and best
practices in supporting victims and survivors. The Security Council’s women and
peace and security resolutions that specifically address conflict-related sexual
violence have helped further our understanding and better equip our response in this
regard.
In the area of norms-setting, the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) has played a pioneering role in establishing a comprehensive and victimcentred framework to expansively and efficiently respond to conflict-related sexual
violence crimes. For the first time in history, it firmly established conflict-related
sexual and gender-based violence as crimes against humanity and war crimes.
Gender-based crimes can furthermore constitute acts of genocide. It also requires the
ICC Prosecutor to appoint advisers with legal expertise on sexual and gender-based
violence. The Court’s victims and witnesses unit includes staff with experience in
trauma-related to sexual crimes. The Office of the ICC Prosecutor has placed a sharp
focus on expertise and commitment to prosecute sexual and gender-based crimes,
as evidenced in some of the best-known proceedings before the Court. The trial
of Congolese warlord Bosco Ntaganda marked the first time a militia leader was
charged with sexual and gender-based crimes. And Lord Resistance Army warlord
Dominic Ongwen has also been charged with sexual and gender-based crimes,
including sexual slavery.
Moreover, the participation of victims in proceedings of the ICC is a key
element of the Rome Statute. The Trust Fund for Victims, created by the Assembly
of States Parties in 2004, has provided assistance to many victims and survivors
of sexual and gender-based violence. International civil society organizations such
as Justice Rapid Response have also done ground-breaking work in ensuring that
conflict-related sexual violence crimes are investigated promptly and professionally.
Despite the legal and normative frameworks to prevent and eliminate
sexual and gender-based violence, conflict-related sexual violence continues to
be rampant, including through its systematic use as a tactic of war and attacking
civilian populations. The most recent report (S/2021/312) by the Secretary-General
documents rape, sexual slavery and other forms of sexual violence of comparable
gravity perpetrated against women, men, girls and boys in a large number of conflict
situations, many of which are on the Security Council’s agenda.
In looking at country situations, we are particularly concerned about the
numerous reports of serious forms of sexual and gender-based violence committed
in north and central Tigray during military operations since last November. Reports
of over 100 relevant violations include cases of individuals forced to rape members
of their own families, of women being forced by military elements to have sex in
exchange for basic commodities and reports of sexual violence against women and
girls in refugee camps. Due to limited access to the affected areas, it is likely that
sexual violence crimes have been underreported. We welcome the agreement by
the Ethiopian Human Rights Commission and the Office of the United Nations
94/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

High Commissioner for Human Rights to conduct a joint investigation into the
human rights violations and abuses by all parties, as a first step in a much-needed
accountability process.
Furthermore, we are alarmed by the situation in Myanmar, where a culture
of impunity, among the armed forces in particular, including for serious cases of
sexual and gender-based violence, has enabled an ongoing systematic attack against
the civilian population. In particular, Rohingya women and children in camps for
internally displaced persons and those who fled to Bangladesh have remained at
significant risk of sexual violence, including forced marriage and forced pregnancy.
We call for full and immediate compliance with international human rights
and humanitarian law and unhindered humanitarian access to conflict-affected areas
to facilitate the delivery of assistance to survivors of sexual violence. Furthermore,
we call for immediate access for United Nations mandate holders, including the
Special Envoy and the Independent Investigative Mechanism for Myanmar.
Harmful gender stereotypes and abusive power dynamics are the root cause of
sexual and gender-based violence, which affects women and girls disproportionately,
but the same stereotypes also harm men and boys and LGBTI+ people and often
result in underreporting, as has also been documented by the Liechtenstein-based
human rights organization All Survivors Project. Resolution 2467 (2019) and its
comprehensive survivor-centred approach is an important step forward for the
women and peace and security agenda.
In times of quarantines, lockdowns and other restrictions on movement caused
by the coronavirus disease pandemic, it is particularly important to ensure that
survivors of conflict-related sexual violence have access to reporting mechanisms
and necessary services. We call on the Council to include conflict-related sexual
violence as a designation criterion in targeted sanctions regimes as well as to fully
implement resolution 2467 (2019).

21-0526195/140

S/2021/375

Annex 48
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Luxembourg to the
United Nations
[Original: French]
Luxembourg thanks the Vietnamese presidency of the Security Council for
organizing today’s open debate on sexual violence in conflict, as well as all the
briefers, who enriched the debate with their experience and expertise.
Luxembourg endorses the statement made on behalf of the European Union
(annex 37) and those made on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women and Peace
(annex 28) and Security and the United Nations LGBTI Core Group (annex 70).
While the health crisis related to the coronavirus disease has led to a shift
in political and media attention, sexual violence in times of conflict persists. As
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2021/312) points out, the pandemic context has
contributed to exacerbating gender inequalities, which are one of the structural root
causes of sexual violence in conflict, and has reinforced the climate of impunity.
Once again, it is the most vulnerable populations, especially refugee and displaced
women and girls, that have been the first to be affected by the cross effects of conflict
and pandemic situations.
In this context, we must step up our efforts aimed at ensuring that the prevention
of sexual violence remains a political priority and that the needs of survivors are not
forgotten in the response to the pandemic. It is incumbent on all States to continue to
allocate sufficient resources to the fight against impunity and to strengthen access
to justice and reparations for survivors.
Luxembourg will continue to commit itself politically, as well as in the
framework of its development cooperation and humanitarian action, to projects
and initiatives aimed at combating sexual and gender-based violence and fighting
impunity. In 2020, we allocated over €13.2 million to the fight against sexual and
gender-based violence. On a bilateral level, Luxembourg has committed to supporting
a project to adapt the Panzi Hospital run by Dr. Mukwege in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, with a commitment of €5 million over a three-year period, until 2024.
With the primary objective of providing care for victims of sexual violence, the
project aims to adopt a holistic approach based on four pillars, namely, medical care
and psychological, socioeconomic and legal follow-up.
The project is scheduled to start in April 2021. Between 2018 and 2021, we
also financed the construction of a regional centre for the medical and psychosocial
care of women victims of violence, particularly sexual violence, in the Casamance
region of Senegal. In 2021, Luxembourg will continue to support the activities of
the International Committee of the Red Cross aimed at combating sexual violence,
in particular through the financing of a research project on the prevention of
sexual violence. Luxembourg also continues to support the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
Preventing sexual violence in conflict also means addressing the structural
causes that underlie it, which include gender inequality in the broadest sense,
stereotypes and social norms leading to the stigmatization of victims and survivors,
and intersectional discrimination. Through its feminist foreign policy, the
Luxembourg Government applies a multidimensional approach to the fight against
sexual and gender-based violence and to promoting gender equality and women’s
human rights, be they political, economic and social rights or sexual and reproductive
rights, as well as women’s representation and participation at all levels of decisionmaking. Gender equality is also one of the priority themes that Luxembourg will
96/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

promote at the United Nations Human Rights Council throughout its mandate during
the 2022-2024 term.
Today more than ever, it is imperative to increase our efforts aimed at putting
an end to impunity for perpetrators of sexual violence in conflicts. Luxembourg
will continue to be strongly committed to strengthening the international normative
framework and mechanisms and to supporting the work of the International Criminal
Court. We also call on the Security Council to continue to include sexual violence
as a criterion for designation in United Nations sanctions regimes. The Security
Council can count on our commitment, just as we count on the Security Council’s
commitment, to ensuring access to justice and reparations for survivors and to
preventing sexual violence.

21-0526197/140

S/2021/375

Annex 49
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Malaysia to the
United Nations, Syed Mohamad Hasrin Aidid
At the outset, I wish to thank the Vietnamese presidency of the Security
Council for convening today’s open debate on women and peace and security,
focusing on the pressing issue of sexual violence in conflict.
As an elected member of the Security Council in 2000, Malaysia supported the
landmark resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and security. The resolution
clearly underscored the vital importance of cooperation among all the parties
concerned in the field of women, peace, and security, including the protection of
women and girls in situations of armed conflict. Nearly 21 years have passed since
the adoption of this resolution, yet women continue to be the most direct victims
and remain disproportionately affected by armed conflict. The coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic has further exacerbated the situation, resulting in intolerable
environments and prolonged instability.
In last year’s Malaysia-led joint statement in support of the SecretaryGeneral’s appeal for a global ceasefire amid the COVID-19 pandemic, 172 entities —
States Members of the United Nations, a non-member observer State, and a regional
organization with United Nations observer status — expressed deep concern for
the continuation of hostilities in various parts of the world, particularly during a
global health crisis, in the light of the devastating impact of hostilities on the most
vulnerable, especially women and children. The signatories also recognized the
crucial role of women in efforts aimed at building sustainable peace.
The effects of armed conflicts on women are numerous and destructive.
Malaysia condemns all violence against women, including sexual violence, and
urges all parties to conflicts to comply with international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. As a State party to the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, we call for accountability for crimes
of sexual violence perpetrated against women and girls during armed conflict.
We reiterate that accountability constitutes not only careful investigations and
prosecutions of those responsible but also a broader determination of the political,
legal and moral responsibilities of individuals and institutions with regard to past
violations. Perpetrators of such crimes must never go unpunished.
Malaysia also strongly condemns all forms of sexual violence against women
and girls, including opportunistic attacks and the deliberate use of rape as a weapon.
Malaysia believes that peacekeeping missions and peace operations must be
adequately supported so as to enable them to respond to and prevent sexual violence
in conflict, including through standardized predeployment and in-mission training.
Before they are deployed, Malaysian peacekeepers are trained on how to prevent
sexual exploitation and abuse. In furtherance of the women and peace and security
agenda, our women peacekeepers also served in peacekeeping operations.
While we continue to work towards protecting women against violence in
armed conflicts, we must also spare no effort to promote their participation in
peace negotiations, humanitarian planning and post-conflict peacebuilding. In
that context, Malaysia calls for greater efforts and initiatives by Member States,
United Nations entities, including UN-Women, civil society organizations and other
relevant actors in order to advance women’s rights and protect them from sexual
and gender-based violence. In that connection, Malaysia continues to support UNWomen through an ongoing financial contribution so that it can continue to support
women’s meaningful participation and the integration of gender perspectives in
peace and security processes.
98/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

At the regional level, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) is
committed to continue advancing the women and peace and security agenda in the
region. In 2017, the adoption of the Joint Statement on Promoting Women, Peace and
Security in ASEAN at the thirty-first ASEAN Summit represented a landmark in the
region’s commitment to address the pivotal roles that women play in peacebuilding,
conflict prevention, conflict resolution and recovery. This first ASEAN statement on
women and peace and security was subsequently reaffirmed by a joint communiqué
of the ASEAN Foreign Ministers in 2019. The ASEAN Ministerial Dialogue on
Strengthening Women’s role for Sustainable Peace and Security, held in September
2020, also reiterated our determination to enhance the role of women in peace
processes, conflict prevention and resolution, post-conflict reconstruction and
rehabilitation, and to expand networks of women in peace and security. ASEAN is
also presently developing its regional plan of action on women, peace and security
for the period 2021 2022.
In conclusion, Malaysia reaffirms its strong commitment to efforts to address
sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict situations. We will continue to work
with others to advance that agenda and ensure the full mainstreaming of women in
all areas of peace and security.

21-0526199/140

S/2021/375

Annex 50
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Malta to the
United Nations, Vanessa Frazier
Malta thanks Viet Nam for holding this open debate on this important
subject and aligns itself with the statement submitted on behalf of the European
Union (annex 37). We also thank Ms. Pramila Patten, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and the other briefers for sharing
their insights and experiences.
One year ago, the Secretary-General called for a cessation of violence, both
on battlefields and in homes. Despite all efforts made, his latest report on conflictrelated sexual violence (S/2021/312) shows that conflict-related sexual violence
remains a cruel and rampant tactic of war, torture, terror and political repression. We
echo the Secretary-General’s call for a complete cessation, with immediate effect, of
all acts of sexual violence by all parties to armed conflict.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has also exacerbated an already difficult
situation, thus deepening existing gender inequalities and further excluding women
from peace and security decision-making. As outlined in the Secretary-General’s
report, some armed groups have taken advantage of the pandemic to intensify their
operations of sexual harassment, slavery, trafficking and terrorism.
As highlighted in resolution 1325 (2000), women and girls disproportionately
suffer the impacts of armed conflicts and are usually the main targets of rape and
other forms of sexual violence. Their exposure to violence affects their physical,
mental and material well-being. It is important to recognize that sexual violence
manifests itself in many forms, such as intimidation, harassment and violence —
online and offline — and is perpetrated against civil society actors, activists, women
peacebuilders, women human rights defenders and women journalists.
Malta remains committed — both at home and within international forums —
to addressing conflict and conflict-related gender-based violence, including through
awareness campaigns on the issues of sexual violation, sexual and reproductive
health, female genital mutilation and human trafficking, as well as through adequate
training for personnel dealing with such issues.
One of the main pillars of Malta’s national action plan on women and peace and
security is the prevention of all forms of violence, including gender-based violence
and sexual exploitation and abuse. Gender-based violence is a direct result of, and
contributes to, systematic discrimination and inequality, and cannot be addressed
without prioritizing women’s participation in identifying trends and envisioning
solutions at all levels. Through its national action plan, Malta seeks to implement a
survivor-centred approach that ensures that the particular needs of women and girl
victims from conflict-affected areas are taken into account when they are provided
services, including treatment and counselling, to support their recovery from trauma.
The prevention of, and response to, gender-based violence must be holistic
and must incorporate an educational dimension. In must be human-rights-based,
survivor-centred, victim-informed, inclusive, non-discriminatory and designed,
implemented and monitored in partnership with survivors and victims. Let us
continue empowering survivors and help them on their path to healing.
Another crucial aspect is accountability. There can be no excuse for the use
of gender-based violence. Its perpetrators must be identified, brought to justice and
held accountable. The prosecution of gender-based violence is most effective with
strengthened national legal frameworks and judicial processes.
100/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Addressing gender-based violence is part and parcel of the women and peace
and security agenda. Women peacebuilders, civil society leaders, women journalists,
politicians and human rights defenders play critical roles in advancing peace and
security and are often targeted or at a higher risk of violence. They must be allowed
to carry out their work in an enabling environment, which means fully protecting
their rights, ensuring accountability for perpetrators and providing urgent support to
women who face threats or reprisals.
Women organizations also play a key role in the prevention of, and response
to, gender-based violence, including in humanitarian settings, often filling gaps in
State-provided services. As such, they should be allowed to operate freely and must
be provided all technical and financial support they require.
In order to succeed in eliminating conflict-related sexual violence, we must
work together at the national, regional and international levels. Only through a strong
international commitment can the international community eliminate violence
against women and girls once and for all.

21-05261101/140

S/2021/375

Annex 51
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Morocco to the
United Nations
[Original: French]
At the outset, my delegation would like to thank Viet Nam, President of the
Security Council for the month of April, for having organized this open debate on
the issue of the elimination of sexual violence in times of conflict, the importance
of which — given its urgency, its acuteness and its impact on societies — no longer
needs to be demonstrated.
My delegation also thanks Ms. Pramila Patten, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Mr. Denis Mukwege, winner of
the 2018 Nobel Peace Prize, and the civil society representatives for the relevance of
their respective contributions and the testimonies and information provided.
We condemn all violence. However, sexual violence in times of conflict is even
more deplorable. Neither women and girls nor men and boys are spared. The former
suffer the most from the devastating consequences of conflict and pay a heavy price
because of their great vulnerability. The latter are often subjected to forced labour,
slavery, organ theft and sexual exploitation, or are used as human shields, recruited
as child soldiers by armed groups or forced to commit suicide attacks.
Sexual violence does not only affect the victims; it eats away at communities
and societies as a whole. Its aims are to wound the body, mutilate dignity, destroy
the social fabric and squash efforts to rebuild. It destabilizes, ruins and terrorizes
societies affected by conflict.
Resolution 1325 (2000) and the nine subsequent resolutions on this issue
complement existing international instruments and constitute a normative continuum
with a solid and binding legal arsenal developed to ensure the protection of women
and girls in situations of conflict and humanitarian crises.
Paradoxically, in recent years, we have seen a dramatic increase in sexual
violence in times of conflict. The recurrence of these crimes is becoming a source
of great concern to the international community. Worse still, the implementation
of the existing legal arsenal is negligible in relation to the scale and gravity of
the phenomenon.
Indeed, due to their participation in the most recent armed conflicts and their
involvement in mass atrocities and civilian massacres, armed groups undoubtedly
represent a major challenge. Da’esh, Boko Haram, Al-Shabaab and many other nonState armed groups use sexual violence as a tactic of war, a weapon of terror and a
source of revenue to fuel their resources and consolidate their power. They openly
advocate these barbaric, criminal and intolerable practices as part of their notorious
strategic ideological objectives.
Furthermore, the latest report of the Secretary-General, dated 30 March
2021, stresses that “[t]he pandemic amplified gender-based inequality, which is a
root cause and driver of sexual violence in times of conflict and peace”, causing “a
global spike in gender-based violence at a time when avenues for seeking redress
were narrower than ever, as shelters closed and clinics were repurposed in response
to COVID-19” (S/2021/312, para. 2). This shadow pandemic is further exacerbated
when it goes unreported or underreported.
The Kingdom of Morocco, a member of the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security and the Group of Friends for Gender Parity, fully subscribes to
102/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

its international commitments to combat all forms of sexual violence, including in
times of conflict, which they consider to be barbaric, brutal and inhumane methods
and practices with grave consequences for the ability to achieve lasting peace
and reconciliation.
Because of the systematic and premeditated nature of acts of sexual violence,
the Kingdom of Morocco believes that it is urgent to seek innovative approaches
to combat this scourge. In that regard, it is necessary to adopt and implement a
comprehensive and inclusive approach that takes into account the complexity of the
root causes of sexual violence; restores the dignity of the victims; addresses the stigma
surrounding the victims, including children born of such violence; introduces firm
accountability measures against perpetrators who violate international humanitarian
law, human rights and the Geneva Conventions; and invests in rebuilding sustainable
peace. Prevention remains essential to eradicating sexual violence.
Religious leaders have a powerful and persuasive role to play in combating
the use of religion to justify sexual violence. They should be encouraged to speak
out strongly against it. Cooperation with local actors and community leaders is
also crucial, as they can identify the warning signs of sexual violence and propose
appropriate prevention strategies.
In conclusion, protection, prevention and the fight against impunity must be
the watchwords. That is our responsibility and our duty. International law and, in
particular, international humanitarian law, must be applied without exception. It is
our responsibility to protect and respond to the needs of victims, to prevent sexual
violence and to ensure that perpetrators are held fully accountable for their actions.
It is high time to invest in peace, to restore the dignity of victims and to make the
project of rebuilding societies and sustaining peace a reality.
Morocco welcomes the efforts of the United Nations to eliminate sexual
violence in conflict, in particular through the United Nations Action against
Sexual Violence in Conflict network, and the work of Ms. Pramila Patten, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict. Morocco
also welcomes the initiatives taken in the context of peacekeeping operations to
combat sexual violence, as well as the appointment of advisers to combat sexual
violence and the adoption of codes of conduct, military action plans and zerotolerance policies within the armed forces.

21-05261103/140

S/2021/375

Annex 52
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Myanmar to the
United Nations, Kyaw Moe Tun
My delegation wishes to congratulate you again on your able leadership of the
Security Council.
I thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2021/312), and I wish to
express my appreciation to Ms. Pramila Patten, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Mr. Denis Mukwege, Nobel
Peace Prize Laureate, and Ms. Caroline Atim, Director of the South Sudan Women
with Disabilities Network.
We have witnessed significant progress in the promotion of the women
and peace and security agenda since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). The
meaningful participation and representation of women in conflict resolution and
prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding, as well as the protection of women and
girls in armed conflicts, has never been more relevant.
We applaud the great efforts made by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, the United Nations Action against
Sexual Violence in Conflict network, the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and
Sexual Violence in Conflict and United Nations peacekeeping missions to prevent
sexual violence in conflict and address the needs of survivors.
The elected National League for Democracy-led civilian Government
has put gender equality and women’s empowerment at the heart of national
development strategies. Myanmar upholds the zero-tolerance policy for any form
of sexual violence. Accordingly, we have enacted legal reforms for the promotion
and protection of the rights of women and girls. In this light, the draft law on the
prevention and protection of violence against women was drafted during the civilian
Government. This new draft law will reinforce the protection of women from all
forms of violence, including domestic and sexual violence. Furthermore, it will offer
an opportunity for Myanmar to effectively combat violence against women at both
international and domestic levels.
To demonstrate its commitment to addressing conflict-related sexual violence,
the Government of Myanmar signed a joint communiqué with the United Nations on
the prevention of and response to conflict-related sexual violence in December 2018.
The National Committee on Prevention and Response to Conflict-Related Sexual
Violence was also established to implement the joint communiqué in March 2019.
The Committee developed an action plan, with technical assistance from the
United Nations, to identify prioritized implementation areas, such as the issuance
of clear directives by the military, the investigation of alleged violations and the
prosecution of perpetrators, the capacity-building of law enforcement officers, legal
reform measures and the strengthening of service delivery for survivors.
One-stop women support centres and 24-hour help lines have been set up
to provide women and girls with physical, legal, psychological and social support.
These centres and help lines are operating 24 hours a day seven days a week during
the coronavirus disease pandemic to provide timely services to women and girls as
they are more vulnerable during lockdowns.
Victims of sexual violence are also provided with one-time financial support
for rehabilitation. New standard operation procedures were developed in 2019 to
assist with case management for gender-based violence.
104/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Moreover, the Child Rights Law, adopted in Myanmar in July 2019, criminalizes
sexual violence, requiring the Government, the military (Tatmadaw) and armed
groups to take necessary measures to protect children from sexual violence.
The National League for Democracy-led civilian Government is fully
committed to enhancing human rights for all its citizens, especially the most
vulnerable groups, including women and girls. Despite all the challenges it faces,
the Government’s protection of women and girls in conflict-related sexual violence
has gained momentum.
Furthermore, the efforts and hard work that the civilian Government has
undertaken regarding human rights in Myanmar, including the protection of women
and girls in conflict-related sexual violence for the period of 2016 to 2020, have been
included in the national report submitted to the third cycle of the universal periodic
review. That report was successfully reviewed during the thirty-sixth session of the
Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review in January.
However, since the military coup on 1 February, the brutal and inhumane
acts, arbitrary arrests and torture of civilians of Myanmar by the military group
have become systematic and target individuals and innocent civilians. It is evident
that such actions by the military group violate fundamental freedoms, as well as
international humanitarian law and international human rights law, and constitute
crimes against humanity.
To be able to continue to engage and work constructively with relevant United
Nations agencies to achieve our common goals of promoting and protecting human
rights, as well as advancing the women and peace and security agenda, action to put
an end to the military regime must be taken by all means without delay. Therefore,
I wish to stress that the United Nations and the international community have
the responsibility to use all necessary means to protect the people of Myanmar,
including women, girls and children, from the atrocities and brutal and inhumane
acts committed by the military.

21-05261105/140

S/2021/375

Annex 53
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Nepal to the
United Nations, Amrit Bahadur Rai
I would like to begin by thanking the presidency of the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam for convening today’s open debate on sexual violence in conflict. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General for his latest report on conflict-related sexual
violence (S/2021/312). I thank the briefers for their updates and valuable insights.
Nepal strongly condemns the use of sexual violence as a weapon and tactic of
war. Perpetrators of such violence must be held accountable.
We believe that ending sexual violence is pivotal to conflict prevention,
peacebuilding and sustaining peace. Nepal supports the normative framework of the
Security Council towards ending sexual violence in conflict.
The predicament of victims and survivors of sexual violence has further
worsened owing to the coronavirus disease pandemic. This calls for more gendersensitive strategies to help the victims and their families.
Nepal stresses the importance of the effective implementation of existing
instruments for the prevention of sexual violence, the protection of victims and
ensuring criminal accountability. As stipulated in resolution 2467 (2019), we need to
take a holistic, survivor-centred approach to provide justice to the victims and help
them rebuild their lives.
Sexual violence in conflict must be addressed in all its dimensions, as it
is intricately linked with trafficking in persons, migration, labour exploitation,
vulnerability to recruitment and radicalization by armed groups. We must redouble
our efforts to prevent such violence by advancing gender equality and women’s
empowerment in political, social and economic sectors.
The Secretary-General’s report on conflict-related sexual violence rightly
depicts how sexual violence has continued to be employed as a tactic of war, torture
and terrorism, and as a tool of dehumanization in conflict settings. The report
also highlights how survivors and their children continue to be traumatized with a
multitude of challenges related to their health, well-being, justice and social dignity.
However, we regret that the report includes inaccurate references on criminal
accountability for conflict-era cases in Nepal. The report argues that there was
“widespread perpetration of sexual violence during the conflict” (S/2021/312, para.
64) in Nepal. This is a misleading statement and is devoid of facts and evidence, as
there is only one registered case of conflict-era-related sexual assault in the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission of Nepal.
The report also fails to acknowledge the mechanism established by the Enforced
Disappearances Enquiry, the Truth and Reconciliation Commission Act, 2014, and
the Truth and Reconciliation Commission Rules, 2016, to ensure the confidentiality
of the victims, complainants and witnesses. The Truth and Reconciliation Act and
Rules also guarantee the security and protection of mental and physical welfare and
the privacy and dignity of the victims, complainants, witnesses and persons assisting
in investigations of sexual violence.
We wish to see a more credible report of the Secretary-General based on
facts and ref lecting the progress made by Nepal towards ensuring justice for the
conf lict victims.
Conscious of the correlation between women’s empowerment and gender
equality and peace and security, Nepal has been a proactive supporter and promoter
of the women and peace and security agenda.
106/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

As the first country in South Asia and the second in Asia, Nepal introduced
in 2011 a national action plan to implement resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008).
The plan incorporated an inclusive and participatory approach with the participation
of conflict victims and civil society organizations.
The national action plan was successful in enhancing the participation of
women in decision-making, protecting women and girls from sexual and genderbased violence and ending impunity. Several laws and policies were revised in favour
of the protection of survivors of sexual and gender-based violence. Strong laws have
been put in place for holding perpetrators accountable.
Building on the success of the first national action plan, the draft of the second
national action plan on women and peace and security has been prepared with a
focus on the concerns of survivors, female ex-combatants and child victims. The
draft ensures a holistic, comprehensive and transformative transitional justice for
survivors of conflict-related sexual and gender-based violence.
Nepal attaches high importance to the equitable and meaningful participation
of women in conflict prevention, conflict resolution, mediation and peacebuilding.
We believe that an enhanced level of participation of women in United Nations
peacekeeping missions makes peace operations more efficient and effective.
As one of the largest troop- and police-contributing countries, Nepal is
committed to increasing the number of women peacekeepers. We have also embraced
inclusive policies encouraging more females to join the national security forces.
Nepal is committed to a zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and
abuse and is making efforts to attain the goal of a zero-case scenario.
In conclusion, access to justice is a must for victims, survivors and witnesses
of sexual violence. Our efforts should focus on the reintegration of survivors
into society with dignity and honour. As a country with experience of a unique
and homegrown peace process, Nepal stresses the importance of the constructive
engagement of women in conflict prevention and resolution and post-conflict
restructuring and rebuilding.

21-05261107/140

S/2021/375

Annex 54
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Netherlands to the
United Nations
We would like to thank Viet Nam for organizing today’s debate and keeping
this important matter on the agenda of the Security Council.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands fully aligns itself with the statement by the
European Union (annex 37), the statement by the Group of Friends of Women, Peace
and Security (annex 28) and the LGBTI Core Group statement (annex 70).
Over the past year, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has revealed
that the hard-won progress on combating and preventing sexual violence in conflict
is fragile. The pandemic exacerbates sexual violence, hampers the collection of
timely data and impedes access to services for survivors. These developments affirm
that the current pandemic is a gendered crisis. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
therefore fully agrees with the Secretary-General that no effective response can be
gender neutral. The needs of survivors of sexual violence cannot be put on pause and
neither can our response to such violence.
Allow me to highlight three areas of action to strengthen the prevention of and
responses to sexual violence in conflict.
First, a survivor-centred approach is important. The needs of survivors must
be put front and centre in our actions. Adopted in 2019, resolution 2467 (2019)
recognized the need for a survivor-centred approach to sexual violence in conflict.
Yet, the COVID-19 pandemic shows us that when we enter a worldwide crisis,
survivors of sexual violence are not a priority. We know that sexual and genderbased violence threatens peace, security and stability worldwide, but we are not
doing enough to meet survivors’ needs.
Importantly, survivors of sexual violence in all their diversity must have
access to holistic, adequate and comprehensive services in the area of sexual and
reproductive health and rights, mental health and psychosocial support, protection,
legal services, access to justice and support for livelihoods. Concrete and sustained
actions must be taken to ensure that diverse survivors can claim their right to such
services and to ensure long-term measures to address the impact of sexual violence
for survivors and their communities. In this year’s report on sexual violence in
conflict, the Secretary-General describes service delivery as “the ultimate expression
of political will” (S/2021/312, para. 4). The Kingdom of the Netherlands could not
agree more.
To ensure a survivor-centred approach, the importance of accountability for
these crimes cannot be understated. We have to make sure that there is enhanced
attention to sexual violence in documentation and evidence-gathering mechanisms
and that perpetrators are held accountable.
Secondly, survivors’ leadership is imperative. To tackle the root causes of
sexual violence in conflict and to build back better in the wake of the pandemic,
the Kingdom of the Netherlands underlines the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral to promote women’s leadership in international political, security and rule
of law institutions, as well as peace- and decision-making processes. In particular,
women survivors of sexual conflict have an important role to play. It must be
recognized that survivors are individuals with diverse identities, needs, perspectives
and wishes, and they should have a meaningful say in decisions that affect their
lives. This enhances peacebuilding and paves the way towards the prevention of
sexual violence in the future. We have a joint responsibility to promote survivors’
108/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

leadership and to ensure that survivors have a seat at the table and are heard at all
levels of decision-making.
One way of doing this is by using the means and institutions available to
us. For example, in 2021 and 2022 the Kingdom of the Netherlands is a member
of the Peacebuilding Commission. One of our most important goals is to render
discussions within the Commission more inclusive by consistently inviting civil
society, particularly women and youth, to meaningfully participate, inform and
influence discussions.
Thirdly, on strengthening civic space and civil society, survivors of sexual
violence in conflict who speak up to about their experiences, as well as women
peacebuilders, civil society leaders, politicians and women human rights defenders,
are at particular risk of violence. This is unacceptable. Everyone deserves equal
protection and should be able to fully enjoy their human rights.
But the international community should go further than protecting these
groups, by actively supporting, including through financial means, their meaningful
participation in public life and decision-making. In January 2021, the Kingdom of
the Netherlands started new women and peace and security programmes, focusing
on enhancing protection for sexual and gender-based violence in conflict, promoting
women’s leadership in peace and security, and countering harmful gender norms.
These programmes will run until 2025, with a total budget of €40 million, and
are geared to specifically support local women’s rights organizations, aiming
to strengthen Southern leadership and amplify civil society’s voices in a spirit of
partnership.
More than a year ago, the Secretary-General made an urgent appeal for a
global ceasefire, including the cessation of sexual violence. Over the past year,
COVID-19 has posed unparalleled threats to global health, deepened inequalities,
damaged economies and shifted political priorities. Violent conflict continues to
rage and sexual and gender-based violence has intensified worldwide. Recognizing
that prevention is always the best cure, we reiterate the Secretary-General’s appeal
and call for a redoubling of efforts to prevent and respond to all forms of sexual and
gender-based violence.

21-05261109/140

S/2021/375

Annex 55
Statement by the Special Representative for Women, Peace
and Security of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization,
Clare Hutchinson
I thank you for the opportunity to make a statement at this open debate on
sexual violence in conflict. I would like to start by recognizing and thanking Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Patten for her continued leadership and
commitment to this agenda.
Since the adoption of resolution 1820 (2008), there has been growing public
recognition that conflict-related sexual violence is used as a weapon of war against
women and girls — and increasingly against men and boys. Sexual violence
perpetuates conflict and instability. Its long-term, destructive nature has devastating
effects, not only on survivors of this crime, but on entire communities.
As a political and military alliance, NATO recognizes that sexual violence
in conflict is not only a gross violation of human rights — it is also a real and
persistent security challenge. This violence has consequences that increase the
costs and complexities of armed conflict, rendering the prospects for peace and
stability far more difficult. Wartime rape fuels displacement, weakens governance
and destabilizes communities, thereby inhibiting post-conflict reconciliation and
imperilling long-term stability.
Despite the adoption of resolutions, policies and guidelines, not only does the
problem of conflict-related sexual violence persist; it is evolving and growing. And,
as we have seen, it is increasingly used as a tactic of terrorism. State and non-State
armed actors have used and continue to use sexual violence to intimidate, terrorize,
displace and destroy. They see this tactic as both potent and profitable.
The core mission of NATO over the past 72 years has been to safeguard
freedom and security. Our work on the protection of civilians is key to that mission.
Over the years, we have put in place polices, doctrine and capacity-building tools to
enhance our ability to better protect populations at risk. We are shaping a humansecurity approach to our work, including through our policies on the protection of
civilians and on combating trafficking in human beings. We have in place military
guidelines on preventing and responding to conflict-related sexual violence, and we
are in the process of drafting a formal NATO policy to bolster the political foundation
on which this vital work stands.
Conflict-related sexual violence continues to pose significant threats to
global peace and security. It is a threat to its victims as well as to our core values of
democracy, individual liberty and the rule of law. We have a moral and operational
imperative to address it.
We recognize that understanding and responding to the grievous, systematic
sexual abuse of women and girls in and around conflict is mission critical and
essential to our operational effectiveness. We understand that sexual violence does
not have to be an inevitable consequence of conflict. And we understand that we can
help to drive change.
The adoption of resolution 2467 (2019) acknowledges that structural gender
inequality and discrimination are the root causes of sexual violence, while affirming
the necessity for the participation and empowerment of women as the only viable
route to sustainable peace and security.
NATO has taken up the women and peace and security agenda and, over the
years, our contributions to this work have increased, including in our understanding
110/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

of the critical connections between gender equality and sustainable peace. We know
that sexual violence does not happen in a vacuum. We recognize that we cannot
combat this heinous crime if we do not understand the inequalities that lead to the
destruction of women’s rights and their bodies.
Only by working closely with affected communities, including women’s
groups, can we accurately and proactively identify conflict-related sexual violence
threats and identify essential early-warning signs in areas of risk. Gender equality
and the strengthening of women’s empowerment must be at the centre of every
protection activity.
There can be no protection without participation.
Developing and maintaining high standards for ourselves is crucial and
encouraging high standards in other militaries around the world is also essential.
We have worked with many of our partner countries, strengthening our training on
human rights and the protection of civilians, including against conflict-related sexual
violence. And this is key — ridding the world of this blight will take concerted,
cooperative effort among all those committed to peace and security.
We have reaffirmed our international obligations to protecting women, girls,
men and boys from sexual violence, and highlighted the need to develop further
political and operational guidance on how to respond to such heinous crimes,
including in relation to reporting.
The scourge of sexual violence in and around conflict remains a pressing
global challenge. Despite the definitions, resolutions, commitments, endorsements
and financing dedicated to eradicating sexual violence, such intolerable crimes
continue in numerous conflicts around the world today, where the bodies of so many
women and men, girls and boys, are co-opted as part of the battlefield. It demoralizes,
destabilizes and destroys individuals, communities and societies around the world.
Preventing and responding to conflict-related sexual violence is not just a moral
duty; it is critical to achieving durable peace and security. Actions that NATO has
taken have made a real difference. But we all have a responsibility to do even more.
That is why NATO Secretary General Stoltenberg has highlighted the
importance of reinforcing our policy framework to strengthen the political foundation
for our continued commitment to eliminating sexual violence in conflict. This is an
urgent task to create the conditions for security that will allow everyone to live free
from abuse and violence.
Ultimately, in tackling sexual violence in conflict, we do more than help
individual victims; we set the tone for the respect for fundamental dignities and
human rights that is the basis for freedom and essential for peace. By doing this, we
can lay a foundation for lasting stability — a foundation that we can all play a part
in building.

21-05261111/140

S/2021/375

Annex 56
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Pakistan to the
United Nations
Half of the population affected by conflict are women and girls. Women and
peace and security is thus an important element in the work of the Security Council.
The delegation of Pakistan commends the efforts made by the Security Council
to prevent sexual violence in armed conflict and promote global awareness of this
challenge. Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) was a landmark that established
the intrinsic relationship between sexual violence in conflict and the maintenance of
international peace and security. Yet, despite these efforts, women and girls continue
to be subjected to sexual and gender-based violence in almost every conflict around
the world.
We note with appreciation the report of the Secretary-General on conflictrelated sexual violence (S/2021/312). It highlights the challenges posed by the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic to preventing sexual violence in conflict
situations and providing rehabilitation services to victims of sexual violence. The
pandemic has amplified resource constraints, gender inequalities and the fragility of
support systems and rehabilitation services in conflicts around the world.
Sexual violence is an underreported crime. The existing structural,
institutional and sociocultural barriers to reporting such gender-based violence have
been compounded due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The incidence of sexual violence is endemic in situations of foreign occupation
and the systematic denial of the right to self-determination. Such violence is
aggravated where conflicts remain unresolved and where they assume a religious or
ethnic dimension. We urge the Secretary-General to include dedicated information
on the incidence of sexual violence, including the use of rape as an instrument of
occupation policy, in territories under foreign occupation in future reports to the
Security Council.
The international community should also address gaps in oversight,
investigations and accountability mechanisms regarding sexual violence in conflict
situations, and the Security Council can continue to play an instrumental role in
this regard. The provision of health services, rehabilitation, justice and reintegration
mechanisms for survivors of sexual violence should be strengthened.
For the prevention and prohibition of sexual violence in conflict, it is the
responsibility of international community, including the mechanisms of the United
Nations, to end impunity and promote accountability for sexual violence in conflict.
Increased prosecution in cases of rape and gang rape in conflict as war crimes and
crimes against humanity would serve as a panacea for preventing rape and sexual
violence. In this regard, we would like to urge the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, the United Nations Action
against Sexual Violence in Conflict network, the United Nations Team of Experts on
the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict and United Nations peacekeeping
missions to strengthen accountability mechanisms in all conflict settings. We also
urge Member States to make robust efforts in implementing all resolutions related to
women and peace and security, including resolution 2467 (2019).

112/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Annex 57
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Poland to the United Nations
First of all, I would like to express my sincere gratitude and appreciation to the
delegation of Viet Nam for having organized this open debate on sexual violence in
armed conflict and for bringing this essential theme to the attention of the Security
Council. I would like to extend my gratitude to all the briefers. I also wish to thank
the Secretary-General for his informative and comprehensive report (S/2021/312)
on conflict-related sexual violence, which presents in-depth analyses of the most
pressing problems and a set of practical and quality recommendations for a wide
spectrum of international actors, ranging from the Council and Sates Members of
the United Nations to donors and regional and intergovernmental organizations.
Poland aligns itself with the statements delivered on behalf of the European
Union (annex 37) and the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security (annex
28), both of which reaffirm strong support for zero tolerance for any form of sexual
violence.
We share the view that the scale of conflict-related sexual violence against
civilians is of paramount concern. The use of rape and other forms of sexual violence
as weapons or tactics of war is widespread. The most affected are women and girls,
yet we must also account for the presence of male victims.
Survivors of sexual violence perpetrated by armed and/or terrorist groups
suffer physical injuries, deep-rooted stigma and various forms of discrimination
in their communities, including ostracism by their families and exclusion from the
public sphere. This is particularly true for children born of sexual violence, who,
merely because of this fact, are often denied nationality, excluded from school,
deprived medical treatment and subjected to physical and psychological violence.
These children are as much victims of sexual violence as their mothers. We stand
in solidarity with all victims and urge greater support and empowerment for those
affected by sexual violence in conflict situations.
Conflict-related sexual violence has long been regarded as an unfortunate
yet inevitable by-product of war and terror. This has resulted in a growing culture
of impunity and a lack of accountability. We need to end this immediately. If we
manage to reduce impunity and bring perpetrators to justice, we will be able to send
a strong message to victims that their voices have been heard, and to offenders that
the days of meaningless warnings are over.
Poland highlights that the full, equal and meaningful participation of women
in official peace processes, in line with the objectives of resolution 1325 (2000), is
a cornerstone of sustainable peace. Unfortunately, female peacebuilders not only
face structural barriers limiting their access to national and international decisionmaking arenas, but they are also targeted for their activism. Women participating
in official peace negotiations continue to experience high levels of insecurity and
personal threats, including sexual violence being used as a tool of reprisal.
Poland underscores the importance of women’s participation in all processes
related to ending sexual violence in conflict, including peace talks. Female negotiators
can best guarantee a survivor-centred approach, including the rehabilitation of women
survivors of conflict-related sexual violence, ensuring post-conflict reparations
and accountability and establishing vetting mechanisms to exclude perpetrators of
sexual violence from security forces.
Last but not least, we must not underestimate the negative impact of the
coronavirus disease pandemic, since its grim consequences, especially health and
economic consequences, are very likely to increase sexual and gender-based violence
21-05261113/140

S/2021/375

in situations of conflict and fragility. With that being acknowledged, we should
support peacekeeping and monitoring missions so that they are capable of providing
adequate protection to victims of all forms of violence. In this vein, Poland endorses
further deployment of women’s protection advisers and broader use of early-warning
indicators of conflict-related sexual violence.
Eradicating sexual violence in conflict is a must in today’s world. This can
be achieved only through prevention and firm legal responses within the system of
international justice, for accountability is critical to ensuring the desired deterrent
effect. Poland stands ready to support all credible initiatives that can bring us closer
to this goal.

114/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Annex 58
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Portugal to the
United Nations
Portugal would like to thank the Permanent Mission of Viet Nam for organizing
this open debate. We further commend the Secretary-General for the publication of
his latest report (S/2021/312).
Sexual violence in conflict is a crime perpetrated against women, men, girls
and boys. However, women and girls are particularly targeted by the use of sexual
violence, including as a tactic of war to humiliate, instil fear in, disperse and/or
forcibly relocate civilian members of a community or ethnic group, in order to fulfil
military, economic or ideological objectives. In this context, it is essential to tackle
the root causes that drive and perpetuate this violence, including gender inequality
and stereotypes, which are exacerbated by conflict and militarization.
Unlike other forms of lethal or non-lethal violence, conflict-related sexual
violence is always carried out intentionally and, from the perpetrator’s perspective,
has symbolic consequences, since it establishes both the literal and symbolic
domination and subordination of the other — directly, the victim, and, symbolically,
the community.
In this sense, we would like to recall that sexual violence in conflict is not a
mere consequence of war. Victims and survivors of sexual violence in conflict can be
subject to discrimination, sexual assault, sexual slavery, forced prostitution, human
trafficking and forced marriages. Those crimes are serious violations and abuses of
human rights and violations of international humanitarian law. Therefore, we must
ensure accountability and fight against impunity, while maintaining a zero-tolerance
approach. The military defeat of aggressors does not replace their conviction or the
recognition of the survivors’ suffering.
Since the adoption of resolution 1820 (2008) in 2008, the United Nations has
been taking appropriate steps to address widespread and systematic sexual violence,
including with the adoption of the resolution 2467 (2019), in 2019, which underlined
the need to strengthen justice and foster accountability while, at the same time,
introducing a survivor-centred approach and rights-based response.
In this regard, Portugal would like to commend the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Pramila
Patten, for her work and efforts in strengthening United Nations mechanisms to
tackle sexual violence in conflict as a peace and security issue. That mandate was an
important accomplishment of resolution 1888 (2009).
Last year, we celebrated the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security — the first resolution to recognize
that ending violence targeting women is crucial for sustainable peace and security. It
recognized the impact of armed conflicts on women and highlighted the importance
of promoting the active participation of women peacekeepers and of including women
of all ages and backgrounds in negotiation, decision-making and policymaking as
well as ceasefire processes. The women and peace and security agenda has since
become a pillar of peace processes.
Women are fundamental drivers of change. Although women and girls are,
unfortunately, the most affected by conflict, they are also relevant actors in the
prevention and resolution of conflict.
It is urgent to implement specific strategies against acts of violence against
women, in cooperation with civil society, including youth-led and women-led
21-05261115/140

S/2021/375

organizations. New technologies can be very useful in the protection of survivors,
allowing for the prevention and reporting of crimes.
On this matter, the Istanbul Convention of the Council of Europe is a
fundamental international instrument providing adequate independent monitoring
and recommendations to States parties. The Istanbul Convention is open to all
countries. We call on all States that have not yet done so to ratify the Convention.
This commitment also includes the protection and promotion of sexual and
reproductive health and rights and providing survivors with access to mental health
care and legal services.
Regrettably, and despite the Secretary-General’s call for global ceasefire one
year ago, these commitments have been particularly hindered by the coronavirus
disease pandemic.
It is instrumental to improve the training of military and security forces on the
ground in preventing and responding to conflict-related sexual violence.
Portugal has a holistic approach to the women and peace and security
agenda based on the promotion of gender equality, the inclusion of women in
conflict prevention, the training of armed forces and the fight against gender and
sexual violence. We look forward to the outcomes of this open debate, which is an
opportunity to strengthen our commitment to fight the impunity enjoyed by the
perpetrators of these dreadful crimes.

116/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Annex 59
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Qatar to the
United Nations, Alya Ahmed Saif Al-Thani
[Original: Arabic]
I would like to congratulate your country on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council this month, and I thank you for convening this important debate.
I also thank the participants for their important briefings and for their efforts to
provide support and assistance to victims of sexual violence in conflict.
This meeting is taking place against the backdrop of the challenges faced
by women as a result of the global health crisis, in addition to other increasingly
complex challenges that are exacerbated by the increase in conflicts. Women and
girls pay the highest price.
Qatar believes that it is especially important to prevent sexual violence in
conflict, as the issue is closely related to the promotion and protection of human
rights — a top Government priority — and to its efforts to prevent and resolve
conflicts and promote international peace and security, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations.
Preventing sexual violence in conflict necessitates proactive steps to empower
women at every stage, before and after conflict, including by ensuring that they are
able to participate fully and actively in political, economic and social life. We stress
that the international community must devote greater attention to enabling women
to participate in peace processes and negotiations, thereby promoting the desired
outcomes and ensuring that those outcomes are sustainable, as borne out by the
global study on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). It is also necessary to
give the particular needs of women and girl victims of sexual violence pride of place
in peace agreements.
That is why Qatar takes into account the needs and role of women and girls
as target demographic groups in the many international development and relief
programmes that it carries out in conflict zones around the world. In that connection,
Qatar contributed actively to organizing the first International Symposium on Youth
Participation in Peace Processes, which was held in Helsinki in 2019. It will also
host the High-Level Global Conference on Comprehensive Peace Paths for Youth, to
be held in Doha in 2022 in collaboration with Finland, Colombia, the Office of the
Envoy of the Secretary-General on Youth, and the Education Above All Foundation
in Qatar. The Conference will focus on the participation of young women in peace
processes. In order to achieve the Conference’s stated goal, we, as host country, have
taken gender equality into consideration at every stage of our preparations for the
Conference so as to ensure implementation and follow-up of its outcomes. We are
very hopeful that the active participation of young women in the Conference will
help bring forth a new generation that will pave the way for women to participate
widely in peace processes and prevent sexual violence in conflict situations.
The involvement of women contributes to the success of conflict resolution
through mediation. We are convinced that protecting the rights of women and girls
and promoting the advancement of women and their active participation in society
should be an essential part of any agreement.
In that connection, as a major sponsor of the Afghan dialogue aimed at
achieving peace and stability, my country was determined, in coordination with the
parties participating in the dialogue, to involve women in the Afghan peace talks
held in Doha in September 2020. A number of women members of the negotiating
21-05261117/140

S/2021/375

team of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan participated in those talks. Similarly, at
the July 2019 negotiations in Doha, women participants played an important role and
contributed significantly to fostering an environment conducive to fruitful dialogue.
In conclusion, I reiterate that Qatar is committed to continue cooperating
with all stakeholders on the women and peace and security agenda at the national,
regional and international levels, with a view to providing the support needed to
implement that agenda on the ground, with a view to fostering sustainable peace and
security worldwide.

118/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Annex 60
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Korea to the United Nations, Cho Hyun
The Republic of Korea aligns itself with the joint statement of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security (annex 28) and has the honour to submit this
statement in its national capacity.
At the outset, my delegation commends you for convening today’s timely
open debate and expresses its deep appreciation to the briefers for sharing their
valuable insights. We also welcome the most recent report of the Secretary-General
on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2021/312) and reiterate our full support for Ms.
Pramila Patten, Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence
in Conflict.
As the Secretary-General’s report has rightly points out, “[t]he current pandemic
is a gendered crisis” (S/2021/312, para. 4). Its disproportionate socioeconomic
impacts on women and girls have exacerbated their suffering, casting a grim shadow
on the women and peace and security agenda. We are faced with heightened risk of
sexual violence and gender inequality, while the voices and needs of survivors are
increasingly overlooked or forgotten altogether. Now more than ever, our concerted
effort is required to maintain our hard-won gains in this critical sphere.
Against this troubling backdrop, the Republic of Korea would like to highlight
the following three points.
First, a survivor-centred approach, as outlined in resolution 2467 (2019),
is key to preventing and responding to conflict-related sexual violence. We must
ensure that survivors of sexual violence receive non-discriminatory access to all the
services they need, such as sexual and reproductive health-care services and mental
and psychosocial support.
In accordance with its Action with Women and Peace Initiative, the Republic
of Korea proudly hosted the second International Conference last November, with
a particular focus on a survivor-centered approach. Also, my Government has been
participating in the Global Fund for Survivors of Conflict-Related Sexual Violence
as one of its board members and will continue our contributions to the Fund.
Secondly, we need to elevate our sustained efforts to ensure accountability
and end impunity. We are deeply concerned that sexual violence continues to be
employed as a tactic of war and terrorism in settings where security and humanitarian
crises overlap in many parts of the world. For instance, the Secretary-General’s
report presents allegations of over 100 rape cases in the Tigray region in Ethiopia,
including reports of sexual violence against women and girls in refugee camps. This
abhorrent violation of human rights is simply unacceptable. We take note that the
Ethiopian Government has reiterated its zero-tolerance policy on sexual violence and
look forward to a heightened effort to investigate and hold perpetrators accountable.
Last but not least, gender perspectives must be incorporated in the entire peace
continuum. In particular, peacekeeping missions must fully take into account gender
mainstreaming across all mission activities at all stages. In that connection, we fully
support the role of women protection advisers and monitoring arrangements on
conflict-related sexual violence in the field. We also strongly support the important
role of gender advisers and gender focal points in peacekeeping operations,
highlighting their impact on incorporating gender perspectives throughout the
mission activities.
Furthermore, we need to step up our efforts to increase the number of women
in peacekeeping operations and to ensure safe, enabling and gender-sensitive
21-05261119/140

S/2021/375

environments. To that end, the Republic of Korea has been making efforts to
increase the number of women military observers and staff officers serving in
United Nations peace operations to 25 per cent by 2028, in line with the SecretaryGeneral’s Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy 2018-2028. The Republic of Korea
believes that the upcoming 2021 Peacekeeping Ministerial, which will be held in
Seoul this December, will be a great opportunity to discuss further advancing the
women and peace and security agenda.
The implementation of the women and peace and security agenda, including
preventing and responding to conflict-related sexual violence, has a very special
meaning for the Republic of Korea. We will continue to endeavour to restore the
honour and dignity of the so-called comfort women victims and survivors and to
turn their painful experience into a historical lesson to prevent conflict-related
sexual violence.
In 2014, the Republic of Korea established its first national action plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We are pleased to announce that the third
national action plan, for the period from 2021 to 2023, has recently been established.
We will continue to spare no effort to advancing the women and peace and security
agenda in all its pillars moving forward.

120/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Annex 61
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Slovakia to the
United Nations, Michal Mlynár
Slovakia aligns itself with the statement submitted on behalf of the European
Union (annex 37).
Allow me to express my gratitude for the organization of this open debate
on sexual violence in conflict. As conflicts continue to rage in various parts of
the globe, innocent civilians are faced with unbearable suffering. Acts of sexual
violence constitute extraordinarily appalling atrocities against civilians, targeted
mostly against women and girls. The international community, while addressing the
broader issue of attacks against civilians, must focus on the issue of sexual violence
in conflict. This timely debate can contribute to that end.
My delegation shares and supports the Secretary-General’s view that all
approaches to conflict prevention and resolution, as well as recovery efforts, must
put at their core women’s full, equal and meaningful participation and rights,
including respect for bodily autonomy. We stress the importance of a holistic
approach, including the need to address conflict-related sexual violence as part of
the women and peace and security agenda and not only to encompass prevention
and protection from conflict-related sexual and gender-based violence but also to
emphasize the importance of the equitable and meaningful participation of women
in the achievement of peace and security.
The use of sexual violence as a weapon of war and the wider effects of
conflict-related sexual violence echo across communities and generations. It is the
responsibility of all States to support and assist survivors and to hold perpetrators
to account. It is unacceptable that perpetrators of conflict-related sexual violence,
from both States and non-State armed groups, should be allowed to continue to live
in impunity. Full accountability for such crimes is one important factor in bringing
justice to victims. Slovakia supports zero tolerance on all accounts.
In that regard, my delegation commends the leadership of the SecretaryGeneral, as well as his commitment to this important agenda. We fully supported
the launching, in 2017, of the Circle of Leadership on the prevention of and response
to sexual exploitation and abuse in United Nations operations, of which the President
of the Slovak Republic, Her Excellency Zuzana Čaputová, is a proud member.
Pursuant to the recently published Action for Peacekeeping Plus priorities for
2021-2023, the accountability of peacekeepers and all members of United Nations
operations and missions to the populations whom they serve is a crucial component
of our commitment to protecting and maintaining a violence-free environment.
Effective prevention and implementation of misconduct risk management tools,
together with a zero-tolerance policy towards sexual-based violence, are effective
tools to mitigate the threat of sexual-based violence by members of missions.
In line with the latest recommendations of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, we would like to emphasize the need to prioritize the
prevention of and response to sexual-based violence, including sexual violence
in conflict, as an important component of the protection-of-civilian mandates.
Women peacekeepers play a positive role in the protection of civilians, including in
preventing and responding to sexual violence in conflict.
Turning to the 2020 report of the Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual
violence (S/2021/312), Slovakia thanks the Secretary-General for this report, which
highlights relevant trends and developments and contains a set of wide-ranging
pertinent recommendations. Those recommendations include the demand for a
21-05261121/140

S/2021/375

complete cessation, with immediate effect, of all acts of sexual violence by all parties
to armed conflict, the inclusion of sexual violence in sanctions designations and
accountability, including by referring situations to the International Criminal Court.
We believe that the Security Council, as well as individual States and international
organizations, should deliberate and act upon those recommendations.
I wish to reiterate the importance of having gender-sensitive security sector
reform strategies throughout their planning, design, implementation, monitoring
and evaluation phases. We believe that Member States should redouble their efforts
related to security sector reform not only to address but also to prevent sexual and
gender-based violence. Where and as mandated, host State efforts to strengthen
justice and accountability within security sector reform and implement survivorcentred approaches for the prevention of and response to sexual violence in conflict
should be supported.
The limited participation of women in the security sector institutions continues
to impact the capacity of Governments to effectively prevent conflicts and respond
to the security needs of all members of their population. Therefore, the promotion
of women’s meaningful participation in the security sector is critical in efforts to
build inclusive, accountable and legitimate institutions for sustainable peace and
development.
In conclusion, the whole world is currently facing a surge of unprecedented
crises engendered by the coronavirus disease pandemic, which continues to have a
grave impact on women and girls, both within and outside conflicts. The international
community must come together to tackle those challenges. Civilians, among them
women and girls, are paying the highest price, facing systematic violence and
oppression. We need to redouble our efforts to deliver changes on the ground in
favour of women, girls and societies in regions affected by conflict.

122/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Annex 62
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Slovenia to the
United Nations
We wish to thank the Vietnamese presidency for organizing this debate and
the invited speakers for their briefings and testimony. Slovenia aligns itself with the
statements submitted on behalf of the European Union (annex 37) and the Group
of Friends of Women, Peace and Security (annex 28). We would like to make some
additional remarks in our national capacity.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has exacerbated gender
inequalities, which has also led to a global surge in sexual and gender-based violence
as a shadow pandemic. With additional barriers to access to shelters, clinics, redress
and reporting, the pandemic has highlighted the imperative of a survivor-centred
approach to sexual and gender-based violence, which must become an integral part
of the COVID-19 response and recovery efforts. That inherently demands women’s
and survivors’ full, meaningful and inclusive participation in decision-making
processes. Access to sexual and reproductive health and rights and psychosocial
and economic support must be part of the comprehensive rights-based support and
assistance to victims and survivors of sexual and gender-based violence, including
sexual violence in conflict.
In its resolutions, the Security Council condemned sexual violence in conflict
and affirmed that it presents a threat to international peace and security when used
as a tactic of war. We are appalled by the persistence of sexual violence in conflict
and the low level of compliance by parties to conflict reflected in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2021/312). It is particularly alarming that parties to armed
conflict continue to use sexual violence as a tactic of war and political pressure to
advance their objectives.
To achieve lasting and durable peace, the prohibition of sexual violence is a
must, and impunity for such acts cannot be an option. International mechanisms, such
as the International Criminal Court, play an important role in that regard. Slovenia
supports initiatives that aim to strengthen international criminal law, policies and
practices to address sexual violence in conflict more effectively. In that respect,
Slovenia supports the Hague Principles on Sexual Violence in order to enhance the
understanding of what constitutes an act of sexual violence in conflict from the
perspective of its survivors.
We are encouraged by the positive developments indicated in the SecretaryGeneral report, particularly the cases of conviction of perpetrators of sexual violence
by national courts. Slovenia continues to support the calls and recommendations to
the Security Council to integrate conflict-related sexual violence into the work of
its sanctions committees by designating sexual violence as a stand-alone criterion to
sexual violence for sanctions.
For the period of 2021-2025, Slovenia reaffirms its commitments to the global
initiative Call to Action on Protection from Gender-Based Violence in Emergencies.
Slovenia is committed to advocating for the inclusion of gender equality, prevention
and response to gender-based violence.
Slovenia continues to finance projects on gender-based violence in
emergencies. Gender-based violence prevention is included in project design and
reporting for the majority of humanitarian projects funded by the Government of
Slovenia. For the period of 2020-2022, we have earmarked €400,000 to support
two humanitarian projects, selected at the public tender for non-governmental
organization proposals focusing on gender-based violence and raising awareness of
21-05261123/140

S/2021/375

child marriages in Lebanon. Slovenia also supports the Response to Sexual Violence
of the International Committee of the Red Cross for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, for which we pledged a multiannual contribution in 2019.
Revealing the full impact of gender inequalities, the coronavirus disease
pandemic has demonstrated the devastating consequences of unfulfilled
commitments. It has threatened the progress that we have achieved so far. A gendertransformative recovery, with women’s full and meaningful participation and
leadership, must be at the forefront of our efforts to build a more equal violence- and
impunity-free world.

124/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Annex 63
Statement by the Permanent Representative of South Africa to the
United Nations, Mathu Joyini
We wish to thank Viet Nam for convening this annual debate on women and
peace and security: conflict-related sexual violence, which provides the Security
Council an opportunity to take stock of progress made in the implementation of
decisions taken to address the scourge of conflict-related sexual violence.
The advent of the global coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic threatened
the progress made by the entire United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in addressing conflict-related sexual violence. We regret that acts of
sexual violence against women and girls persist in both conflict and post-conflict
situations and have also become a tactic in the strategic objectives and ideology of
certain terrorist groups. As noted in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2021/312), the
prevailing COVID-19 situation has unfortunately revealed the existing gaps in our
efforts to curb sexual violence in conflict and to attend to the needs of victims and
survivors of such crimes.
Women and girls in conflict situations, particularly refugees and those
internally displaced, have become more vulnerable to sexual violence during the
pandemic. We are concerned by the reported harmful coping mechanisms by some at
internally displaced settings that have resulted in an increase in sexual exploitation
and child marriages. Moreover, we are concerned that the pandemic has in some
situations resulted in the closure of safety shelters and clinics being repurposed
for the COVID-19 response. That makes it more challenging for affected women to
receive necessary services and support, especially access to sexual and reproductive
health services. Such developments further illustrate the severity of the plight of
women and girls in conflict situations.
The continued existing and emerging challenges to women have led to the
recently concluded sixty-fifth session of the Commission on the Status of Women
to focus on “women’s full and effective participation and decision-making in public
life, as well as the elimination of violence, for achieving gender equality and the
empowerment of all women and girls”. This theme resonates and aptly captures the
spirit of our discussion today because the pursuit of gender equality and women’s
empowerment is vital to addressing many challenges faced by women, including
sexual violence.
We wish to focus our statement on the following two points: first, progress,
achievements and best practices; and, secondly, challenges and the way forward.
In terms of progress, achievements and best practices, South Africa believes
that, over the past 20 years, the Security Council has developed a robust normative
framework on women and peace and security that includes fighting the scourge
of conflict-related sexual violence. It is commendable that most peace operations
mandated by the Security Council include addressing sexual violence, in line with
that normative framework.
We recognize that the gap is not the lack of a normative framework, but rather
one of implementation. Resolution 2493 (2019), which was unanimously adopted
by the Security Council in October 2019, reinforces the need to fully implement
all resolutions on women and peace and security, including conflict-related sexual
violence. Through that normative framework, we acknowledge that notable progress
has been made in improving the international response to conflict-related sexual
violence, even during the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, since the adoption of
resolution 2467 (2019), a survivor-centred approach has been embraced to address
the plight of victims of sexual violence.
21-05261125/140

S/2021/375

Civil society and women’s organizations are playing a greater role in advocating
for the rights of victims and survivors of sexual violence. Women protection networks
and women’s organizations, in collaboration with the national authorities and the
international community, are positively contributing to providing necessary support
to the survivors of sexual violence because of their outreach abilities, especially in
local communities and in remote areas. In that context, the Security Council has
increasingly been inviting those role players to its meetings to exchange views on
matters concerning women, which is a positive development. Our ability to utilize
virtual briefings for such engagements has also been a positive development.
We also recognize the vital role of women’s protection advisers in United
Nations peace operations, contributing primarily to developing and enhancing
the monitoring and analysis of conflict-related sexual violence trends, as well as
providing responses when required. Innovative ways such as one-stop centres to
address structural challenges to providing services to victims and survivors,
particularly during the pandemic, have proven useful for accessing services. While
we recognize the use of virtual platforms to provide some services to survivors
during the pandemic, a balanced approach is necessary, as some services must be
provided in-person rather than virtually.
With respect to accountability, we commend the work of the Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict as outlined in the report of
the Secretary-General for assisting national authorities in building institutional
safeguards against impunity, as part of broader efforts to reinforce the rule of law,
which is critical to addressing the needs of the survivors of sexual violence. We thus
note the progress made in some of the countries affected, such as the successful
prosecutions of the perpetrators of those heinous crimes through courts, mobile
courts and mobile military courts. The latter are best practices that can be replicated
in other situations where there is lack of capacity, access and coverage.
South Africa also commends the progress that the Security Council is making
on increasingly listing and designating for targeted sanctions perpetrators of the
use of sexual violence in conflict, as evidenced by the recent listings of implicated
parties in the Central African Republic and Yemen.
South Africa notes that the joint field missions to affected countries by the
United Nations and regional organizations convey a positive message of solidarity
and support to the women and children affected by conflict. Over the past few years,
the joint missions have been one of the effective initiatives of the United Nations
and the African Union’s Office of the Special Envoy on Women, Peace and Security.
As a way forward to existing challenges, we propose the following.
In terms of prevention and protection, there is a need to improve threat analysis
and early warning in order to inform responses to counter acts of sexual violence in
situations of conflict.
Since the work of the United Nations and other humanitarian service providers
is contingent on the availability of financial resources, it is imperative to address the
impact of COVID-19, particularly its diversion of resources from conflict-related
sexual violence programmes and activities. Therefore, South Africa supports the
recommendation of the Secretary-General for Member States to address chronic
funding shortfalls for combating conflict-related sexual violence by providing
predictable financial support to the conflict-related sexual violence multi-partner
trust fund.
We urge the international community to find innovative ways to address
persisting barriers to the fight against sexual violence that deter victims from
reporting these crimes, such as victim-blaming, stigmatization, fear of reprisals, a
126/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

culture of impunity and lack of provision of medical, legal and psychosocial services
by national authorities and institutions, mostly affected by lack of finances to provide
free access to these services, especially legal representation for women.
We also wish to underline the importance of supporting inclusive national
ownership of processes concerning justice, accountability and redress for those
crimes consistent with international human rights law and international humanitarian
law. The primary objective is to build trust and confidence between the national
authorities and institutions and the survivors as well as the population. That will
help to address the needs of victims such as rehabilitation, justice and reintegration.
South Africa believes that it should be mandatory for survivors in conflict and
post-conflict situations to access comprehensive medical, psychosocial and legal
services. Mobile service centres could be a possibility in order to ameliorate access
and coverage challenges.
We further believe that it is important to attend to the information gap that
exists as raised in the report of the Secretary-General. In that context, we encourage
the United Nations to improve its communication strategies to raise awareness about
the availability and accessibility of the services it provides to survivors of conflictrelated sexual violence.
South Africa also believes that the perpetrators of sexual violence must be held
accountable for their crimes and brought to justice. More attention should therefore
be given to strengthening investigation and prosecution capacities in the countries
affected for victims to receive justice.
We underline the need for regional cooperation, including cross-border
monitoring and response capabilities, to address cross-border and cross-regional
conflict situations where women and girls are also targeted for acts of sexual violence.
The issue of children born of sexual violence remains of concern. In that
regard, we look forward to receiving the special report on the plight and rights of
children born of conflict-related sexual violence and their mothers.
We wish to conclude by reiterating our request for the annual report of the
Secretary-General to also include information on sexual violence in situations of
occupation such as in Western Sahara and Palestine. It is a glaring omission in the
report that the situation of women in these situations, which are items on the agenda
of the Security Council, are not reflected therein.

21-05261127/140

S/2021/375

Annex 64
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Spain to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
Spain aligns itself with the statements made by the European Union (annex 37)
and the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security. It also welcomes the fact
that for the first time the United Nations LGBTI Core Group is delivering a statement
before the Security Council (annex 70); Spain fully subscribes thereto.
Spain congratulates Viet Nam on having convened this important open debate,
especially in a year in which we still have clearly in mind the twentieth anniversary
of resolution 1325 (2000) and in which sexual violence has increased as a result of
the pandemic. We welcome the report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/312) and his
calls for commitment and action. In that respect, Spain will continue to support the
mandate of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence
in Conflict, Pramila Patten.
Spain is a pioneer in the implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda with respect to its fundamental pillars of participation, prevention and
protection. The prevention and eradication of sexual violence in conflict situations
and the fight against impunity are elements key to advancing with respect to all
pillars, including the full and effective participation of women in all their diversity in
peace processes and at all stages of conflict resolution. The vulnerability of women
and girls in armed conflict and their exposure to all forms of sexual and genderbased violence in conflict requires us to remain especially vigilant and proactive and
to defend the sexual and reproductive rights of all women and girls.
For that reason, Spain incorporates that priority in its feminist foreign policy,
which makes gender equality and the rights of all women and girls a central objective
of all its efforts. Through its principles and priority lines of action, Spain will
support the fight against impunity for crimes of sexual violence, promoting both
the involvement of the competent international courts and the adoption of sanctions
when appropriate.
We are convinced of the importance of having robust regulatory frameworks
against sexual violence that guarantee the effective implementation of mechanisms
for the persecution and protection of victims, as well as reparations. The coronavirus
disease and its impact on the increase in violence against women and girls make it
more necessary than ever to have a renewed commitment by countries, international
organizations and other actors in the international community. The declaration of
assistance and protection services as essential services, the support of individuals
and organizations that provide assistance to victims, and the strengthening of
international, regional and national justice and accountability systems are actions
that must be taken urgently.
For all the aforementioned reasons, and in keeping with our country’s internal
policies, Spain has bolstered its commitments in that area through its second national
plan for women, peace and security, the future humanitarian diplomacy plan, Spanish
cooperation and humanitarian action programmes, including the fresh commitments
made by Spain in the framework of the Call to Action to combat sexual violence.
Multilateralism is the most effective framework for fighting sexual violence
and ensuring lasting peacebuilding. Spain supported the declaration on strengthened
multilateralism on the occasion of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United
Nations based on the firm conviction that multilateralism is the best way to make
progress in eradicating all forms of violence. The creation in 2020 of a Group of
Friends for the elimination of violence against women, of which Spain is a part, is
a step in that direction.
128/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Annex 65
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Switzerland to the
United Nations, Pascale Baeriswyl
Switzerland thanks Viet Nam for having organized this debate and the
speakers for their contributions.
We are concerned about sexual violence in conflicts around the world.
While the majority of survivors of sexual violence are women and girls, men and
boys also suffer from such violence, as recognized in resolution 2467 (2019). The
stigmatization and exclusion of victims can lead to even more unreported cases. As
Nobel Peace Prize laureates Dr. Denis Mukwege and Nadia Murad jointly told the
Council ahead of the adoption of resolution 2467 (2019),
“without the will of the international community and imposed consequences,
[these] crimes will continue to be perpetrated”.
Switzerland would like to highlight three priorities that should guide the
collective mobilization against sexual violence and its consequences.
First, we must take a community-based approach when taking care of survivors
of sexual violence, including children born of rape. The rights and needs of survivors,
including their sexual and reproductive health and rights, must be central to our
actions. Switzerland concretely supports the strengthening of community networks
and networks of solidarity with those affected, for example in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in the Great Lakes region. In accordance with resolution
2467 (2019), we call for support for all community-based prevention and response
efforts, in particular those of civil society and local organizations.
Secondly, we must address the persistent lack of accountability at the national
and international levels for sexual violence in conflict. Switzerland supports the
efforts of the International Criminal Court to combat impunity for sexual and
gender-based crimes. Switzerland also collaborates with national actors to facilitate
access to justice for survivors in order to enable them to play a role in preventing and
combating sexual violence in conflict. We call on the Security Council to pursue the
fight against impunity with all means at its disposal.
Thirdly, we must urgently address the challenges of preventing and combating
sexual violence in conflict, which have been exacerbated by the coronavirus disease
pandemic. Switzerland urges all parties to armed conflict to respect and ensure
respect for the prohibition of rape and other forms of sexual violence, in accordance
with international humanitarian law, human rights law and resolution 2532 (2020).
It supports the appeal made by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict and her tireless efforts while stressing that Member
States have the primary responsibility to protect all persons from acts of sexual
violence. Switzerland welcomes the various provisions in resolutions 2532 (2020)
and 2565 (2021) in that respect but calls on the Security Council to engage more
systematically in monitoring the implementation of those resolutions, including in
the context of the geographical situations on its agenda.
Furthermore, we would also refer to the declaration of the Group of Friends of
Women, Peace and Security.

21-05261129/140

S/2021/375

Annex 66
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Turkey to the United Nations
At the outset, we would like to thank Viet Nam for having convened today’s
open debate, which enables us to assess the progress made in addressing the scourge
of sexual violence in armed conflict and the challenges that emerge or continue to
require the attention of the international community.
We would also like to express our appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his latest report (S/2021/312), Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Patten for her valuable briefing and other briefers for their insightful presentations.
Over the years, Member States, the United Nations system and the international
community have taken important steps to prevent and respond to sexual violence
in conflict. Global awareness about the effects of armed conflict on women has
increased, in particular with the adoption of the ground-breaking Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) and all other subsequent resolutions and decisions on women
and peace and security. Through those outcomes, the Security Council has recognized
that sexual violence constitutes a threat to international peace and security when
used systematically as a tactic of war.
Despite that encouraging progress, however, conflict-related sexual violence
continues to be widespread and employed as a tactic of war, torture and terrorism.
In his latest report, the Secretary-General once again points to the large
number of cases of sexual violence globally. The report also reveals that at a time
when the Secretary-General has called for a global ceasefire to focus on defeating
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), the pandemic has amplified gender-based
inequality and given rise to new protection concerns for women and girls while
making access to essential services even more challenging for survivors. Lockdowns
have exacerbated existing structural, institutional and sociocultural barriers to
reporting sexual violence in conflict.
Turkey strongly condemns sexual violence in conflict, which has consequences
for all affected. In addition to its devastating impact on survivors, it has broad and
long-lasting effect on communities and societies as a whole for generations.
Our responsibility must be to bring justice, recognition and reparations to the
survivors of those horrendous crimes. The Secretary-General rightfully identifies
accountability for crimes of conflict-related sexual violence as a key element of his
prevention strategy.
Sexual and gender-based violence has been a constant feature of the conflict
in Syria since its inception. Unfortunately, millions of Syrians, particularly women
and girls, continue to live under the threat of sexual violence.
In depicting the disturbing nature of the sexual violence carried out in Syria,
it is essential to refrain from employing a selective and restraining approach towards
sampling. That is particularly important in order to avoid creating the impression
that the international community could overlook the sexual violence committed
by certain groups. In that vein, we would like to recall the fact that the Kurdistan
Workers’ Party (PKK)/Partiya Yekitiya Demokrat (PYD)/ People’s Protection Units
(YPG) terrorist organizations resort to torture and sexual violence in the detention
centres in areas under their control, as confirmed in the past by independent
organizations and United Nations investigative bodies.
Another word of caution is necessary regarding the explicit referral to the
PKK/YPG-affiliated, separatist, self-proclaimed entity in north-east Syria as “The
Autonomous Administration of North and East Syria” in paragraph 57 of the annual
130/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

report. That entity is closely linked to the PKK/YPG terrorist organization, which,
in pursuit of its separatist agenda, is undermining the principle of territorial integrity
of Syria, contrary to the relevant Security Council resolutions on Syria, including
resolution 2254 (2015). In that respect, it is important to avoid such wording in United
Nations reports, which not only contravenes Security Council resolutions but could
also be abused by the terrorist entity for legitimacy to enhance its separatist agenda.
As a neighbouring country that has opened its doors to Syrians fleeing war
and violence in their own country, Turkey now hosts close to 4 million Syrians,
of whom approximately 1.7 million are women. Turkey is making every effort to
provide security and safety to Syrian women and girls who have fled the conflict in
Syria. We attach utmost importance to their empowerment and self-reliance as well
as to their protection from sexual and gender-based violence.
Since 2014, psychological and social support has been provided to a large
number of refugees to ensure their adaptation to our country and access to services.
In addition to benefiting from the same health-care services provided to Turkish
citizens, refugee women who are victims of violence are protected subject to
the taking of required legal steps. All women seeking asylum in Turkey who are
identified as victims of violence have the right to stay in women’s shelters. They also
receive assistance from violence-prevention and monitoring centres.
We will also continue to support reconstruction and rehabilitation efforts for
Turkmen, Yazidi, Shabak and Christian Iraqi victims of Da’esh. In this respect, we
welcome the Yazidi Women Survivors Law that was recently enacted in Iraq.
As mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report, in October 2020, under the
auspices of the United Nations, the federal and Kurdistan Regional Governments
signed an agreement to provide security and services to facilitate the return of
Yazidis to Sinjar. A precondition for this return is the full and proper implementation
of the Sinjar agreement to normalize the situation and provide sustainable stability
in Sinjar. So far, regrettably, no concrete progress has been achieved, either in
the return of Yazidis to Sinjar or for the establishment of local security forces, as
envisaged in the agreement. The cause of this delay is the armed resistance of the
PKK terrorist organization and its affiliates. The deadlock that prolongs the plight
of Yazidis is therefore still in place.
It should be borne in mind that although considerable legislative actions are
under way to redress social fractures in the aftermath of Da’esh, the current delicate
situation on the ground thwarts progress. Legislative steps can only become effective
and meaningful once Yazidis and other local communities are able to return safely to
their ancestral lands. To this end, the international community’s solidarity is required
to confront the PKK terrorist organization, which is no less brutal than Da’esh. To
add insult to injury, there are reportedly ex-Da’esh members operating within PKKaffiliated Sinjar Resistance Units in Sinjar, causing new trauma for Da’esh victims
in the region. To fully normalize the situation on the ground, Yazidis must return
freely to their homes in Sinjar, and the PKK should be eradicated from the region
and from Iraq as a whole.
We appreciate the valuable United Nations efforts aimed at acknowledging
cases of conflict-related sexual violence in all parts of Libya. At the same time, we
should stress that the underreporting is a far graver issue for eastern Libya than other
parts of the country, owing to lack of institutional monitoring mechanisms in the
region. In this respect, it may also be useful to highlight the particular difficulties
that international organizations and non-governmental organizations have faced in
reporting cases of sexual violence.
The militia problem that has been kept up by the warlord Haftar is a systemic
issue in eastern Libya, and there have been a considerable number of reports on
21-05261131/140

S/2021/375

sexual violence committed by these armed militias. In this regard, reporting
violations by these armed groups and underscoring the militia problem are important
for preventing similar cases from happening in future.
It is also worth underlining that the atmosphere of fear in eastern Libya, as
in many other conflict areas, is nurtured by the killing of women’s rights activists.
One example is Hanan Al-Barassi, an outspoken critic of sexual violence and rape
against women by armed groups in eastern Libya, who was assassinated in Benghazi
on 10 November 2020.
The findings of the report of the Secretary-General on the situation of Rohingya
Muslims in Myanmar not only reminds us of the widespread and systematic brutal
attacks, including sexual violence, against the Rohingya community in previous
years, but also indicates that their plight persists. The ongoing displacement and
discrimination and the significant risks of sexual violence against Rohingya women
and children in camps have also been exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemicrelated restrictions.
The involvement of the Myanmar army in sexual violence is worrisome. The
lack of accountability and independent investigation as well as denial of access for
international mechanisms further hamper the collective efforts to address conflictrelated sexual violence in the country. Therefore, we expect the full implementation
of the joint communiqué signed in 2018 between the Government of Myanmar and
the United Nations to prevent and address conflict-related sexual violence.
Myanmar must address the root causes of the problem in Rakhine state
and create the conditions necessary for peaceful coexistence and the safe return
of refugees. We welcome the provisional measures announced by the International
Court of Justice on 23 January 2020 and expect full compliance with these measures
as well as due reporting on the allegations of sexual violence against the Rohingya.
The increasing number of protracted conflicts, forced displacements and
humanitarian emergencies in the world create an environment conducive to the
trafficking of women and girls. Trafficking often involves sexual violence and
exploitation. As many traffickers have taken advantage of the emergence of COVID-19
to expand their criminal activities, the situation is more serious today than ever.
The Secretary-General’s report also confirms the nexus between sexual violence,
conflict-driven human trafficking in persons and violent extremism. Turkey attaches
utmost importance to the fight against human trafficking, which constitutes a serious
violation of human rights and an offence to human dignity and integrity.
With that understanding, we fully support all international cooperation
mechanisms in combating human trafficking. We are taking all necessary measures
for effective implementation of the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto. Furthermore, in December 2019, human
trafficking was included as part of the “catalogue crimes” in the Turkish code of
criminal procedure, which has considerably strengthened the judicial processes for
tackling the crime.
The effective and resolute response to conflict-related sexual violence
requires, inter alia, the empowerment of women and girls, the promotion of gender
equality and ensuring access to justice and accountability for these crimes. It also
necessitates the political will and concerted action of the international community
as a whole.
I would like to conclude by underscoring that Turkey remains determined to
continue contributing to international efforts aimed at addressing this challenge.

132/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Annex 67
Statement by Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the
United Nations, Sergiy Kyslytsya
Ukraine aligns itself with the statements made on behalf of the European
Union (annex 37) and of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security (annex
28), respectively.
Let me express my appreciation to the Vietnamese presidency of the Security
Council for convening today’s open debate on sexual violence in conflict. I also want
to thank the Secretary-General for preparing the report on conflict-related sexual
violence (S/2021/312), which covers the period from January to December 2020.
At the outset, I would like to reaffirm Ukraine’s commitment to the zerotolerance policy with regard to all forms of sexual violence. We stand in solidarity
with victims and survivors of such crimes. Last year, we commemorated the most
important documentary milestones in the history of the women and peace and security
agenda, namely, the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000)
on women and peace and security, and the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption
of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, whose significance we cannot
underestimate. Unfortunately, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has
brought additional challenges to the global security environment and only worsened
the situation by adding to existing international problems. It is therefore significant
that the Secretary-General highlighted in his recent report that
“COVID-19 gave rise to new, gender-specific protection concerns linked
with: militarization, as well as checkpoint and border closures, which
restricted the operating space for women’s organizations; sexual harassment
of women health-care workers and women in isolation and treatment centres;
and sexual violence against women detained for alleged curfew violations”
(S/2021/312, para. 3).
We are deeply convinced that such forms of sexual violence as rape, sexual
slavery, forced prostitution, forced pregnancy, forced abortion, forced marriage,
enforced sterilization or any other form of sexual violence of comparable gravity
perpetrated against women, girls, men or boys are directly or indirectly linked to a
conflict. It must therefore be a matter of our concern and immediate response. We
call on the Secretary-General to preserve the issue of investigations and prosecutions
of all these violations as a priority matter.
Ukraine is ready to actively participate in collective efforts aimed at ensuring
that victims and survivors can access the comprehensive support they need to fully
recover from these violations and be able to reintegrate into their societies. Such
collective efforts should address the specific needs, perspectives and wishes of the
most vulnerable victims and survivors and those living with disabilities.
The report before us, which focuses on only 18 countries, reveals the
difficulties stemming from the underreporting of incidents as a result of intimidation
and stigmatization of survivors and of limited capacities of the United Nations staff.
We expect that future reports of the Secretary-General on the topic will be more
comprehensive and reflect situations in major conflict-affected zones and occupied
territories. In this regard, we fully support the Secretary-General’s recommendation
to continue to incorporate sexual violence as a stand-alone designation criterion for
sanctions, including when used as a tool of reprisal against women in public and
political life.
For Ukraine, the issue of promoting the women and peace and security agenda
has taken on new importance since 2014, which marked the beginning of an armed
21-05261133/140

S/2021/375

aggression of the Russian Federation against our country. We have faced seven years
of suffering and fighting for the protection of human rights and for prevention of all
forms of violations and discrimination. Russia’s armed aggression turned Ukraine
into the country with the world’s ninth largest number of internally displaced
persons: some 1.5 million people, 60 per cent of whom are women.
Protected populations in the occupied territories face intimidation, detention
and ill treatment, as well as physical and sexual violence. The occupied territories
have become home for discriminative practices and gender inequality. As reported
by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
on numerous occasions, the prison known as Izolyatsia in Donetsk stands as an
emblematic example of crimes being committed against detainees in the occupied
areas, including acts of sexual violence.
As a party to the conflict, Russia continues to destabilize Ukraine, especially
through actions in occupied areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, disregarding
the commitments it had made under the Minsk agreements. However, notwithstanding
the ongoing external aggression it was facing, Ukraine adopted, on the eve of the
twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace
and security, its second national action plan to implement this resolution, which
emphasizes the important role of women in peacebuilding and conflict resolution.
The new action plan was developed according to a results-oriented management
methodology.
The second action plan provides for the broad participation of various groups
of women in its implementation, including those that were not included in the first
action plan, namely, veterans, family members of the dead or missing, and women
in volunteer organizations. Furthermore, the second national action plan focuses
on achieving greater participation of women in decision-making, in particular in
national security and defence, peacebuilding and so on.
I would like to highlight the fact that women constitute 23.6 per cent of
Ukraine’s armed forces. This number has increased over 15-fold since 2008, from
1,800 to 29,760, of whom 900 are senior officers. Among these numbers, 15.2
per cent are military personnel, and 8.4 per cent are civilians. Of the personnel
defending Ukraine against Russia’s aggression, over 10 per cent are women. Woman
volunteers provide tangible support at the front line. Another Government priority
is the reintegration of veteran women, as they face difficulties when they return to
civilian life, including difficulties in finding employment, obtaining free medical
services and overcoming stereotypes commonly held by the public.
The Government of Ukraine has enhanced its efforts aimed at ensuring gender
equality and women’s empowerment in all spheres of public life, as well as necessary
support and reintegration for women victims of sexual violence as the result of the
ongoing foreign aggression.
Ukraine will continue its efforts aimed at promoting awareness of the women
and peace and security agenda and strengthening its implementation within the
United Nations, in particular to advance women’s rights and protect them from
sexual and gender-based violence.

134/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Annex 68
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the United Arab Emirates
to the United Nations
The United Arab Emirates thanks Viet Nam for organizing today’s open
debate, and also thanks Special Representative Pramila Patten and the other briefers
for their powerful insights.
It has now been more than 20 years since the Security Council, for the first
time, formally called on parties in conflict to protect women and girls from wartime
sexual violence. Nevertheless, the number of these crimes continues to rise, and
perpetrators still largely manage to escape accountability for their heinous actions.
With the coronavirus disease pandemic in its second year, the harrowing stories
and the frequency of these crimes have only increased. In this critical moment, the
prevention of conflict-related sexual violence should be at the heart of the work
the United Nations and its States Members. In war-torn countries, where social
distancing is considered a luxury and where lockdown measures have intensified,
women and girls have paid a heavy price.
In northern Syria, the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the
Syrian Arab Republic noted reports of at least 30 rapes in February 2020 alone. It can
only be assumed that the number of unidentified and unreported cases is considerably
higher. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo documented 1,053
cases of conflict-related sexual violence last year. In Yemen, sexual violence-related
crime, including sexual violence against men and boys perpetrated by the Houthis
or in Houthi-operated facilities, has been well documented. In Libya, the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya documented two incidents of kidnapping and
rape, including gang rape, of asylum seekers in May 2020. In the Central African
Republic, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic documented 240 cases of conflict-related sexual
violence, including 221 rapes or attempted rapes and 12 cases of sexual slavery.
Regrettably, conflict-related sexual violence seems to have become the norm
in today’s world. If the new normal means that women are brutally raped in their
homes and girls are sexually assaulted on their way to school, then it must be our
primary duty to change the status quo.
Thirteen years have passed since the adoption of resolution 1820 (2008),
which recognized that sexual violence can be used as a tactic of war. Since then,
States Members of the United Nations have been working tirelessly to ensure that
women and girls no longer have to fear for their safety. The United Arab Emirates
would like to share some of the efforts it has undertaken to that end.
At the outset, we are pleased to announce that in March this year the United
Arab Emirates formally launched its first national action plan for the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. Aligned with the
pillars of the women and peace and security agenda, the plan focuses on women’s
meaningful and effective participation in conflict prevention and peacebuilding, as
well as the protection of women from sexual and gender-based violence.
The United Arab Emirates is also committed to making progress globally.
We are proud to serve as a member of the Board of the Generation Equality Forum
Compact on Women, Peace and Security and Humanitarian Action. We were also
honoured to co-host both “End Sexual and Gender-Based Violence in Humanitarian
Crises” conferences, held in 2019 and 2020, which raised hundreds of millions of
dollars for programming, mostly for fragile and conflict settings. As part of the my
21-05261135/140

S/2021/375

country’s $10-million package on sexual and gender-based violence, we pledged $2
million in 2020 through the United Nations Population Fund to address the sexual
and gender-based violence experienced by the Rohingya Muslim minority, as well
as to enhance access to sexual and reproductive health services for victims of sexual
violence. Earlier this year, the United Arab Emirates also expanded its contribution
to Nadia’s Initiative in order to support the reconstruction of Sinjar and the voluntary
return of survivors of sexual violence in safety and dignity to their homeland. We
very much support its vision to empower the brave Yazidi women of Iraq.
The United Arab Emirates takes note of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2021/312), on conflict-related sexual violence, and would like to highlight several
recommendations.
First, we call on Member States to tackle the root causes of conflict-related
sexual violence, including structural gender inequality and harmful social norms that
lead to victim-blaming and the stigmatization of survivors. Fighting sexual violence
in the long run must go beyond merely responding to it — it also requires prevention.
Secondly, we must all work together to guarantee the full, equal and
meaningful participation of women, including girls and survivors of sexual violence,
in decision-making. The United Arab Emirates is pleased to announce that we will be
concluding an agreement with the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs
to undertake projects focusing on increasing women’s meaningful participation and
leadership in political processes.
Thirdly, with the assistance of the United Nations, we must work together
to guarantee that law enforcement agencies have the capacity and are equipped to
investigate, prosecute and adjudicate cases of conflict-related sexual violence, and
are empowered by law to do so. The United Arab Emirates calls on the Security
Council to devote more attention to sexual and gender-based violence, including
by inviting the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence
in Conflict to brief the Council more regularly and facilitating the effective
deployment of gender advisers and women’s protection advisers to United Nations
peace operations.
In conclusion, fighting sexual and gender-based violence will remain a key
priority for the United Arab Emirates during its term on the Security Council from
2022 to 2023.

136/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Annex 69
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Yemen to the
United Nations, Abdullah Al-Saadi
I thank you for convening this open debate on the very important subject of
sexual violence in conflict. I also wish to extend my thanks and gratitude to all the
briefers for their informative presentations.
As the world faces intersecting crises, the most vulnerable groups, namely
women and children, bear the brunt of conflicts and humanitarian crises as victims
of sexual violence, and suffer reduced access to health care and support services.
Globally, both in situations of conflict and peace, the pandemic has exacerbated
the disproportionate socioeconomic and childcare burden borne by women. That
burden is even higher in conflict situations like Yemen, where women face unique
security and socioeconomic challenges.
In Yemen, women’s rights, safety and public and political participation has
seen remarkable progress since the start of the transitional political process in 2012.
Since then, women have been at the heart of shaping the present and future of Yemen,
including through their meaningful involvement in the National Dialogue Conference,
which gathered 565 participants. Women met the 30 per cent participation quota set
for the Conference, and of the 17 members who drafted the Constitution of the new
federal State, four were women.
Unfortunately, the hard-won progress made in this area was partially halted,
and even reversed in some respects, following the coup of the Houthi militia in 2014.
In areas under Houthi control, women continue to be subjected to a full range of
threats and human rights violations and abuses by the Houthis, including arbitrary
detention, sexual violence, suppression of their rights to express their opinion, to
demonstrate and to demand the release of their family members imprisoned by the
Houthis. Further, the Houthi militias continue to target women, in particular, on
account of their activism against the militia’s practices. The Houthi militia have
detained hundreds of Yemeni women in private prisons and have subjected them to
various types of torture and violations, including rape and forced disappearance, as
documented by the Panel of Experts. In addition, many cases go unreported due to
fear of reprisals, stigma, pressure from the community or lack of services.
Most recently, in furtherance of their practices of terrorizing Yemeni women,
the Houthi militia abducted a young Yemeni model and actress due to the nature
of her job and detained her in a secret prison. On the heels of the death of Sultan
Zabin, who was recently subjected to Security Council sanctions, this heinous crime
confirms the systematic nature of Houthi oppression and crimes against women.
In that regard, the Government of Yemen calls on the international community,
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen and all women’s protection
organizations to play an active role in highlighting the challenges and violations
facing Yemeni women in Houthi-controlled areas, to show solidarity with them, to
condemn these outrageous Houthi crimes, to exert pressure on the Houthi terrorist
militia to stop using women for extortion and to unconditionally release all kidnapped
women held in their private prisons. Silence will only embolden the perpetrators.
For its part, the Government of Yemen has ratified international conventions
and protocols related to the protection of women’s rights and respect for international
humanitarian law, including international covenants to protect women during armed
conflict, and has also incorporated those rights into its national laws and legislative
framework so as to ensure rights for all, without gender discrimination, and to enable
women to contribute to the economic, social and cultural fields.
21-05261137/140

S/2021/375

In October, in line with the Government’s commitment to respecting human
rights and promoting the concepts of justice, equality and partnership, the Ministry
of Social Affairs and Labour adopted a national action plan for 2020 to 2022 in order
to implement the women and peace and security agenda. Among other things, the
plan focuses on implementing the provisions of resolution 1325 (2000), strengthening
partnerships with non-governmental organizations in order to combat extremism,
enhance women’s participation and empower them to play a meaningful role in
peacebuilding and conflict prevention.
Before I conclude, allow me to reiterate that although substantial progress has
been made, there is still much work to be done in the years ahead. The Government
of Yemen recognizes the important role of women in achieving a fair and sustainable
peace. In fact, in all previous United Nations-led peace talks, women have been
represented only in Government delegations. The Government continues to be
committed to protecting women, advancing their rights and ensuring their minimum
participation level of 30 per cent in all Government bodies, in accordance with the
outcomes of the National Dialogue Conference.

138/140

21-05261

S/2021/375

Annex 70
Statement by the United Nations LGBTI Core Group
[Original: English, French and Spanish]
On the occasion of this annual open debate on sexual violence in conflict, the
States members of the United Nations LGBTI Core Group are honoured to present a
written statement to the Security Council for the first time.
The LGBTI Core Group is an informal cross-regional group established in
2008. The group is co-chaired by Argentina and the Netherlands, and includes
Albania, Australia, Bolivia, Brazil, Cabo Verde, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Ecuador, El Salvador, France, Germany, Iceland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Luxembourg, Malta, Montenegro, Mexico, Nepal, New Zealand, North Macedonia,
Norway, Spain, Sweden, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
the United States of America, Uruguay and the European Union, as well as the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and non-governmental
organizations Human Rights Watch and OutRight Action International.
The LGBTI Core Group recognizes the need to ensure that the work of the
Security Council is inclusive and responsive to the needs of all individuals affected
by conflict, including lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI)
persons. In that respect, we thank the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for chairing
this important meeting. We pay tribute to all victims and survivors of conflictrelated sexual violence, including victims of such violence and discrimination on
the basis of their real or perceived sexual orientation, gender identity or expression,
or sex characteristics.
The members of the LGBTI Core Group are deeply concerned that, despite
the robust framework put in place by the Security Council over the past decade to
prevent and address sexual violence in conflict, the level of compliance by parties to
conflict remains insufficient in most cases.
It is alarming and unacceptable that actual or perceived sexual orientation
or gender identity could increase a person’s chances of becoming the target of
rape, sexual slavery, forced prostitution, forced pregnancy, forced abortion, forced
sterilization, forced marriage or other forms of conflict-related sexual violence.
We are concerned that in recent years the number of reports of conflict-related
sexual violence committed on the basis of a person’s actual or perceived sexual
orientation and/or gender identity has increased in a number of conflicts.
Furthermore, we are deeply concerned about the widespread underreporting
of such crimes, as well as retaliation, discrimination against, and stigmatization of
those individuals, which continue to be the norm for conflict-related sexual violence
based on sexual orientation or gender identity, thereby contributing to widespread
impunity for the perpetrators. In particular, the fear of stigmatization and reprisals,
unfavourable cultural norms and a lack of awareness, adequate support services and
accountability for survivors all contribute to underreporting and must therefore be
addressed.
In that regard, we call on all parties to conflicts to respect international law,
including international humanitarian law, and human rights in order to break the
vicious cycle of sexual violence, underreporting, impunity and retaliation, and
call on them provide targeted services to address the needs of LGBTI victims and
survivors of sexual violence. We welcome the role of the United Nations Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict in that regard and
encourage them to take into consideration the special needs of victims and survivors
21-05261139/140

S/2021/375

targeted on the basis of their real or perceived sexual orientation, gender identity or
expression, or sex characteristics.
The members of the United Nations LGBTI Core Group recognize the
interdependence between peace and security and the sustainable agenda principle of
leaving no one behind, as embodied in Sustainable Development Goal 16, on peace,
justice and strong institutions.
Furthermore, the Core Group underscores the need to adopt a survivor-centred
and human-rights-based approach and to provide relevant services to prevent and
respond to conflict-related sexual violence. We must also ensure that survivors’
rights are respected and that all victims of sexual violence have access to justice,
assistance, reparations and judicial redress. That includes access to comprehensive
specialized services such as psychosocial services, health care, sexual and
reproductive health services, legal and livelihood support and services for survivors
of sexual and gender-based violence that are adapted to their needs and provided
without discrimination. Moreover, in the adjudication of related asylum claims, the
victims’ LGBTI status and the concomitant vulnerability to violence must also be
duly considered.
Member States should recognize that all survivors, including those who are
targeted on the basis of their actual or perceived sexual orientation or gender identity,
are unique individuals with different experiences and needs, and that all support
to assist and empower survivors must be adapted to the context, paying particular
attention to multiple and intersecting vulnerabilities.

140/140

21-05261
