S/2005/302

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 May 2005
Original: English

Report of the Security Council mission to Haiti,
13 to 16 April 2005
I. Introduction
1.
In his letter dated 31 March 2005 (S/2005/220), the President of the Security
Council informed the Secretary-General that the members of the Council had
decided to send a mission to Haiti from 13 to 16 April, which would be led by
Ambassador Ronaldo Mota Sardenberg of Brazil. Following consultations among
the members of the Council, it was agreed (see S/2005/235) that the composition of
the mission should be as follows:
Brazil (Ambassador Ronaldo Mota Sardenberg, head of mission)
Algeria (Ambassador Abdallah Baali)
Argentina (Ambassador César Mayoral)
Benin (Ambassador Joël W. Adechi)
China (Ambassador Wang Guangya)
Denmark (Ambassador Lars Faaborg-Andersen)
France (Ambassador Jean-Marc de La Sablière)
Greece (Minister Counsellor Alexandra Papadopoulou)
Japan (Ambassador Shinichi Kitaoka)
Philippines (Ambassador Lauro L. Baja, Jr.)
Romania (Ambassador Gheorghe Dumitru)
Russian Federation (Ambassador Andrey I. Denisov)
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (Ambassador
Adam Thomson)
United Republic of Tanzania (Ambassador Augustine P. Mahiga)
United States of America (Ambassador Anne Woods Patterson)
2.
The terms of reference of the mission are contained in the annex to the present
report.

05-32219 (E) 100505

*0532219*

S/2005/302

II. Activities of the mission
3.
The Security Council undertook its mission to Haiti in conjunction with the Ad
Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti of the Economic and Social Council, which visited
Haiti from 12 to 16 April. Some meetings were held in common, in accordance with
the respective mandates.
4.
The mission constituted a clear signal of the concern of the Security Council
about the current crisis in Haiti and the need for both immediate action and longterm solutions to the many problems besetting Haiti and its people.
5.
The mission visited the capital of Haiti, Port-au-Prince, as well as the cities of
Cap-Haïtien and Gonaïves. In the capital, the mission met with the Interim
President, Boniface Alexandre; the Interim Prime Minister, Gérard Latortue; the
Minister of Culture and Communication, Magali Comeau-Denis; the Minister of the
Interior, George Moise; the Minister for Youth and Sport, Paul Berne; the Director
of the Cabinet, Jean Robert Noël; and the Director General of the Haitian National
Police, Léon Charles.
6.
In addition, the mission met with officials of the Provisional Electoral Council,
representatives of political parties and leaders of civil society.
7.
In Cap-Haïtien, the mission met with religious and political leaders — the
Archbishop of Cap-Haïtien, Hubert Constant; the delegate of the North Department,
Wilbert Joseph; and the Mayor, Aspile Fleurant — and received briefings from the
staff (civilian, military and police) of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the World Food Programme. In Gonaïves, the mission met
with the delegate of the Artibonite Department, Elie Cantave; and the Director of
the Haitian National Police, Artibonite Department, Joseph Gaspard Hyppolite; and
MINUSTAH staff (civilian, military and police).
8.
In Port-au-Prince, the mission met the members of the Core Group, chaired by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Juan Gabriel Valdés, and
comprising the Principal Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Hocine Medili; the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Adama
Guindo; and the Force Commander, Lieutenant General Augusto Heleno Ribeiro
Pereira; as well as representatives of regional and subregional organizations
(Organization of American States (OAS), Caribbean Community Task Force on
Haiti, European Commission), international financial institutions (Inter-American
Development Bank, International Monetary Fund and World Bank) and other major
stakeholders (Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Chile, France, Germany, Mexico, Spain,
United States).
9.
In addition, the mission met with the senior leadership of MINUSTAH,
namely, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti, Mr. Valdés;
the Principal Deputy Special Representative, Mr. Medili; the Deputy Special
Representative and Humanitarian and Resident Coordinator, Mr. Guindo; the Force
Commander, Lieutenant General Pereira; and the Police Commissioner, David Beer;
staff members in the areas of political affairs, electoral assistance, civil affairs,
human rights, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, gender, child
protection, humanitarian affairs and HIV/AIDS, as well as contingent commanders
and the United Nations country team. The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral accompanied the mission during its visit to Haiti.

2

S/2005/302

10. This is the first mission of the Security Council to Latin America or the
Caribbean.

III. Findings of the mission
General
11. The mission learned that almost all national actors across the political
spectrum acknowledged that Haiti was in a deep political, social and economic
crisis. While welcoming the international community’s interest and attention,
interlocutors expressed a certain frustration that Haiti again needed to call for
international assistance. This was particularly apparent in the dilemma articulated
by some interlocutors regarding the need for foreign troops to help to provide
stability and security, a key attribute of sovereignty.
12. While not minimizing past decisions and actions, most interlocutors pointed to
poverty and unemployment as the root causes of the instability. Different
perceptions were expressed on how to overcome this situation. Regardless of the
approach, the mission found that there was broad agreement that a solution to the
country’s current situation would not be reached in the short term. While elections
were seen as a first and essential step in the process, they were not seen as the
comprehensive solution to the crisis. The process of stabilization and normalization
in a number of areas, being addressed in parallel, would need to continue for some
time. Social and economic recovery would need to be strengthened. The mission
found that there appeared to be general commitment and support for those goals
among national actors, but such commitment had generally not been translated into
concrete actions and deliverable results. In addition, the buy-in of the population,
particularly outside the capital and among the young people, was unclear. However,
the mission was of the view that democratic elections seemed essential for restoring
Haitian hopes and conditions and that there were opportunities in the current climate
that Haiti could build upon in order to overcome the crisis.

Security
General security situation
13. The Security Council mission found that the security situation, while improved
from one year and even a few weeks earlier, remained fragile and that serious
incidents continued to occur. In this situation, the mission found that there was a
need to continue to focus on addressing the security situation in the country in order
to ensure a sustainable political transition process and socio-economic development.
The mission was of the view that stability and security would need to be
accompanied by stronger efforts to achieve those objectives.
14. The mission was informed by various interlocutors that elements of insecurity
included violent actions by supporters of former President Jean-Bertrand Aristide;
elements of the former military and armed gangs with ties to criminal elements such
as drug traffickers and illegal arms dealers; and shifting affiliations. In addition, the
mission learned from some interlocutors that frequent, possibly manipulated and
rapidly organized demonstrations expressing political discontent also destabilized

3

S/2005/302

the security situation. Haitian authorities noted that their lack of information about
the people involved with those groups had complicated their ability to deal with the
different elements in a fair and equitable manner. At the same time, the mission
learned that a few interlocutors perceived the security situation in Haiti as less
chaotic than it appeared, as generally small localized incidents were exaggerated by
the media and by interested groups. The mission learned that the status of the former
military, that is whether it should be incorporated into the public sector, remained a
divisive issue among the major players.
15. There was awareness and criticism of the earlier inability of MINUSTAH to
fully address the security situation as a result of its slow deployment and diversion
of assets for other purposes such as the humanitarian disaster in Gonaïves. It was
noted that some of the criticism of MINUSTAH and the Transitional Government
had been exaggerated and fanned by interested groups. The mission was able to
establish that the presence of MINUSTAH military and police forces was essential
not only in ensuring that the situation did not deteriorate further but also in
preventing further serious destabilization and assisting in the process towards
normalization and stabilization.
16. It was only after MINUSTAH neared its authorized level of military and police
personnel that it was able to deploy throughout the country and increasingly take a
more robust approach. The overall security situation, particularly in the capital, had
improved as a result of recent successes in security operations against gangs in Cité
Soleil and Bel-Air; and against elements of the former military who had taken over
former President Aristide’s residence in the Tabarre district of Port-au-Prince, and
against those who had taken over police stations in Petit-Goâve and Terre Rouge.
The most recent operation undertaken by MINUSTAH in support of the Haitian
National Police had resulted in the deaths on 9 and 10 April, respectively, of the
leader of one of the gangs and a leader of the former military, who have both been
responsible for fomenting instability in the country. The mission learned that the
joint operations had successfully undermined the recent worrying alliances between
illegal armed groups, that is, gangs associated with Mr. Aristide’s supporters and
elements of the former military. The mission was pleased to hear the positive
assessment of MINUSTAH actions by Haitian authorities, who noted that the
Mission had made important progress in this regard.
17. However, the killing of a MINUSTAH soldier from the Philippines on 14 April
while undertaking an operation in Cité Soleil, which the mission condemned, and
the earlier killings of a Sri Lankan soldier in Petit-Goâve and a Nepalese soldier in
Terre Rouge, highlighted the pressing need to remain vigilant and to ensure that the
situation did not deteriorate as the country entered a sensitive political period with
the upcoming elections, starting with the registration of voters on 25 April.
18. The mission welcomed the more proactive posture adopted by MINUSTAH
since December 2004. At the same time, the mission recognized the extremely
difficult environment in which the military and civilian police operated, especially
in densely populated urban areas, and that the number of tasks they were being
asked to perform had stretched their capacity even in the pre-election stage.
19. The mission was informed about the challenges to be faced in addressing the
security situation, including the fear of retaliation against information sources;
possible collusion between illegal actors and some members of the police; the urban
environment in which illegal gangs operated; and the need to enhance coordination

4

S/2005/302

and cooperation. The mission did learn with concern that MINUSTAH military and
police personnel felt handicapped by the lack of tactical intelligence and the
possibility that existing intelligence could be tainted. While progress had been made
in collecting and responding to intelligence, it could be further improved to enhance
security operations. The mission learned also that the Joint Mission Analysis Cell,
which would facilitate analysis of information from a variety of sources, was not yet
operational. In addition, the mission was concerned to learn that tactical aviation
support had been ineffective because of restrictive United Nations rules on the use
of such military assets.
20. The Security Council mission welcomed the implementation by MINUSTAH
of the policy of zero tolerance of sexual abuse and exploitation.
21. The mission took note in particular of the civil affairs activities undertaken by
the troops, which included pilot training programmes to help people enter the labour
force, waste removal, medical assistance and road reconstruction. The mission was
concerned with the fact that so far the implementation of development projects was
limited to a number of items. The mission was of the view that those projects were
essential for the security and stabilization environment, bolstered the image of
MINUSTAH in the eyes of the local population, and delivered tangible results.
Haitian National Police
22. Almost all of the mission’s interlocutors stressed the importance of the
professionalization of the Haitian National Police, which is the responsible authority
for security and law and order in Haiti. However, the mission acknowledged that the
police on their own could not yet adequately fulfil their tasks and exercise public
security functions over the entire country, owing to the insufficient number of
officers (although their exact number could not be established), lack of adequate
training and equipment, a limited budget, and corruption. The mission expressed the
view that the police should be reformed without delay.
23. The mission recognized that increased international assistance was required to
implement reforms conducive to a credible, accountable and respected police force
in Haiti. Moreover, professionalizing the police is a long-term task, requiring
dedicated attention, organizational efforts and resources to root out corruption and
counter the negative public image of the police. To promote the trust and confidence
of the population in the police, many interlocutors underlined the need to ensure
transparent recruitment and to vet those already in the police service, including
elements of the former military. The mission found that there were a number of
good officers in the national police who worked courageously under difficult
circumstances. Furthermore, the Director General of the Haitian National Police
suggested the implementation of a community policing approach to change the
behaviour of the police, improve their image and enhance communication with the
population. The mission was of the view that it was necessary to rapidly enable the
national police to ensure the safety and security of all people in Haiti.
24. The mission found that, while cooperation between the national police and
MINUSTAH had initially been difficult, the level and character of cooperation had
improved lately. This was demonstrated by the recent joint security operations and
the willingness of both sides to further improve their existing level of cooperation.
The mission learned that MINUSTAH had contributed positively to the work of the

5

S/2005/302

police, which was made evident, inter alia, by the growing police presence in the
poorer urban neighbourhoods.
25. The mission found that MINUSTAH had a clear mandate to assist the
Transitional Government in monitoring, restructuring and reforming the police, but
that it was unable to make marked progress in this important area because of the
ambiguous attitude of the police regarding the need to undertake serious reforms, as
well as the need to divert MINUSTAH resources to operational tasks in the light of
the precarious security situation. The mission noted that the vetting and certification
of police officers had yet to begin, although a police development plan had recently
been approved. The mission was also informed that the lack of French-speaking
civilian police and specialists in MINUSTAH, such as investigators and forensic
experts, had hampered the ability of the Mission to implement its mandate. There
have been discussions on possible additional measures to assist the Transitional
Government in the constitutional and political processes now under way in Haiti.
Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
26. The Security Council mission found that some prerequisites for a
comprehensive programme of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration were
lacking. Likewise, the Transitional Government, assisted by MINUSTAH, still
lacked the ability to implement an adequate programme encompassing all armed
groups and individuals. Many actors stressed the importance of making progress in
this area before the elections scheduled for the last quarter of 2005.
27. The unified commitment of the Transitional Government to a comprehensive
approach to disarmament, demobilization and reintegration was found questionable.
The mission was encouraged by the establishment of the National Commission on
Disarmament, but it was concerned by the Commission’s limited scope and its
ambiguous attitude to addressing the issue fully, particularly vis-à-vis the former
military personnel. It also found that the capacity and capabilities of the
Commission would need to be enhanced. Although recognizing that the
establishment of the Commission was a beginning, the mission found that it was
essential that the process take place with the full buy-in of the population,
particularly, but not only, with regard to disarmament, in view of the spread of small
arms in the country.
28. The mission was pleased to note that MINUSTAH was supporting the
Transitional Government in its efforts to launch an approach to disarmament
building on socio-economic development. However, the mission was of the opinion
that it was imperative to focus not only on the long-term aspects but also on the
immediate need for disarmament in view of the political timetable. There was
therefore, a need for a credible deterrent vis-à-vis those elements that did not wish
to engage in the process, coupled with an even-handed and comprehensive
application of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process to those
willing to participate. Otherwise, the security situation could be further undermined
by frustrated and discontented individuals who might abandon the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process and even rejoin illegal armed groups. The
mission condemned all violence and called on the Haitian authorities to implement
as a matter of priority a comprehensive programme of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration to disarm all of the illegal armed groups, with the assistance of
MINUSTAH.

6

S/2005/302

29. The mission found that, while challenges remained, there were also promising
signs that the attitude towards disarmament, demobilization and reintegration was
evolving. The mission learned that, although there was an increased willingness to
participate in a disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme on the
part of members of the former military, some were not satisfied with the benefits
offered since they were primarily interested in being reabsorbed into public sector
positions (especially in the national police). It was deemed necessary to provide a
concrete response to the social demands of the former military, with a view to
reintegrating them into the formal economy, as an essential element in the
promotion of peace and stability in the country. The mission was however
concerned to learn that promises had been made by the Transitional Government to
members of the former military, in respect of indemnity payments, pensions and
State employment, which were not linked to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, particularly the need to disarm. Furthermore, some of the promises
had not been kept. Unfulfilled promises have the potential to destabilize the
situation and exacerbate frustrations and alienation. The mission welcomed the
efforts of MINUSTAH to redress this situation. The mission found that to continue
the incremental progress it was essential that sufficient funds be made available to
allow realistic promises to be fulfilled.

Political transition
General
30. The Security Council mission found that the political situation in Haiti
presented promises as well as major challenges. While the national dialogue had
been formally launched less than one week before the mission’s visit, the political
landscape in Haiti appeared to be dominated by more immediate concerns, such as
insecurity in the capital, the debate surrounding the imprisonment of the former
Prime Minister, Yvon Neptune, and the former Interior Minister, Jocelerme Privert,
and other controversial issues dominating the Haitian media. At the same time,
practically all interlocutors stressed the importance of adhering to the electoral
timetable as well as the need for an inclusive political process leading to free and
fair elections.
31. The mission was struck by the complex nature of the political landscape, with
some 90 registered political parties and a myriad of civil society organizations,
which did not appear to have clearly identifiable political platforms for the future of
the country. The mission stressed to the political leaders the need to present their
long-term objectives for the country, as well as political platforms that conveyed the
parties’ views on how they would address pressing issues such as widespread
unemployment. The mission, in the course of its visit, was informed about possible
linkages between some political parties and illegal armed groups, which remain a
deep source of concern, especially in view of the forthcoming electoral period. The
mission was reminded of the difficulty for MINUSTAH to play a role in promoting
the political transition, given the fragility of the Transitional Government, the
numerous political players, and the Haitian people’s strong desire to chart their own
political path. Haitian interlocutors made it very clear to the mission that they
themselves must take the lead in this process, a position that was supported by the
mission.

7

S/2005/302

National dialogue and reconciliation
32. The Security Council mission welcomed the official launching of the national
dialogue by the Interim President on 7 April. It was felt among the mission’s Haitian
interlocutors that, for such a dialogue to be successful, deep and inclusive
participation spanning the political landscape was an essential requirement. To this
end, the mission emphasized that the process of dialogue and reconciliation was
needed to create better conditions for long-term stability in the country, and all
political actors must renounce violence to participate in the dialogue. The
inclusiveness of such a dialogue was not a foregone conclusion given that Fanmi
Lavalas had yet to participate in the political transition process. The Interim
President reported that he had reached out to members of Fanmi Lavalas to ensure
their participation in the process.
33. Despite the sharp divisiveness that characterizes the relationship between key
political tendencies, the mission was reassured that none of the 20 political leaders
representing some 14 political parties with whom it met disputed the fact that a
“minimum consensus” was essential before elections could be held. In a similar
vein, other observers noted that, given that the launch of the national dialogue
coincided with the beginning of the electoral period (which is to commence with the
official inauguration of the registration exercise on 25 April), there was a need to
focus on a political dialogue centring on a code of electoral conduct, one of whose
principles would be the renunciation of violence. Moreover, almost all interlocutors
stressed that the national dialogue should continue beyond the elections and include
other sectors such as social and economic actors. There was no agreement to start
this broader dialogue prior to the polls, however, nor was there consensus on its
shape and content. The mission heard suggestions that the earlier “political
dialogue” could include substantive discussions on issues of importance for the
people such as the economy, the environment, development and decentralization, to
at least start the process of engagement prior to the elections. During the mission’s
visit to Cap-Haïtien, its interlocutors noted the need to ensure that the dialogue
included the regions outside the capital. The Archbishop of Cap-Haïtien delivered to
mission members a letter from the Conférence épiscopale d’Haïti that called for
peaceful transition towards democracy as well as for social and economic
development.
Electoral process
34. Given the turbulent political history of Haiti, the need to ensure the credibility
and integrity of the electoral process was paramount in the mission’s discussions.
The mission recognized the widely shared view that the election timetable must be
adhered to, and was reassured by the strong commitment expressed by the Haitian
interim authorities to conduct free and fair, transparent and inclusive elections with
a view to transferring power to elected authorities on 7 February 2006, as scheduled.
Along these lines, the Interim President and the Interim Prime Minister stressed that
the return of Haiti to constitutional rule through the election of a legitimate and
democratic government was an essential foundation for the future stability and
development of the country. Both mission members and their interlocutors showed a
clear awareness that many long-term, structural problems would persist in Haiti
even after the newly elected authorities took office, but they were confident that a
new democratic climate would significantly facilitate the resolution of those
problems.

8

S/2005/302

35. At the same time, the mission was reminded of the considerable challenges to
be faced in conducting elections in the country, where electoral fraud and violence
have been standard and recurrent features. In fact, all the interlocutors stressed to
the mission the need for close — and sustained — international engagement
throughout the electoral process. The members of the Transitional Government
requested that the international community “supervise” the entire electoral process,
including dispatching international observers at all stages (registration, voting,
counting of votes and announcement of the winners), until the post-transition
Government assumed its responsibilities.
36. Given the still precarious situation in Port-au-Prince and the lack of progress
in disarmament at the national level, security for the electoral period was a
prominent theme throughout the mission’s discussions with its interlocutors.
Members of the Provisional Electoral Council reminded the mission of their own
vulnerability, noting that the Council’s headquarters had been attacked twice during
the week the registration was originally scheduled to begin. Moreover, members of
the Electoral Council expressed deep concern that any attacks against civilians early
in the registration period could severely undermine any efforts to encourage
potential voters to participate in the electoral process. Reflecting such a concern, a
religious leader stressed that electoral participation in Haiti should not require
people to put their lives at risk to exercise their right to vote.
37. The Interim Prime Minister proposed that the security arrangements be
reinforced during the electoral period, including through the deployment of
additional French-speaking MINUSTAH civilian police officers. The mission noted
that there was a plan to recruit and train electoral security assistants to provide
security to the registration centres and subsequently to the polling stations, but
many interlocutors felt that this would be insufficient and that MINUSTAH military
and police forces would still need to provide security at the polling stations. The
mission welcomed the participation of MINUSTAH in the electoral security
commission created by the Interim Prime Minister, which brings together
representatives from the Provisional Electoral Council, the national police and the
Transitional Government.
38. The mission was also made aware of technical issues that could hamper the
conduct of free and fair elections. In particular, some provisions made in the
electoral decree of January 2005, including a stipulation allowing an appeal to be
made to the Supreme Court, could create considerable delays, not to mention
undermining the independence of the Provisional Electoral Council vis-à-vis other
sectors of the Government. In addition, the possible discrimination against
independent candidates was a cause for concern. Furthermore, additional legislation
that would, inter alia, provide public funding for political parties and establish a
new national identity card remains pending, and its early adoption is urgently
required if the electoral process is to be properly observed.
39. The mission also voiced concern that many logistical aspects of organizing
elections, arising in part from the lack of capacity of the Provisional Electoral
Council, could possibly complicate the timely preparation of the elections. For
example, the registration of voters had already been delayed; one Electoral Council
official suggested that the exercise could begin in provinces where the security
situation was perceived to be better. Conducting credible elections for an estimated
4.25 million voters in a country where there is no infrastructure (roads and

9

S/2005/302

electricity) and no existing voter list is a major challenge. One interlocutor frankly
pointed out that there could be 100,000 candidates throughout the country if the
estimated 90 political parties fielded 10 candidates each. Finally, the mission was
informed that there was a $22 million deficit in the budget for the elections, which
would have to be covered to meet urgent immediate needs such as the infrastructure
and logistical requirements for the registration centres and equipment, electoral
security and civic education.
40. The logistical and practical challenges of preparing for elections were evident
during the mission’s trip to Gonaïves. Mission members were informed that while
the Artibonite Department should have some 60 registration centres, only one centre
had been established. A similar situation was found in Cap-Haïtien. The
Organization of American States, which is responsible for conducting the
registration exercise and creating a permanent voter roll, was expected to install the
necessary equipment at all registration sites for the launch of the nationwide
registration process on 25 April.
41. Given the country’s historical background, many Haitians remain sceptical
about the prospects for the forthcoming elections. Several actors repeatedly stressed
that elections were only one of numerous steps to be taken in building a democratic
society. Some were concerned that the elections might simply pave the way for a
new “dictatorial era” if nothing was done to reform the judicial sector and the State
apparatus. Others raised the difficulty of ensuring inclusivity, given the polarized
political landscape. The mission is firmly of the view that the Haitian people need to
be informed that the elections will lead to significant change. It is clear that, for the
elections to be successful, people will need to be psychologically prepared to
participate. Numerous interlocutors stressed the need for civic education at all levels
and to reach out to all sectors of the population, particularly the youth. Political
leaders, for their part, must prepare the ground for free and fair elections, commit
themselves to peacefully accepting the results, and assume the responsibility of
meeting voters’ expectations in the post-electoral period. The mission called upon
all leaders of the country to take full responsibility for the sovereign affairs of Haiti
and fulfil their responsibility for improving the lives of their constituents once they
are elected to office.

Human rights
42. The mission was struck by statements by interim authorities that no human
rights violations in the country were committed by the State. The mission conveyed
to the Transitional Government the message that respect for human rights standards
contributed to reinforcing stability and security, and expressed the opinion that all
actors should abide by those standards. Nevertheless, the mission received reports
that a culture of impunity remained pervasive, marked by arbitrary arrest, wrongful
detention, inhumane prison conditions, excessive use of force, and extrajudicial
executions. As a result, the population continues to view the national police with
fear and lack of respect. The mission learned that the commission that should
investigate allegations against the police had yet to be established.
43. The mission was informed that human rights investigations, including those
conducted by MINUSTAH, were hampered by the instability of the situation and the
security concerns of victims and witnesses. It had also proved difficult to engage the

10

S/2005/302

national police in human rights investigations in the light of their image in the eyes
of the population and the ambiguous attitude of the Transitional Government, as
indicated above. In this regard, it was suggested that a national procedure could be
established for the filing of complaints against members of the national police or the
international civilian police. Other challenges were noted, such as the national
capacity to effectively uphold human rights and the over-reliance on MINUSTAH
civilian police and the national police in the conduct of such investigations.
44. The assessment of the situation of the former Prime Minister, Yvon Neptune,
raised concerns that, until the judicial system in Haiti was reformed (see below),
human rights violations, specifically in terms of due process, would continue. The
mission stressed that it was necessary to encourage efforts to expedite pending
cases. It found a need for creative means to address this situation within the rule of
law and with full respect for the independence of the judiciary so that the law itself
did not facilitate such violations. With regard to Mr. Neptune, national interlocutors
explained that he could not be released until he appeared before a judge and
presented his case. The mission welcomed the information that the Transitional
Government would follow the advice of Louis Joinet, the independent expert on the
situation of human rights in Haiti appointed by the Secretary-General, in addressing
Mr. Neptune’s situation.

Social and economic development
45. Virtually all Haitian interlocutors identified themselves with the statement of a
Transitional Government official that poverty is “the underlying root of unrest in
Haiti”, as well as the consensus view that there could be no genuine stability in the
country without the strengthening of its economy. Both the Haitian interlocutors and
the mission stressed the need for a long-term strategy to promote development and
combat poverty. In cooperation with the donor community, the Transitional
Government has developed an interim poverty reduction strategy, the Interim
Cooperation Framework. All interlocutors underlined the need to accelerate and
streamline donor funding in order to visibly improve living conditions for the
Haitian population, and to ensure that the Transitional Government had the capacity
to develop and implement projects. They welcomed the implementation of the
projects identified by the recent international conference held in Cayenne, which
were selected according to their ability to rapidly disburse funds and to respond to
the most urgent needs of the population in such fields as road-building, electricity
generation, governance and access to basic services.
46. At his meeting with the mission, the Interim Prime Minister underlined the
need for Haitian priorities to be taken into account, donor funds to be spent within
Haiti, and tangible improvement in the country’s basic infrastructure, particularly
electricity, the exploration of renewable sources of energy such as solar, wind and
water power, and the development of the country’s 3,000 kilometres of roads, which
would facilitate the growth of the agricultural sector in the north and allow farmers
to bring goods to market. For his part, the Interim President cited as priorities the
development of the agricultural sector through irrigation resources, the building of
roads and electricity generation, and the need to combat deforestation and
environmental degradation.

11

S/2005/302

47. While it shared the view that the Haitian people should see tangible results
from the Interim Cooperation Framework, the mission was reminded of the
enormous development challenges in Haiti which, in fact, represent a situation
worse in many aspects than in countries that have undergone years of conflict. The
mission was informed that, owing to the country’s dire economic, social and
political plight, there was little hope that Haiti — where public health indicators are
the worst in the region, life expectancy is 50 years and infant mortality is 80 per
1,000 — would achieve any of the United Nations Millennium Development Goals
until 2015, unless a focused and urgent international cooperation initiative were
launched for that purpose. At the same time, the mission is convinced that shortterm economic progress is not only possible but also essential in the lead-up to the
elections, provided that rapid disbursement of donor funds is ensured and projects
are agreed upon with Haitian priorities in mind.
48. The mission was also briefed on additional ways in which MINUSTAH
implements the integrated mission concept with a view to promoting long-term
development in collaboration with United Nations agencies. Five main areas of
cooperation were cited, namely, disarmament, justice, elections, national dialogue
and child protection. Other areas highlighted were the work of UNICEF and
MINUSTAH to combat child trafficking in Haiti, a country where about half of the
population is under 15, as well as the efforts of a network of United Nations
agencies working on women’s issues. On the latter, the mission acknowledged that
the current climate of violence, insecurity and impunity marginalized Haitian
women in their daily lives and, in particular, left them vulnerable to sexual violence.

Humanitarian situation
49. The mission was reminded that, like many Caribbean countries, Haiti is highly
exposed to natural hazards such as hurricanes, floods, earthquakes and landslides. In
the case of Haiti, however, unlike its neighbours, a high degree of vulnerability —
due to poverty, environmental degradation, political and social instability and heavy
population density — creates scenarios for frequent large disasters. The mission was
briefed on an array of lessons learned from the efforts of MINUSTAH to address the
natural disasters that struck Haiti in 2004, particularly the tropical storm that hit
Gonaïves in September 2004, such as the need for pre-positioned emergency stocks,
early-warning systems and rapid-reaction capabilities.

Institution-building and extension of State authority
50. The mission found that the State institutions in Haiti at all levels remained
weak and in urgent need of reform and capacity-building. Some interlocutors said
that State institutions faced continuing problems of corruption, lack of capacity of
the civil service, absence of transparency and accountability and lack of necessary
equipment. The population was also seen as alienated from the administration,
leading to poor governance, which contributed to the country’s current situation. At
the same time, the mission found that progress had been achieved in key sectors
such as addressing the deficit in the budget through improvements in fiscal
procedures and governance. In essence, the mission considered that a modern public
administration did not yet exist in the country.

12

S/2005/302

51. The mission saw a huge divide between the capital, Port-au-Prince, and the
outlying regions. Gonaïves, for example, has not had a serving mayor since
December 2004. In addition, it is without a functioning civil administration and
characterized by absentee personnel who ironically receive their salaries while the
city could not even allocate a budget for public services or capital improvement.
52. The mission learned that the judicial system remained dysfunctional and that
Haitians perceive it to be corrupt and inefficient. Furthermore, some interlocutors
pointed to the outdated legal codes and the process of appointing judges, as well as
their low salaries and lack of training, as among the factors that have contributed to
the present state of the judicial sector. In addition, the mission learned that almost
all of the detainees held prior to the breakout of 19 February at the National
Penitentiary had long been in pre-trial detention and had not yet been heard by a
judge. The mission also learned that the judicial system lacked basic equipment and
infrastructure and had lost archival documents during incidents of unrest.
53. The problems in the justice and penal systems had compounded the human
rights situation — for example, the arrest of suspects who were held in poor
conditions and without trial for prolonged periods — and negatively affected the
reconciliation process. The mission found that, for the police to operate effectively
and in compliance with human rights standards, and to address the security
situation, the judicial and penal systems needed to be reformed. This was seen as an
urgent task facing Haiti. The mission expressed support for the collaborative efforts
of MINUSTAH and UNDP to assist the Transitional Government in this regard and
also expressed the willingness to examine corresponding measures, such as the
establishment of a prison registry.
54. The mission learned of the need to undertake disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration in the context of an overarching security sector reform encompassing
the police and the judicial and penal systems, and the need to enact legislation to
control small arms and the private security sector.
55. The mission found that many national and international interlocutors pointed
to the negative and sensationalist role played by the media in Haiti. The mission
found that capacity-building in the Haitian media might promote the political
transition process as well as the security and stability of the country.

Regional relations
56. The Security Council mission was concerned to learn that relations between
Haiti and the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) remained difficult. However, it
welcomed the initiative of the Foreign Minister to try to revive relations on a
bilateral basis. The mission welcomed the commitment of CARICOM to assist in
the electoral process. The mission also welcomed the information provided by the
Haitian authorities that it had good relations with the Dominican Republic,
particularly their joint aim to address the migration of Haitians to the Dominican
Republic through enhanced border control and joint projects to address economic
development issues.
57. The mission took note of the extensive assistance being provided by OAS in
the preparation of the elections. OAS has taken on the responsibility of supporting
the Provisional Electoral Council in conducting the registration of voters by

13

S/2005/302

designing a comprehensive system. The mission noted that the task that OAS had
taken on was the underpinning of the electoral process, and it was essential that
OAS, in support of the Electoral Council, ensure a successful and timely
implementation of the exercise.
58. The mission welcomed the concrete demonstration of support and leadership
by the countries of Latin America to Haiti through their substantial contribution of
troops and police, as well as continued political engagement.

MINUSTAH
59. The Security Council mission found that, although MINUSTAH had deployed
slowly, it was now working well, despite difficult circumstances. The mission
welcomed the significant work undertaken by MINUSTAH to date, while
recognizing that many challenges remained.
60. The mission found that there were differing views within the population on the
performance of MINUSTAH although, on balance, it was viewed in positive terms.
Interlocutors focused on the improvements made in recent months in a number of
areas, particularly security. It was generally recognized that MINUSTAH could do
more in such areas as reform of the national police and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration. The mission found, on its visit to Cap-Haïtien, that the national
interlocutors welcomed the efforts made by MINUSTAH on behalf of Haiti,
contrasting with some assessments heard in the capital.
61. Some interlocutors expressed concern, however, about the need to ensure that
international assistance including economic cooperation took into account the
specific complexities of Haiti, especially in view of the perceived failure of
previous United Nations missions in the country. Some interlocutors warned against
applying international model approaches in Haiti. The mission is aware that
MINUSTAH is cognizant of this fact and has made efforts to ensure that the
solutions proposed are tailored to the unique situation. The mission also found that
MINUSTAH was willing to act and to apply lessons learned.
62. Some interlocutors expressed confusion about the mandate of MINUSTAH.
The mission believes that MINUSTAH needs to urgently design a communications
strategy and to enhance its relations with the public. This would allow MINUSTAH
to better communicate its mandate and role in Haiti to ordinary people and to
counter false propaganda. Such a proactive information strategy will become even
more essential during the electoral process.
63. The mission took note of the request from Haitian authorities that the mandate
of MINUSTAH be extended for a period of 12 months so that the mandate renewal
did not occur in the middle of the electoral process. Some authorities requested that
it be extended until after the handover of power to the new government in order to
bolster the confidence of the people.

14

S/2005/302

IV. Recommendations
Introduction
64. The visit of the Security Council mission provided an excellent opportunity to
have direct talks with a broad spectrum of political, religious and civil society actors
in Haiti. In-depth discussions with MINUSTAH personnel helped the mission
enhance its understanding of the work of MINUSTAH in discharging its mandate.
65. It is a sensitive time in Haiti — perhaps a decisive turning point in the
country’s history. The United Nations is in Haiti to help Haitians achieve their goals
of stability and peace, meet their immediate social and economic requirements, and
assist them towards the road to sustainable development while remaining respectful
of the sovereignty of Haiti. The holding of the elections late in 2005 represents the
immediate challenge for the Haitians and the international community. The Haitian
authorities and the international community should continue, in parallel, to prepare
for medium- and long-term institution-building and development.
66. The international community is committed to supporting Haiti, but it cannot
and should not act in its stead. Therefore it calls on Haitians themselves, particularly
the Transitional Government, to assume their State responsibilities and take
advantage of this historic opportunity, thus taking full ownership of their future.
Elections
67. Free, fair and inclusive elections must be held in 2005 in accordance with the
established timetable, and the results respected by all actors. The Security Council
mission recalls that, in accordance with the Haitian Constitution, democratically
elected authorities must take office on 7 February 2006.
68. The mission stresses that there is no alternative to elections. The mission urges
Haitian authorities to do everything possible to prepare for elections and to ensure
their smooth operation. The Council should closely evaluate the preparation of the
elections on a regular basis to ensure that it remains on track.
69. Elections should be open to all political parties that publicly renounce
violence.
70. It is essential that sufficient funds be identified to conduct safe and successful
elections. The mission urges MINUSTAH, through its work with the Provisional
Electoral Council, to provide donors with a detailed and justified budget outlining
priorities within and among budget items, as well as an integrated timeline for the
conduct of all electoral activities. The Council encourages timely disbursement of
already committed funds.
71. The mission emphasizes the need for MINUSTAH and the Transitional
Government to commence with all speed a broad-based civic education programme
so as to ensure the broadest possible participation of the Haitian population.
72. The mission is of the opinion that there is an urgent need (a) to work with the
appropriate Haitian authorities in order that an international coordinated presence be
enabled to help to ensure that the registration and voting processes conform with
democratic standards; and (b) to establish appropriate arrangements for international
electoral observation.

15

S/2005/302

Security
73. The mission expresses concern as to whether sufficient resources will be
available to ensure security during the election period. The members request the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to (a) make a comprehensive review of the
security situation on the ground and of the resources that currently belong to
MINUSTAH; (b) make early recommendations on the need for additional police and
military resources once they reach the ceilings established in Security Council
resolution 1542 (2004); and (c) make recommendations to improve the rules of
engagement of the civilian police in accordance with the mandate to provide, inter
alia, operational support to the Haitian National Police, in order to increase global
security and protection in view of and during the electoral period.
74. MINUSTAH must continue to support the Transitional Government to ensure a
secure and stable environment within which the constitutional and political process
in Haiti can take place. Such measures include refining the coordination procedures
between the national police and MINUSTAH. The mission also stresses the need to
ensure better coordination between the MINUSTAH civil police and military
components.
75. To better enhance those objectives the mission stresses the need to make the
Joint Mission Analysis Cell operational as soon as possible in order to pool and
better operationalize the information available to the MINUSTAH military, police
and civilian components.
76. The mission urges the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to take all
necessary measures to ensure the use of aviation assets in an efficient and effective
manner in support of security operations.
National dialogue
77. The mission believes that the political dialogue initiated recently by the
Transitional Government with the support of MINUSTAH must focus on the needs
for the upcoming elections, and must be pursued vigorously and with broader grassroots participation. The Council also supports a long-term dialogue, to be
participated in by all sectors of Haitian society, aimed at developing a common
vision for the future of Haiti.
Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
78. The mission concluded that Haitian authorities, supported by MINUSTAH,
should implement without delay the programme of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration proposed by MINUSTAH in February. Furthermore, there is a need to
clarify without delay the intention of the Transitional Government vis-à-vis the
status of former military personnel, and for payments to any groups to be made only
as part of a comprehensive disarmament programme.
79. The mission expressed concern about the reported funding gap for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, and calls upon MINUSTAH and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to provide detailed information to the
Security Council on whether further international resources are required to ensure
early progress on disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, particularly the
reintegration component. The mission understands that it is essential that the donor

16

S/2005/302

community provide the necessary resources for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, taking into account the above-mentioned information.
Haitian National Police
80. The mission stresses the urgency of accelerating the reform of the Haitian
National Police so that they can establish the trust of Haitian citizens and be counted
upon to provide public security in Haiti. Such reform should be planned and
executed by the Transitional Government with the support of MINUSTAH and
bilateral partners.
81. To this end, MINUSTAH should work with the Transitional Government to
establish and publish a provisional desired end state (size and standards, inter alia)
for the Haitian National Police and a programme (timetable and resources, inter
alia) for getting there.
Institutional development
82. The mission stresses the importance of rebuilding Haitian institutions, many of
which are barely functioning, like the judicial and penal systems, so that the
population can gain trust in the State structures. The mission calls upon the
international community to provide assistance to that end, including for capacitybuilding.
83. The mission recommends strongly that additional measures to assist the
judicial system be examined with the Haitian authorities, and that the mandate of
MINUSTAH be amended to allow international experts to participate and assist in
this effort as may be required.
Human rights
84. All actors must abide by human rights standards, without exception.
Combating impunity and promoting respect for human rights are urgently demanded
by both the Haitian people and the international community. The mission urges
Haitian authorities to address, as a matter of priority, the most flagrant, sensitive or
visible cases, including by investigating alleged human rights violations by the
Haitian National Police. The international community is committed to ensuring the
end of impunity in Haiti, while promoting due process and the rule of law. There can
be no trust and reconciliation while human rights violations continue.
Development and humanitarian assistance
85. The mission is of the opinion that pervasive poverty is an important root cause
of unrest in Haiti, and stresses therefore that there can be no genuine stability in the
country without the strengthening of its economy.
86. The mission renews its appeal for the accelerated disbursement of the funds
pledged by international financial institutions since the International Donors
Conference on Haiti of July 2004, and strongly supports the Cayenne follow-up
donor conference to be held, preferably, no later than July. The Council also
emphasizes the need to urgently implement highly visible quick-impact projects that
have the ability to deliver immediate benefits to the population. It calls on all donors
to resume full cooperation with Haiti by, inter alia, examining the possibility of

17

S/2005/302

supporting such priority areas identified by the Transitional Government as
infrastructure, energy and the environment.
87. The mission found that there is a need for increased coordination between
MINUSTAH and the various development actors in Haiti. This would ensure higher
efficiency of the development efforts, especially in the poorest areas.
Public relations
88. In order to improve the Haitian population’s understanding of the mandate of
MINUSTAH and its role in Haiti, the mission recommends that MINUSTAH
urgently develop and implement a proactive communications and public relations
strategy.
89. The mission reiterates its commitment to assist the Haitian people in their
quest to achieve stability and development in Haiti. To do so, the mission reaffirms
the view of the Council that a long-term United Nations presence in Haiti is
required.
Ad Hoc Advisory Group of the Economic and Social Council
90. The mission welcomed the opportunity to undertake this visit in conjunction
with the Ad Hoc Advisory Group of the Economic and Social Council, and it looks
forward to continuing its collaboration so that immediate and medium-term
measures provide the basis on which long-term development can occur.
* * *
91. The mission wishes to express its appreciation to the interim Government and
people of Haiti for their support and willingness to share with the mission their
perceptions and suggestions for the future of their country. The mission is also very
grateful to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Juan Gabriel Valdés,
his senior management team and the staff, contingents and civilian police of
MINUSTAH for their tireless support and work to make the mission a success in a
challenging environment. The mission wishes to thank UNDP and other United
Nations agencies for the involvement in the visit, as well as the Secretariat staff who
accompanied the mission for their professionalism and support.

18

S/2005/302

Annex
Letter dated 31 March 2005 from the President of the Security
Council addressed to the Secretary-General*
I have the honour to inform you that the members of the Security Council have
decided to send a mission to Haiti from 13 to 16 April 2005, which I will lead as
head of mission. The members of the Council have agreed on the terms of reference
of the mission, a copy of which is enclosed herewith.
The composition of the mission will be forwarded to you shortly.
The mission will be held in conjunction with the mission of the Ad Hoc
Advisory Group on Haiti of the Economic and Social Council.
I would be grateful if you could have the present letter and its annex circulated
as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Ronaldo Mota Sardenberg
President of the Security Council

* Previously circulated under the symbol S/2005/220.

19

S/2005/302

Terms of reference for the Security Council mission to Haiti,
13-16 April 2005
1.
The Security Council has decided to organize a mission to Haiti led by Brazil,
in conjunction with the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti of the Economic and
Social Council. The visit will take place from 13 to 16 April 2005.
2.

The mission has the following objectives:
(a)

To convey the following message to local actors:

(i) To express its full support for the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) and for the United Nations presence in Haiti as long as
necessary;
(ii) To underscore the long-term commitment of the international community
to stabilization and development in Haiti, and the need for continuing support
of international and regional organizations to that end;
(iii) To underline the leading role and the responsibilities of the Transitional
Government in its efforts to attain those objectives;
(iv) To stress the need for improved coordination between the Transitional
Government and MINUSTAH to ensure security. To reaffirm and commend the
continuing support of MINUSTAH for the efforts of the Transitional
Government;
(v) To reiterate the need to reject violence, to respect human rights and to
fight against impunity;
(vi) To call upon all parties to engage fully in the electoral process according
to the calendar proposed by the Provisional Electoral Council and to support
the holding of free and fair elections, at both the local and national levels,
during 2005 and the subsequent transfer of power to the elected authorities;
(vii) To stress the utmost importance of the immediate launch of an inclusive
national dialogue based on the ownership of the Haitian people;
(viii) To convey the determination of the Security Council to see that all
pledged funds are promptly disbursed;
(b) To assess the level of coordination of MINUSTAH in each aspect of its
mandate, and between the capital and the outlying regions of Haiti;
(c) To review the progress achieved so far and to assess the needs and
requirements in the following areas:
(i)

20

Security:
a.

Police. To assess the current situation of the Haitian National Police
and mechanisms for its reform and the creation of a credible,
accountable and respected police force;

b.

MINUSTAH. To assess the implementation of the MINUSTAH
security mandate and the way ahead, taking into account the current
capacity of the Haitian National Police and enhancing its
coordination with MINUSTAH;

S/2005/302

c.

(ii)

Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. To evaluate steps
towards the implementation of a disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme that addresses all illegal armed groups in a
comprehensive manner, including its legal basis, actions to be taken
by the Transitional Government and measures requiring immediate
implementation, including by MINUSTAH;

Political transition:
a.

Reconciliation. To assess the status of the national dialogue and the
steps to be taken by the Transitional Government, with assistance
from MINUSTAH, in this regard;

b.

Elections. To assess the state of planning and implementation of the
electoral process and to ensure that the elections are held as
scheduled;

(iii) Human rights. To assess the human rights situation, including the
activities of the Haitian National Police, cases of unlawful detention and the
special needs of women and children;
(iv) Development:
a.

To assess and encourage the implementation of quick-impact
projects that have a direct impact on the well-being of Haitians, in
particular those living in the poor urban areas;

b.

To explore ways, in coordination with the Ad Hoc Advisory Group
on Haiti of the Economic and Social Council, to assist the
Transitional Government in the preparation and implementation of
development projects in Haiti, as outlined in the Interim
Cooperation Framework, and in the establishment of a long-term
development strategy;

(v) Institution building. To analyse the evolution of projects and programmes
in Haiti concerning the rule of law and security sector reform, including that of
the judiciary and of correctional institutions, as well as to assess current needs
and challenges in those areas;
(vi) Humanitarian situation. To evaluate the humanitarian situation.

21
