A /69/PV.102

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-ninth session

102nd plenary meeting

Thursday, 10 September 2015, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kutesa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Uganda)

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Agenda item 32 (continued)
Prevention of armed conflict
Draft resolution (A/69/L.74/Rev.1)
The President: Members will recall that, under
agenda item 32, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 69/285, at its 92nd plenary meeting, on 3 June
2015, and adopted resolution 69/293, at its 96th plenary
meeting, on 19 June 2015.
I now give the floor to the representative of Nigeria
to introduce draft resolution A/69/L.74/Rev.1.
Mr. Elias-Fatile (Nigeria): As the facilitator
of the negotiations process on draft resolution
A/69/L.74/Rev.1, entitled “Commemoration of the
seventieth anniversary of the United Nations”, Nigeria
has the pleasure to introduce, on behalf of the Group
of African States, the draft text in this meeting. I
would like to begin by underlining the obvious fact
that this is the only Member-State-driven initiative to
commemorate the seventieth anniversary of the United
Nations, and to request the Assembly’s support for the
draft resolution’s adoption. It will be to the credit of
all Member States that we all agree to commemorate
the seventieth anniversary of the Organization, which
belongs to everyone, through a Member States-driven
initiative, as represented by this draft resolution.
This is a very important text, and sufficient time
was spent negotiating it before we were able to have
what is before us this afternoon. Kindly permit me to

provide, in two minutes, some background information
for the benefit of some members that could not
participate in the informal consultations where we
negotiated the text.
As of April, it was obvious to the African Group
that there was no plan in place by the General Assembly
to commemorate the seventieth anniversary of the
signing of the Charter that established the United
Nations. Consequently, the African States reflected
on this and engaged in consultations, conscious of
the need to seize the opportunity of the seventieth
anniversary of the United Nations to take stock of the
achievements and challenges of the Organization after
70 years of its existence. Against that backdrop, African
Permanent Representatives mandated their experts to
explore the possibility of developing a draft text with
a feasible proposal that would be acceptable to all on
the need to celebrate the seventieth anniversary of the
Organization.
Prior to the commencement of efforts, discussions,
and eventually negotiations, among African Group
experts on the draft resolution, we conducted some
research to see if there were any ongoing discussions
on the same subject at the United Nations. That became
necessary to avoid the duplication of effort and for
other germane reasons. Following our inquiry, we were
satisfied that there were no similar ongoing initiatives
at the United Nations.
Eventually, we arrived at a text that was presented
to Member States for their consideration at our first
informal meeting on Thursday, 10 June. The draft text

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-27659 (E)

*1527659*

A/69/PV.102

before the Assembly for consideration this afternoon
is a product of compromise, deep reflection and farreaching consultations. It takes on board a number of
considerations, including, first, a realization of the
importance of marking the seventieth anniversary of
the United Nations in a significant way.
Secondly, as we mark the seventieth anniversary of
the United Nations, it was considered very important
to reflect on and take account of the issue of the
maintenance of international peace and security — the
very reason for the establishment of the Organization,
in 1945. That is an important issue to Africa.
Thirdly, the seventieth anniversary is an ideal
milestone by which to reflect on what has been
achieved, especially in the area of the maintenance of
international peace and security, which is a fundamental
concern to us in Africa.
Fourthly, it should be recalled that the series of
United Nations meetings already scheduled for the highlevel segment of the seventieth session of the General
Assembly will focus on the issue of development,
while none of the meetings will focus on the subject of
international peace and security.
Fifthly, this also buttresses the need for the theme
of the thematic debate to focus on the subject of the
maintenance of international peace and security by
creating a platform to discuss it extensively at the
highest level possible during the high-level segment of
the seventieth session of the General Assembly.
Lastly, from the beginning of the discussions on
the draft resolution, the African Group continually
highlighted the need to avoid a draft resolution
that would involve any financial implications. It is
delightful to note that the draft before us will have no
financial implications, as we were informed and as will
be announced again this afternoon.
We are grateful to Member States for the large
turnout at the informal meetings in June and July,
and we appreciate the overwhelming support that we
received from delegations. It is remarkable that there
were about 80 delegations at the very first informal
consultations. The initial discussions went very
smoothly, with many delegations supporting Africa
and commending this initiative. The African Group
appreciates the observations, the suggestions, the
different views that were advanced and, indeed, the

2/30

10/09/2015

invaluable contributions made during the informal
consultations.
It is equally instructive to add that the programme
budget implications associated with the draft resolution
were a major area of concern, on which there were strong
reservations by four delegations. It will be recalled that
the preambular and all operative paragraphs, including
the paragraph that contains information with indications
that the draft resolution would involve some financial
implications in the beginning, were agreed as a result
of this. However, today, as I said, it is noteworthy and
encouraging to know that this concern is no longer
relevant, as the Secretariat has clearly confirmed that
a budget officer has indicated that the draft resolution
will not involve any financial implications.
In conclusion, on behalf of the African States,
I wish to state again that this is the only Member
States-driven initiative to commemorate the seventieth
anniversary of the United Nations after a series of
negotiations, consultations and discussions, including
the compromise that went into it. We request
delegations’ cooperation and support to adopt the draft
text this afternoon for implementation. We encourage
delegations to participate at the highest possible level
in the thematic debate.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/69/L.74/Rev.1, entitled
“Commemoration of the seventieth anniversary of the
United Nations”.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to those delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have also become
sponsors of draft resolution A/69/L.74/Rev.1: Belarus,
Georgia, India, Indonesia, Italy, Jordan, Norway, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia and Sweden.
The President: May I take it that the General
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/69/L.74/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/69/L.74/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 69/316).
The President: Before giving the floor to the
speaker in explanation of position, may I remind

15-27659

10/09/2015

delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Mukerji (India): I would like to begin by
commending my colleagues from the African Union
for this extremely timely initiative and for moving
resolution 69/316 for the consideration of the General
Assembly. As a sponsor of this resolution, my
delegation fully supports the need to commemorate the
seventieth anniversary of the United Nations through
this proposed meeting of the General Assembly at the
highest possible levels during the week of the highlevel segment of the General Assembly.
It was on 16 April 2013 that my delegation first
proposed that we commemorate the importance of the
seventieth anniversary of the United Nations. I am
therefore very happy that, with our brothers and sisters
in Africa, we have today given concrete shape to this
idea whose time has come.
The debate of 1 and 2 October will provide a useful
platform to look at the strengths and weaknesses of the
United Nations system in addressing issues of peace
and security and to consider pathways to meaningfully
address its structural anomalies, including through
the reform and expansion of the Security Council,
the primary organ mandated by the Charter of the
United Nations with responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. My delegation
therefore looks forward avidly to participating in those
deliberations.
I would like to conclude by complimenting the
facilitator, the delegation of Nigeria, on its excellent
stewardship of this process and for having followed
a truly consultative, open and transparent approach
in the negotiations leading up to the adoption of the
resolution.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item
32?
It was so decided.

A/69/PV.102

Agenda item 123 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(t) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
Draft resolution (A/69/L.79)
The President: The General Assembly will
now take action on the draft resolution contained in
document A/69/L.79.
Members will recall that the Assembly held its
debate on agenda item 123 and its sub-items (a) to (y) at
its 48th plenary meeting, on 11 November 2014.
I now give the floor to the representative of Kuwait
to introduce draft resolution A/69/L.79.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait): In my capacity as Chair of
the group of members of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation in New York, I am pleased to introduce
draft resolution A/69/L.79, entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation”.
The aforementioned draft resolution is consistent
with the spirit, mission and purposes of resolution
3369 (XXX), of 10 October 1975, whereby the
Assembly decided to invite the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation to participate in the sessions and the work
of the General Assembly and of its subsidiary organs in
the capacity of observer.
In its preambular paragraphs, the draft resolution
reaffirms the shared common goals of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation and the United Nations in
conflict prevention, confidence-building, peacekeeping,
conflict resolution and post-conflict rehabilitation,
mediation and preventive diplomacy, including conflict
situations involving Muslim communities.
Furthermore, the draft resolution highlights the
desire of the two organizations to work more closely in
the political, economic, social, humanitarian, cultural
and scientific fields and in their common search for
solutions to global problems, such as questions relating
to international peace and security, disarmament, selfdetermination, the promotion of a culture of peace
through dialogue and cooperation, decolonization,
fundamental human rights, economic and social
development, and combating international terrorism. It
welcomes the initiatives for interfaith dialogue by the

15-276593/30

A/69/PV.102

two organizations and the existing cooperation between
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
In its operative paragraphs, the draft resolution
welcomes the strong commitment of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation in the fight against violent
extremism and terrorism; the shared common goals
of the two organizations in promoting and facilitating
the Middle East peace process; and the cooperation
between the two organizations towards combating
intolerance and the stigmatization of persons based on
their religion or belief.
Four decades after the rightful and wise decision
of the General Assembly, today we are witnessing
the increasing importance and utility of dynamic
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation. Clearly, in the
face of enduring as well as emerging conflicts, such
cooperation between the two organizations has a
strategic value.
In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to express my deep gratitude for the diligent work
undertaken by delegations in drafting this draft
resolution.
I now request all States members of the General
Assembly to adopt the draft resolution contained in
document A/69/L.79 by consensus.
The President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to explain their positions
before the voting. May I remind delegations that
explanations of position are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Bishnoi (India): Draft resolution A/69/L.79,
on cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), which
has been introduced, is a significant departure from
previous resolutions on the subject, especially the one
adopted by the General Assembly in August 2013, at its
sixty-seventh session.
While previous resolutions envisaged the OIC
as contributing to promoting and facilitating the
Middle East peace process to achieve the objective
of establishing a just and comprehensive peace in
that region, operative paragraph 4 of the present draft
resolution seeks to go beyond.

4/30

10/09/2015

According to the draft resolution introduced today,
the OIC would foster solutions to “other conflicts”.
The rationale for seeking to extend the role of the
OIC in this manner is not clear. The OIC is also not a
regional organization as understood in the context of
Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter. We had
constructively participated in the consultations on this
text and conveyed our views in clear terms. However,
these consultations were terminated abruptly, without
resolving these issues and without coming to a common,
mutually acceptable understanding.
While we do not ask for a vote, we would like to
reiterate our position that the OIC has no locus standi
for facilitating resolutions to any dispute outside the
Middle East peace process or disputes that affect States
that are non-members of the OIC.
Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia): Armenia proudly
shares a long history of friendship, cooperation, deep
mutual respect and civilizational interaction with
the overwhelming majority of States members of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC). With some
of them, our common history stretches back many
centuries. Armenia enjoys and will spare no effort to
further deepen the most cordial bilateral relations with
those States.
Furthermore, Armenia enjoys effective cooperation
within the regional organizations of which it is a member
and recognizes the value of regional arrangements
in promoting peace, development and human rights.
Within one such regional organization, namely, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), Armenia is faithfully working towards the
“pacific settlement of local disputes”, as stipulated in
Chapter VIII of the Charter.
Armenia has traditionally been involved in a most
constructive manner in the negotiation and adoption of
resolutions under the agenda item under consideration.
With respect to the present draft resolution, it should
be understood that in negotiating draft resolutions
on cooperation with the United Nations, the relevant
organization deals with the broader membership of the
United Nations, not all of which are members of the
given organization and therefore are not bound by its
mandate.
Achieving an explicit consensus while negotiating
such resolutions is therefore most important, not least
for the sake of the credibility of such resolutions.

15-27659

10/09/2015

A/69/PV.102

Regrettably, this is not the case with the present draft.
The OIC has no mandate to foster the resolution of
disputes outside its mandated area. Operative paragraph
4 of the draft resolution in its present form therefore
distorts basic principles of international law.

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (t) of agenda item 123?

Armenia entered into the negotiations on the present
draft in good faith and in a cooperative spirit. Armenia
spared no effort in working to achieve a genuine
consensus. In the course of negotiations, Armenia
welcomed the position of the Chair to seek a consensus
on each and every paragraph of the draft resolution
or otherwise return to previous language. Notably, it
was possible to secure consensus on most parts of the
draft. At all stages of negotiations, Armenia tirelessly
continued to seek a consensus on the language contained
in operative paragraph 4. However, the negotiations
have been frozen, no further consultations have been
initiated and no efforts have been made to bridge the
gaps. Such methods of negotiation have deprived this
draft of genuine and full support. This is regrettable, as
we were strongly committed to achieving consensual
solutions, which, in our view, were perfectly possible.

(u) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Pacific Islands Forum

While not asking for a vote, Armenia reiterates
its position concerning paragraph 4, as the OIC has
no mandate to foster the resolution of disputes outside
its mandated area. Armenia calls upon the OIC to
reiterate its support for internationally agreed formats
of negotiations for the peaceful settlement of conflicts.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position before adoption.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/69/L.79, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation”.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that, since the submission of draft
resolution A/69/L.79, in addition to those delegations
listed in the document, the following countries have
become sponsors: Georgia, Italy and Sweden.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/69/L.79?
Draft resolution A/69/L.79 was adopted (resolution
69/317).

It was so decided.

Draft resolution (A/69/L.90)
The President: The General Assembly will
now take action on the draft resolution contained in
document A/69/L.90.
Members will recall that the Assembly held its
debate on agenda item 123 and its sub-items (a) to (y) at
its 48th plenary meeting, on 11 November 2014.
I now give the floor to the representative of Papua
New Guinea to introduce draft resolution A/69/L.90.
Mr. Sarufa (Papua New Guinea): Two days ago,
Papua New Guinea assumed the Chair of the Pacific
Islands Forum and, as my first assignment here in this
context, I have the honour to introduce, on behalf of the
members of the Pacific Islands Forum, draft resolution
A/69/L.90, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Pacific Islands Forum”. We are deeply
pleased and grateful to all sponsors of this draft
resolution. We also welcome and note with appreciation
the increasing number of sponsors for this biennial draft
resolution that we have observed since 2011, which
stands as a testament to the increasing recognition of
the expanding cooperative relations between the Pacific
Islands Forum and the United Nations.
I would be remiss if I were not to acknowledge
and commend the pivotal and strong leadership role
and valued contribution made by the outgoing Pacific
Islands Forum Chair, the Republic of Palau, in guiding
the work of the Forum over the past year. I would also
like to place on record our particular appreciation to His
Excellency Mr. Caleb Otto, Permanent Representative
of Palau to the United Nations, for not only spearheading
the draft resolution that is now before the General
Assembly, but also for his stewardship of the work of
the Pacific Islands Forum by fostering constructive
and cooperative relations between the Pacific Islands
Forum and the United Nations.
As the incumbent Chair of the Pacific Islands
Forum, Papua New Guinea pledges to strive to further
consolidate the expanding and mutually beneficial

15-276595/30

A/69/PV.102

ties between the Forum and the United Nations as
we embark on implementing the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the other internationally
agreed outcomes. In that regard, we welcome and look
forward to the meeting between the Pacific Islands
Forum leaders and the Secretary-General on the
margins of the seventieth general debate of the General
Assembly. I also applaud and thank the other members
of the Forum and other States Members of the United
Nations that played a role in the finalization of the draft
resolution now under consideration.
As a brief overview, particularly for the States
Members of the United Nations that are not familiar
with the Pacific Islands Forum, the Forum was
founded 44 years ago, in August 1971, as a regional
intergovernmental organization where leaders would
meet annually to develop collective responses to
regional and international issues. It currently includes
16 independent and self-governing States in the Pacific
region. It has three associate members, 12 observers
and 17 post-Forum dialogue partners. The Pacific
Islands Forum currently has observer status at the
United Nations.
The Pacific Islands Forum’s vision is one of
ensuring a region of peace, harmony, security, social
inclusion and prosperity, so that all peoples of the
Pacific can lead free, healthy and productive lives. The
profile and influence of the Forum has also developed
significantly and matured; once a relatively informal
meeting of leaders, it is now a major summit that
attracts the attention and participation of many other
nations and international and regional organizations,
including the United Nations. Coincidentally, the fortysixth Pacific Islands Forum is currently under way in
Port Moresby, and concludes tomorrow.
The Forum’s administrative arm is the Pacific
Islands Forum secretariat, based in Suva. It acts as
the secretariat for Forum-related events, implements
decisions by leaders, facilitates the delivery of
development assistance to member States and
undertakes the political and legal mandates of Forum
meetings.
Turning to the draft resolution on cooperation
between the United Nations and the Pacific Islands
Forum, A/69/L.90 is a biennial resolution. In essence,
the draft resolution is a procedural and technical
update, which refers to key recent developments in
the relations between the Pacific Islands Forum and

6/30

10/09/2015

the United Nations over the past two years. It takes
into account the recent major intergovernmental
processes and internationally agreed outcomes and
their relevance to the work of the United Nations and
the Pacific Islands Forum, respectively, as well as the
importance of enhancing cooperation between the two
entities in these and other relevant areas, including the
outcome of the third International Conference on Small
Island Developing States, the Samoa Pathway, which
addresses sustainable development issues concerning
small island developing States (SIDS), of which many
are Pacific Islands Forum countries, the third United
Nations Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction, the
Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the third International
Conference on Financing for Development, and the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, which will
be considered for adoption by world leaders during the
post-2015 summit to be held in two weeks’ time.
Another new element that has been included in the
draft resolution is the recognition of the importance of
the work being undertaken by the Joint Inspection Unit
on the comprehensive review of the United Nations
system support for small island developing States,
particularly in the context of the SIDS sustainable
development challenges, and the relevance of ensuring
effective United Nations system support for SIDS
sustainable development efforts.
The draft resolution also takes into account the new
development architecture of the Pacific Islands Forum,
known as the Framework for Pacific Regionalism,
adopted by the Forum leaders in July 2014. In brief,
following a comprehensive review of the operations of
the Pacific Islands Forum, the Forum leaders decided
to recast the Forum’s principal objectives, which
are now incorporated in the Framework for Pacific
Regionalism. The key objectives have been sustainable
development that combines economic, social, and
cultural development in ways that improve livelihoods,
well-being and the sustainable use of the environment;
economic growth that is inclusive and equitable;
strengthened governance, accountable institutions and
systems; and peace and security for all.
Finally, the draft resolution reaffirms the
importance of ensuring that the sub-item on cooperation
between the United Nations and the Pacific Islands
Forum remains on the General Assembly’s agenda in
future years.

15-27659

10/09/2015

My delegation is of the firm view that the draft
resolution is essentially a technical and procedural
update on strengthening constructive cooperative
relations between the Pacific Islands Forum and the
United Nations. It is balanced, fair, forward-looking
and representative of the main developments evolving
at both the regional Pacific and the international levels.
In conclusion, therefore, on behalf of the Pacific
Islands Forum members and the other sponsors of the
draft resolution, Papua New Guinea urges the General
Assembly to adopt it by consensus.
The President: Before giving the floor to the
speaker in explanation of position, may I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Beck (Solomon Islands): The Solomon Islands
wishes to clarify that, while it is a member of the Pacific
Islands Forum, it is regretfully unable to sponsor today’s
draft biennial draft resolution, entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Pacific Islands
Forum” (A/69/L.90), in its present form.
The draft resolution comes before us during a
critical year in which we adopted the Small Island
Developing States Accelerated Modalities of Action
(SAMOA) Pathway, concluded discussion on the
2030 agenda and adopted the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda. All those frameworks call for a new form of
relationship, a new political partnership and a paradigm
shift in international cooperation between the United
Nations and all regional organizations.
My delegation views today’s draft resolution as
important, since both the Pacific Islands Forum and
the United Nations are centred on people and have a
responsibility for the well-being of their peoples. That
relationship is well defined in Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations. In the view of the Solomon
Islands, the relationship outlined in the draft resolution
before us is not progressive enough. The agreed-on
language from our sister regional organization for
small island developing States (SIDS) and the United
Nations, which was adopted during the current session
and called for action by the United Nations and its
specialized agencies, funds and programmes in order
to intensify assistance to SIDS, was not accepted by
the partners in this draft resolution. That is regrettable.
In my view, this is also a missed opportunity
for developing an action-oriented partnership. My

A/69/PV.102

delegation finds it disturbing that, despite all the
commitments that were announced during the post2015 process, we are getting pushback even before our
leaders have adopted the 2030 agenda. That raises the
question of how serious we are about implementing our
post-2015 agenda. Given the impact of climate change
and our sustainable development challenges, time is
a luxury we do not have. I am mindful that this draft
resolution is a biennial one. The next opportunity to
strengthen cooperation between the United Nations and
the Pacific Islands Forum will be in 2017, in two years’
time.
This reminds me of what the Secretary-General’s
predecessor, Kofi Annan, stated on more than one
occasion while working on the outcome to the 2005
World Summit, which outlines contours for reforming
the United Nations in order to make it more responsive
to twenty-first-century conditions. He said that the
United Nations was like a fire truck; it is putting out
fires when it should be taking a more proactive role in
preventing those fires from starting. What saddens my
delegation is that something that was said 10 years ago
is still a reality today in the Pacific. The United Nations
system comes together annually to respond to disasters
hitting the Pacific, but shies away multilaterally from
building resilient societies and investing in our peoples.
That is what our post-2015 agenda is all about. We see
that gap in the draft resolution, and that is why we do
not accept the proposed language.
The Solomon Islands values its relations with all
the neighbouring countries that make up the Pacific
Islands Forum and all those that have sponsored this
draft resolution. We will not stand in its way. That
said, if in future these draft resolutions do not allow for
internal consultations among members of the regional
organization concerned in order to define its relations
with the United Nations and for time to engage with
the wider membership on such resolutions, the Solomon
Islands will call for a vote. Business as usual — or even
incremental change — is no longer enough.
The President: We have heard the only speaker in
explanation of position.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/69/L.90, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Pacific Islands Forum”.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.

15-276597/30

A/69/PV.102

Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that, since the submission of draft
resolution A/69/L.90, in addition to those listed in
the document, the following countries have become
sponsors: Albania, Angola, Armenia, Austria,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Chile, Croatia, Cuba, the Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Greece, Guatemala,
Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland,
Israel, Jamaica, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Maldives, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Norway, the
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/69/L.90?
Draft resolution A/69/L.90 was adopted (resolution
69/318).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (u) of agenda item 123?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 13 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
(a) Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/69/L.84)
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly held a debate on agenda item 13
and its sub-item (a), jointly with agenda item 115, and
adopted resolution 69/15 at its 51st plenary meeting, on
14 November 2014. Members will also recall that, under
sub-item (a) of agenda item 13, the Assembly adopted
resolution 69/282 at its 92nd plenary meeting, on 3 June
2015, and resolution 69/310 at its 98th plenary meeting,
on 6 July 2015.

8/30

10/09/2015

I now give the floor to the representative of South
Africa to introduce draft resolution A/69/L.84.
Mr. Mamabolo (South Africa): On behalf of
members of the Group of 77 and China, I am honoured
to introduce draft resolution A/69/L.84, entitled “Basic
Principles on Sovereign Debt Restructuring Processes”,
under sub-item (a) of agenda item 13. The Group of
77 and China would like to congratulate the Ad Hoc
Committee on Sovereign Debt Restructuring Processes
for conducting and submitting its work. We would
also like to thank Ambassador Sacha Llorentty Solíz
of the Plurinational State of Bolivia for his leadership
and stewardship as Chair of the Ad Hoc Committee.
The Group also thanks the office of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development for its valuable
support, which assists developing countries, where
necessary, on issues such as debt restructuring.
The Group believes that the basic principles on
sovereign debt restructuring processes in the draft
resolution before us today are an important outcome
and a good basis for future discussions on such issues.
Those principles have been crafted in a way to ensure
their inclusivity, non-intrusiveness and voluntary
character. They should not favour one side over another.
Both the rights of creditors and debtors are intended to
be incorporated in the draft text in order to bring about
a win-win situation for all concerned.
As several General Assembly resolutions have
recognized, the issue of debt and its sustainability is
essential for underpinning growth. In that regard, both
debt sustainability and effective debt management, as
well as the determination of adequate debt pre-payment
capacity that does not impair sustainable development,
are both factors to be considered in the efforts
carried out by Member States to attain national and
internationally agreed development goals, including
the Sustainable Development Goals, in the context
of future commitments of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. As States Members of the
United Nations, we need to work together on sovereign
debt restructuring and management process as we
march with great vigour towards the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
Indeed, the Agenda must leave no one behind.
Sovereign debt matters concern both developed and
developing countries. This should not be depicted as
solely an issue for developing countries, but as a matter
with the potential to upset the entire global economy.

15-27659

10/09/2015

The opportunity to have frank and an all-encompassing
multilateral discourse on this issue, with all concerned
on board, including the established international and
regional financial institutions, should not be lost.
The Group also believes in the need for continuing
efforts to address systematic fragilities and imbalances,
and to reform and strengthen the international financial
system, while reaffirming that multilateral institutions,
including entities within the United Nations system
and other relevant organizations, play an important
role, in accordance with their respective mandates, in
assisting countries in achieving and maintaining debt
sustainability.
Ms. Rambally (Saint Lucia), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
We therefore urge support for the draft resolution,
as it mainly contains preliminary work on sovereign
restructuring processes. We will need all hands on deck
in order to address this issue once and for all.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/69/L.84, entitled
“Basic Principles on Sovereign Debt Restructuring
Processes”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua,

A/69/PV.102

Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Canada, Germany, Israel, Japan, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Colombia,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon, Greece, Hungary,
Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San
Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
Draft resolution A/69/L.84 was adopted by 136
votes to 6, with 41 abstentions (resolution 69/319).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Spain informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to the speakers in explanation of vote, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the States members of
the European Union.
As we underscored on previous occasions, there
should be no doubt that we recognize the major
importance of sovereign debt restructuring, which
has a significant impact on the global economy and
on many countries in particular. Within the European

15-276599/30

A/69/PV.102

Union, we have also been seriously affected, whether
on the creditor or on the debtor side.
We recall our reservations on the ways in which the
original resolution 68/304, of 9 September 2014, and the
subsequent resolution 69/247, of 29 December 2014, on
modalities, were introduced and adopted. They made it
impossible for us to participate in the process that led
to today’s resolution 69/319.
We take note of today’s resolution, entitled “Basic
Principles on Sovereign Debt Restructuring Processes”,
which includes various statements that do not
accurately reflect international law or practices. While
not being in a position to support it, in the light of the
importance we all accord to the issue of sovereign debt
restructuring, we will continue to take an active part in
efforts aimed at tackling the challenges and identifying
solutions in a constructive way.
We continue to believe that the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) is the appropriate institution
to host global discussions on this subject and that the
work on sovereign debt restructuring should remain
in the IMF. We support the ongoing IMF efforts
aimed at facilitating timely and orderly sovereign
debt restructuring, where such a process is deemed
necessary, based on a robust contractual approach, as
well as the discussions in the Paris Club and in the Paris
Forum on debt restructuring.
Furthermore, most recently with the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda, we collectively recognized the scope
for improvements on this matter. The European Union
will remain actively engaged in the related discussions.
Mr. Kononuchenko (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): The acute debt crises of recent years
have clearly illustrated the serious deficiencies in the
existing system whereby sovereign debts are regulated.
At a time of globalization, the consequences of
conflicts between debtors and their creditors go beyond
the sphere of bilateral relations and present increasing
threat to regional and international financial stability.
With the aim of preventing similar situations in future
and strengthening consistency in the external loan
market, the Russian Federation has always supported
initiatives to improve the current system by which
sovereign debt operations are restructured through the
United Nations, as the most representative and inclusive
global Organization.

10/30

10/09/2015

Our delegation voted in favour of resolution
68/304. We actively supported the creation of the
Ad Hoc Committee to establish a multilateral legal
framework for sovereign debt restructuring processes.
We believe that the principles elaborated by the Ad
Committee and ratified today constitute an initial stage
in the establishment of a sovereign debt restructuring
process that is fair, predictable, balanced and effective.
In our view, for the medium and long term, improving
the implementation of sovereign debt restructuring
operations is fundamental — in the interests of both
creditors and debtors and through the development of
a universal legal mechanism, which can apply to all
types of external debt, and not solely to that of bond
securities. We therefore believe that it would be wise
to pursue the work already started, and we call on all
countries of the Group of 20 — as well as international
financial institutions — to take part in it.
Ms. Derderian (United States of America): As we
have noted previously, the United States of America
remains committed to the stability of the international
financial system and to the development of its partners
around the world. We respect the views of other
Member States on this complex issue and acknowledge
that the current sovereign debt restructuring system
would benefit from further refinement, including more
widespread adoption of updated collective action and
pari passu clauses, as well as greater emphasis on
public debt management.
Nonetheless, the proposed basic principles on
sovereign debt restructuring processes are problematic
in several respects, including language that could
be construed as acknowledging a certain right to
restructure sovereign debt that does not exist. The
principles could also undermine the enforcement of
contractual terms. Those and other concerns highlight
the United States view that the United Nations is not
best placed to address the issue of sovereign debt
restructuring. As a separate issue, we note that it is
unhelpful to make a distinction between Member and
observer States, as the resolution does, whereas simply
referring to States is a simpler, inclusive and preferable
solution.
We will refrain from speaking to the issues in
this text in more detail today, in consideration of our
colleagues’ time and in the light of the fact that our
concerns are well known. Instead, we respectfully
refer members to our prior statements on this process,
including that of 9 September 2014 (see A/68/PV.107).

15-27659

10/09/2015

A/69/PV.102

Our position has not changed, which is why we asked
for a recorded vote on resolution 69/319 and voted
against it.

I shall now give the floor to those representatives
who have requested the floor to make statements
following the adoption of the resolution.

Mr. Gunnarsson (Iceland): As we said at the
beginning of this process in 2014, resolution 69/319
addresses a very real problem. We referred at the time
to the Secretary-General’s conclusion, in his report
(A/69/167) on the matter, that international ad hoc
arrangements for debt crisis resolution have resulted
in incoherence and unpredictability. The problems and
concerns about debt sustainability, which is one facet
of sovereign debt restructuring, figure prominently in
the Addis Ababa outcome document. In abstaining in
the initial voting, we raised the question of what would
be the right and proper international forum for that
important cause. We also underlined that further work
was needed in order to achieve a stronger consensus. It is
our view that negotiations over the past two months have
produced a balanced set of basic principles that should
be used by the competent international organizations in
the process of sovereign debt restructuring.

Mr. Timerman (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): On
behalf of President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner and
the people of Argentina, I would like very much to thank
the great majority of United Nations Members that have
understood the importance of resolution 69/319, which
favours economic stability, peace in our societies and
development. Today, debt is the cause of violence and
inequality, creating a situation in which the powerful
take advantage of less developed countries needing
funds.

Given the balanced nature of the principles
established, Iceland voted in favour of resolution 69/319.
Mr. Neelam (Australia): At the outset, let me say
that Australia places great importance on improving
sovereign debt restructuring processes. We recognize
that that is an issue that is critical to affected
economies around the world. For that reason, Australia
has played and will continue to play a constructive
role — through global forums — to find contractual
solutions that improve the effectiveness of sovereign
debt restructuring.
With regard to resolution 69/319, Australia does not
support principle 1, which could be construed to imply
that countries have a unilateral right to restructure their
debt. We believe that any restructuring of debt should
be the result of negotiation and mutual agreement
between debtors and creditors. That is the reason that
Australia abstained in the voting on this resolution
today. Australia remains committed to engaging
actively in the work of the International Monetary
Fund, the Group of 20 and the Paris Club in order to
effectively address this important issue.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote.

Why have we come here? Many countries have told
us that this is not the right forum. However, it is the
only forum that over the past 70 years of the history of
the United Nations has adopted resolutions that have
changed the course of the history of humankind. That
has been achieved because this is a democratic forum
where all sovereign countries have a voice and a vote.
The Assembly adopted the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, endorsed the decolonization and the
self-determination of peoples and territorial integrity,
adopted the United Nations Declaration on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women and the Convention
on the Rights of the Child, and endorsed the peaceful
settlement of disputes among States. It adopted the
International Convention for the Protection of All
Persons from Enforced Disappearance, a Convention
that was sponsored by the Republics of Argentina
and France and based on the sad experience of the
Argentine Republic with the forced disappearance of
political activists during the last dictatorship.
If the Assembly is able to settle all those issues,
which have unleashed major tragedies in the world,
allowing the majority of us to understand the
seriousness of those scourges and to resolve them, how
is it not possible to say that this is not the right forum for
addressing the issue of sovereign debt? Countries have
a right to restructure sovereign debt. We have to put a
limit on the pirates of the twenty-first century, which
are nothing more than the vulture funds that have fed
on the lack of global legislation and taken advantage
of the poverty of many of the countries present in this
Hall.

15-2765911/30

A/69/PV.102

I am very proud of the fact that during this year,
when we have worked so intensely, 12 additional
countries have supported and voted in favour of
the resolution and five have changed their negative
votes, because this is not a question of winning. This
is a democratic place. We did not come here to win
anything; we came to convince people. That is why
I thank the Assembly, which has moved this process
forward very patiently and with a great deal of honour
and much common sense, which has allowed us to reach
this important juncture.
Finally, I would like to underscore the presence
of our colleague, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, who has been
kind enough to attend this meeting today. This is such
an important day for all the countries of the Third
World — Africa, Asia and Latin America — that are
suffering and want to stop suffering the consequences
of all the attacks against us by countries and vulture
funds that do not wish to see us resolve our debt problem
or to develop in peace and with political stability.
I would like to cede the floor to my colleague,
Minister of Economy and Public Finances of Argentina
Axel Kicillof, who is present with us today.
Mr. Kicillof (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank, together with the Minister for Foreign
Affairs, the Assembly for its adoption of resolution
69/319, which has been an important resolution for us.

10/09/2015

Ms. Rodríguez Gómez (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We are truly
experiencing what is called living history. We wish
to send a warm embrace from the General Assembly
to the President of the Argentine Republic, President
Fernández. We send a warm greeting to her and her
brave people because what has just happened in the
Assembly is not just anything. As valiant Minister
for Foreign Affairs Timerman, our South American
brother, said, what has happened is bringing the voice
of dignity of the people of our South America, Latin
America and the Caribbean. What has occurred here is
precisely a moment of dignity in which we overthrow
the power of the vulture funds that spread misery and
poverty throughout the world. We also venture to say
that they lead to terrorist violence in other parts of the
world.
Sovereign States are dominating and overpowering
the vulture financial capital, which together with the
media machinery is trying to impose its will on the
world. What has occurred today, with all of the votes
that bravely supported these principles, essentially
ensures the sovereign possibility of regulating the
financial capital of these vulture funds, which have
subjected people to exploitation, misery, poverty and
violence.

The current economic crisis has highlighted the fact
that foreign debt has become for many countries — not
just those that are part of the underdeveloped world,
but many others around the world — a heavy burden
that hinders them and endangers their growth, their
inclusion and their creation of activities and jobs.

We are grateful and very happy to be in the
Assembly. Once again, we are united as South
Americans. We add our thanks to all the world’s
countries that, in this multilateral forum, are insisting
on the fundamental principles of the United Nations:
the principle of the self-determination of peoples,
the principle of non-intervention of capitals in our
sovereign States and countries, and the principle of the
sovereign equality of States.

We know that many people are hoping that
contractual clauses will solve the issue of debt
restructuring. However, we believe that we have
to change the international structure and financial
architecture. The United Nations, which is a democratic,
representative and equitable body, is the one entity that
is able to do that. Setting these Basic Principles is a
fundamental step towards ensuring that no one will
suffer from the attacks by vulture funds that Argentina
and many other countries are suffering from today. We
welcome this resolution because it is a fundamental
step for us to have a better world — a world free from
vultures.

We have all come here to this necessary forum, as
Foreign Minister Timerman has said, a forum that has
taken historic steps and produced legal instruments that
are relevant for all of humankind. We are very happy
to have supported this vote and to have participated
because we were also sponsors of a fundamental
principle: the sovereign immunity of jurisdiction. We
endorse the fact that what has occurred here will take
away the power to act and govern from some funds and
capitals that the people did not elect. It is the sovereign
States, representing their people, that have the right
to govern their destiny in a free, independent and
sovereign manner.

12/30

15-27659

10/09/2015

I thank all the countries that have joined together and
taken away stability from the vulture funds. Stability is
what we must give to our people — stability, happiness
and progress. This was a vote for the happiness of our
people.
Mr. Rattray (Jamaica): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the 14 States members of the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM). CARICOM aligns
itself with the statement made by the representative of
South Africa on behalf of the Group of 77 and China
and by the representative of Maldives on behalf of the
Alliance of Small Island States.
At the outset, CARICOM wishes to thank the
Mission of Bolivia for its commitment and leadership
during this process, which has culminated in the set
of Basic Principles that have just been adopted by the
Assembly.
CARICOM believes that these basic principles
provide a useful framework for further discussions
on debt restructuring towards the goal of making the
process timely, orderly, effective and, most importantly,
fair. As recent cases have highlighted, current marketbased approaches to restructuring sovereign debt
provide insufficient means by which to adequately
address the vast amount of pre-existing debt owed
to private creditors. It is therefore important that we
agree to a Basic set of Principles that can underpin the
negotiation of the orderly, constructive and consensual
restructuring of the debt of sovereign States.
The matter of a multilateral framework for sovereign
debt restructuring is of great interest to CARICOM
member States in the light of the fact that unsustainably
high debt burdens remain among the major challenges
to the economic development of the region. Indeed, the
average current debt-to-gross domestic product (GDP)
ratio among CARICOM countries exceeds 70 per cent,
with the most severely indebted countries having debtto-GDP ratios in excess of 100 per cent. In several
CARICOM countries, the primary surpluses required
to reduce the stock of debt to sustainable levels range
between 1.5 and 10 per cent of GDP. This scenario
has fostered a situation where, across the subregion,
debt servicing has far exceeded expenditure on social
services, including health care and education, a fact
that has had far-reaching implications for our overall
socioeconomic development.
The situation becomes all the more critical as we
move towards a post-2015 world and prepare, in mere

A/69/PV.102

weeks, to adopt, in this very Assembly, Agenda 2030,
an agreement of the international community to pursue
a sustainable development agenda with the eradication
of poverty at its core. The placement of countries in debt
distress on a sustainable debt path would enable them
to achieve their prospects for economic recovery while
simultaneously improving their ability to effectively
meet their creditor obligations.
CARICOM member States’ efforts to effectively
address their unsustainable debt burdens have been
constrained by their categorization as middle-income
countries. This designation renders them ineligible for
debt relief and severely limits their ability to access
concessionary and grant-based financing. With a few
exceptions, the region has not benefited from recent
global debt-relief initiatives such as the Heavily
Indebted Poor Countries Initiative or the Multilateral
Debt Relief Initiative.
In conclusion, CARICOM is of the view that
indebted countries must be given an opportunity to
undertake orderly debt-workout arrangements as a
means of stabilizing their economies and returning to
a path of sustained, inclusive economic growth. We
believe that the Basic Principles on Sovereign Debt
Restructuring Processes are therefore an important
tool in arriving at this position, and we fully support
resolution 69/319.
Mr. González Franco (Paraguay) (spoke in
Spanish): Paraguay, which holds the pro tempore
chairmanship of the Southern Common Market
(MERCOSUR), welcomes the Basic Principles on
Sovereign Debt Restructuring Processes. This set of
principles, which must be observed in the restructuring
of sovereign debt, was elaborated in order to establish
a multilateral legal framework for debt-restructuring
processes under resolution 69/247, of 2014, which
established the Ad Hoc Committee on Sovereign Debt
Restructuring Processes.
On behalf of the States parties to MERCOSUR, I
should like to express our gratitude to the Plurinational
State of Bolivia and the Argentine Republic, through
their Permanent Representatives, for their leadership
in the processes of consultation and negotiation that
culminated today in the adoption of the Basic Principles,
tools that will serve to limit the destructuring effect of
risk capital funds.
Finally, I reiterate the rejection by the States parties
to MERCOSUR of the attitude and the requests of a

15-2765913/30

A/69/PV.102

minority group of non-restructured bondholders of
the sovereign debt of Argentina, whose action makes
it difficult to reach a final agreement between debtors
and creditors and endangers the financial stability
of countries, as stated in the joint communiqué of
the Presidents of the States parties to MERCOSUR,
meeting on the occasion of the forty-eighth regular
session of the MERCOSUR Council, held in Brasilia
on 17 July.
Mr. Koncke (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): It
is my privilege to speak on behalf of the Union of
South American Nations (UNASUR) in order to
underscore the importance of the adoption of resolution
69/319, entitled “Basic Principles on Sovereign Debt
Restructuring Processes”.
There are various reasons why we believe that today
an important step has been taken. First, as we have
stated on previous occasions, the States members of
UNASUR firmly believe that the United Nations is the
Organization that has the role and legitimacy necessary
to deal with issues of development. We therefore believe
that the General Assembly, as the most democratic body
of the Organization where all members are equally
represented, is the appropriate forum for dealing with
economic and financial questions as well, considering
the current challenges.
Secondly, it is vital that the international system
be able to rely on a system for the restructuring of
sovereign debt under fair conditions, with mutual
benefits for both creditors and debtors, without in any
way affecting the development or welfare of countries
and their peoples.
Thirdly, UNASUR deems it necessary to move
towards a reorganization of the international financial
architecture in order to reduce the negative impacts of
an unstable global financial system. Here we believe
that the stability and predictability of the international
financial architecture requires that sovereign debt
restructuring processes be carried out and respected.
Fourthly, problems related to external debt affect
the international community as a whole, including
both developed and developing countries, and restrict
the capacity to create the conditions necessary for
the exercise of human rights, in particular economic,
social and cultural rights. Countries must use their
scarce resources to pay down debt instead of being
able to invest in the welfare of their peoples. Debt
crises are costly and detrimental to employment and

14/30

10/09/2015

productive investment and in general lead to cuts in
public spending, including on health and education.
Indebtedness for any nation is an impediment to growth
and development, and it also contributes to increasing
unemployment and poverty.
For all of those reasons, it was essential for the
regional and international financial community to
respond robustly while emphasizing the inherent link
between financing and development, and between
sustainable growth and debt sustainability against the
backdrop of the actual repayment capacity of countries
and while maintaining equal treatment among creditors.
We therefore welcome the adoption of resolution 69/319,
which is the outcome of a year’s work in a process of
open and transparent negotiations.
Faced with the problem of sovereign debt
restructuring, which is increasingly part of
international discussions, we highlight the importance
of having identified a number of principles that, under
international law, already govern any restructuring of
sovereign debt under both general principles of law
and customary norms. Undoubtedly, this is a great
contribution by the General Assembly in compiling and
codifying those principles, as it will be highly useful
to advancing discussions on the establishment of a
multilateral legal framework that will make them even
more effective.
In conclusion, these principles will not only serve
as a clear guide as to how processes of sovereign debt
restructuring are carried out, but will also contribute to
the upcoming discussions on the subject that we must
continue to follow up at the United Nations.
Mr. Sareer (Maldives): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS).
Debt sustainability is a significant challenge facing
many small island developing States (SIDS) that is
stalling efforts towards sustainable development. It
is known that SIDS’ ratio of gross domestic product
to debt in 2014 stood on average at 57 per cent, as
compared to 44 per cent in all other middle- and lowerincome countries, thereby making SIDS more severely
indebted than other developing countries. Our unique
and particular vulnerabilities contribute to that higher
debt scenario.
The basic principles in resolution 69/319 are clear,
concise and present a useful reference for future action
and dialogue on debt restructuring. The discussion of

15-27659

10/09/2015

those issues has long been recognized as important.
AOSIS welcomes this resolution, which sets out the
principles of transparency, impartiality, equality,
sovereign immunity, sustainability, legitimacy and
good-faith treatment for both debtors and creditors.
The resolution has particular resonance as this time,
as we are moving towards the implementation of the
Addis Ababa Action Agenda and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
We thereore welcome the adoption of this timely
and important resolution. We look forward to continuing
this conversation.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): It is a pleasure, Madam,
to have you preside over this important meeting of the
General Assembly.
Given the time constraints, I will make a very brief
statement in the context of my functions as Chair of the
Ad Hoc Committee on Sovereign Debt Restructuring
Processes, having been given that mandate by two
resolutions of the Assembly.
I would first like very sincerely to commend the
work of the Permanent Representative of Argentina
to the United Nations, Ambassador Marita Perceval,
as well as, of course, the work of Ministers Timerman
and Kicillof, whose personal dedication to this very
important issue I have seen for myself. Through them,
I would like to convey my greetings to President
Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, who, along with
her Government, has had the courage to confront,
in an absolutely decisive way, the scourge of vulture
funds — not only when it comes to Argentina, but for
many other countries, especially developing countries.
I also wish to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his support to the work of the Ad Hoc
Committee, as well as the President of the General
Assembly at its sixty-ninth session, His Excellency
Mr. Sam Kutesa. I thank them both in particular not
just because it is a matter of protocol, but because they
have devoted personal efforts to this very important
resolution 69/319. For instance, when the International
Monetary Fund refused to meet with the Chair of the
Ad Hoc Committee, it was an action by the SecretaryGeneral and by the President of the General Assembly
that led the Fund to pay attention to a draft resolution
originating in the Assembly and a mandated Committee.

A/69/PV.102

In that connection, I should also like to
acknowledge the work done by the Group of 77 under
the chairmanship of South Africa and its Ambassador,
Kingsley Mamabolo. His team has been crucial in
arriving at this afternoon’s successful outcome. Of
course, I am also grateful for the work of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, and
especially the team of Richard Kozul-Wright, which
also played a very important role that is now reflected
in the resolution. I also cannot fail to mention the rest
of the Bureau of the Ad Hoc Committee, including
vice-Chairs Niluka Kadurugamuwa of Sri Lanka and
Khanim Ibrahimova of Azerbaijan, as well as the
Rapporteur, Khaled Benamadi of Algeria. Their work
has also been crucial to this outcome. I also wish to
thank the Permanent Mission of the Plurinational State
of Bolivia for its efforts.
This resolution is important because we are not
talking just about the financial system, as we would
be led to believe. This resolution has to do with the
opportunities for growth in our countries. And when we
talk about opportunities for growth, we are also talking
about opportunities for development. And if we are
talking about development, we are talking about social
and economic rights. In turn, we are talking about the
quality of our political systems — and ultimately about
the issues of greatest concern to the Organization.
When they tell us that this is not the appropriate forum
to discuss these issues, what we are really being told
is that we must play the game when they control the
decisions, when they own the ball and when they get to
determine the size of the field. That is not democracy. It
goes against the principles of the Organization.
While we of course respect the fact that some
countries voted against the resolution, we do not
understand their reasons. In reading each of the
principles, it is difficult to be opposed to the principles
of good faith and transparency, or any of the other
seven principles. Therefore, while we can respect that
position as part of the sovereign right of every State, in
my capacity as Chair of the Ad Hoc Committee, I do
want to draw the Assembly’s attention to the attitude
of the International Monetary Fund. The Fund is not
just an agency belonging to certain countries, it is part
of the United Nations system. It was repeatedly invited
to the Committee’s meetings, but its seat remained
unoccupied throughout. The International Monetary
Fund must be reformed. It has to be democratized.

15-2765915/30

A/69/PV.102

10/09/2015

Otherwise, it will not respond to the principles —I
repeat — of the United Nations system.

new 2030 agenda for sustainable development could not
have been more propitious.

I thank all Member States for their efforts in
adopting this resolution, which no doubt will be the
dividing line of before and after in addressing this issue
at the Organization.

The integrated and indeed universal nature of that
new agenda calls for an integrated and wide-ranging
approach to the means for achieving sustainable
development. A fair and balanced resolution of
sovereign debt issues, which these guiding principles
can help promote, can be helpful in creating the
conditions for continued inclusive growth in debtor
countries as well as their sustainable development,
and can also promote global macroeconomic stability.
The principles themselves are non-binding and thus
preserve countries’ sovereign policy space for designing
their borrowing instruments to suit their specific
circumstances while also taking into account other
relevant factors. We hope that voluntary adherence
to the principles will contribute greatly to preventing
debt crises and to creating more efficient and fair debtrestructuring processes.

The Acting President: I would like to kindly
request that members limit their statements in order
to enable us to deal with the agenda items as intended
today, as we have another item to come on our agenda.
Mr. Bishnoi (India): India is pleased with the
Assembly’s adoption today of resolution 69/319. At
the outset, I would like to warmly congratulate the
delegation of Argentina on having taken the lead on this
issue over the past several months. I would particularly
like to acknowledge the presence here today of
Argentina’s Minister for Foreign Affairs, International
Trade and Worship, Mr. Héctor Timerman, and His
Excellency the Argentine Minister of Finance. I would
like to convey our appreciation to the Permanent
Representative of Bolivia for his sterling guidance of
the work of the Ad Hoc Committee on Sovereign Debt
Restructuring Processes.
The issue of sovereign debt restructuring has lately
held centre stage in global discussions. It is not linked to
any one country, nor is it a problem only for developing
countries. There is also ample evidence that the issue is
directly linked to the issue of the inclusive development
and macroeconomic and political stability of countries
and their peoples’ welfare. With its adoption of today’s
resolution, the Assembly is codifying and formalizing
a set of basic principles for sovereign debt restructuring
processes, arrived at through the work of the Ad
Hoc Committee in accordance with the Assembly’s
mandate. In doing so it is laying down a set of simple
yet powerful markers that can provide a very helpful
template for dealing with the issue of sovereign debt
and its restructuring.
The adoption of the resolution today is also very
timely, coming as it does as we wind down a very
eventful and productive sixty-ninth session and begin
our work towards a historic seventieth. In exercising
its role as the supreme and universal global legislative
body, the General Assembly is making a pronouncement
about an important issue and doing so meaningfully,
and the fact that the adoption of this resolution today
coincides with the widely anticipated endorsement of a

16/30

Mr. Teo (Singapore): Singapore voted in favour of
resolution 69/319 today. In our view, the non-binding
principles for sovereign debt restructuring are a
practical outcome and conclusion of the processes of
the Ad Hoc Committee. We appreciate the efforts made
to consider the complex and wide-ranging interests
involved, and we note the principles’ recognition that
the contractual rights of all creditors must be taken into
account in any debt restructuring.
Our position on considering improved approaches
to sovereign debt restructuring is well known.
Any further consideration of improved approaches
must secure the active, inclusive participation and
engagement of both debtor and creditor countries, as
well as of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and
other established international and regional financial
institutions. That will enable us to comprehensively
consider the various diverse perspectives and to work
towards a more collaborative and effective outcome.
In that regard, the IMF may be better placed to take
discussions on sovereign debt restructuring forward.
Mr. Hermida Castillo (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): Our delegation welcomes Mr. Héctor
Timerman, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Argentina,
and the rest of his team, and commends the work of
the Argentine delegation, particularly Ambassador
María Cristina Perceval. We would also like to thank
Ambassador Sacha Llorentty Solíz of Bolivia for his
leadership of the Ad Hoc Committee on Sovereign

15-27659

10/09/2015

Debt Restructuring Processes. We are grateful for the
initiative of our sister republic, Argentina, in bringing
this important debate on sovereign debt to the Assembly
and helping to raise Member States’ awareness of the
importance of implementing mechanisms that can help
prevent and resolve financial crises.
We are pleased that the Group of 77 and China has
taken on this important initiative, and we welcome the
adoption today of resolution 69/319, which covers the
basic principles for sovereign debt restructuring. Our
delegation voted in favour of the resolution in the belief
that those principles should serve as a foundation for
a legal framework for any future agreements we may
wish to arrive at for the benefit of all our peoples. They
are also essential at this crucial moment in our history,
when we are preparing to adopt a post-2015 agenda
that includes 17 Sustainable Development Goals and
169 targets, since they will enable us to establish the
political space we need to implement those goals.
Nicaragua would like to emphasize the undisputed
role of the United Nations, particularly the General
Assembly, as a universal, democratic and equitable
forum that can help us ensure the legitimacy of the most
important decisions we have to make, particularly those
on economic and financial issues, which affect every
person living on this planet. We regret that we could not
count on the participation in the discussion of this topic
of other relevant actors, whose absence displays a lack
of political will and interest in resolving an issue that
affects the entire international community, regardless
of levels of development.
While because of this we have had to put to a
vote a resolution that should have been adopted by
consensus, this situation should be of equal concern
for developed and developing countries. All Member
States should work to achieve debt sustainability,
which is essential to supporting growth and achieving
national and international development goals, including
the Sustainable Development Goals.
Mr. Reyes Rodríguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We are very grateful to you for overseeing our work,
Madam. I would like to welcome the presence of
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Argentina and
Venezuela and of Argentina’s Minister of Finance. We
congratulate Ambassador María Cristina Perceval, who
was fully involved in this effort and whose birthday it
is today.

A/69/PV.102

Today is also a historic day for the United Nations.
For the first time, after decades of discussion within
the framework of the Organization, we finally have
a set of principles for guiding States and other
international actors in solving the problems associated
with foreign debt. For years, our peoples have made
enormous sacrifices to honour their financial foreign
commitments, compromising their right to development
and to their own basic living conditions. By contrast,
wealthy usurers and speculators had raised their
expectations, rationales and ambitions to profit from
hunger, illiteracy, disease and the denial of the dream
of a better future for our children, women and men.
Foreign debt and the actions of vulture funds predators
are scourges affecting all developing countries.
Thanks to the unity of the Group of 77 and China,
with South Africa as its Chair, and to the leadership of
Mr. Llorentty Solíz, Chair of the Ad Hoc Committee
on Sovereign Debt Restructuring Processes, the United
Nations now has a set of clear and strong principles
to face the problem of resolving the problem of
sovereign debt. But that is just the beginning of the
long path we must follow if we wish to find a just and
rational solution to the problem of the foreign debt
of developing countries, which we have paid over
and over again merely for its accrued interest. Those
principles serve as a confirmation of the solidarity of
the international community with the commitment
of peoples and authorities, and in particular that of
leaders, including the President of Argentina, who have
made social justice the heart of their work. We will not
be able to ensure that the countries of the South will
receive justice in the future, but we have made a vital
contribution to establishing an international framework
that challenges the impunity enjoyed by the speculators
who have ruined our countries.
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We have today adopted resolution 69/319 on the
Basic Principles on Sovereign Debt Restructuring
Processes, submitted by the Group of 77 and China
(G-77). We endorse the statements made on behalf of
the G-77 and the Union of South American Nations.
We also welcome the presence of Mr. Héctor Marcos
Timerman, Minister for Foreign Affairs, and Mr. Axel
Kicillof, Minister of Economy and Public Finances of
Argentina, and commend Argentina’s great efforts to
introduce to this body a subject of global impact that
requires a global response. The perseverance of the
Permanent Representative of Argentina, Ambassador

15-2765917/30

A/69/PV.102

10/09/2015

María Cristina Perceval, and members of her Mission
has been of particular importance.

of the Union of South American Nations.We would like
to make a few comments in our national capacity.

In our view, the restructuring sovereign debt is an
issue of the global agenda whose importance merits
discussion in the United Nations, the global forum
par excellence where all countries of the international
community can participate and contribute. Thus,
sovereign debt has been addressed in the two documents
that have distinguished this sixty-ninth session: the
Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International
Conference on Financing for Development, in section
E of its chapter II (resolution 69/313), on debt and
debt sustainability, and Agenda 2030 on Sustainable
Development, which in point 3 of its target 17, appeals to
countries to help promote long-term debt sustainability,
including restructuring processes for debt.

The issue of debt restructuring has crucial
implications for the stability and balance of the
international financial system, and for the future
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. The current architecture for restructuring
debt is not sustainable and has to be amended to allow
for the achievement of the 17 sustainable development
goals and their 169 targets. The need to amend the
current architecture was recognized in the reform and
amending of the pari passu clauses and the collective
action proposed by the International Capital Markets
Association, with the endorsement of the International
Monetary Fund, and recently by the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda of the Third International Conference
on Financing for Development, as adopted in July in
Ethiopia.

The evidence shows us that countries remain
indebted, and that it has become increasingly necessary
to have ules on sustainability and debt restructuring
processes. Today’s resolution 69/319 will help to open
a debate on this issue in which other international
bodies will also be able to add their voice. There is a
need to include this matter within the framework of
international standards and apply the rule of law, and
to take into account the impact of debt on development
and the quality of life of peoples and the central role
of the General Assembly in addressing issues of global
impact, such as the resolution that we have adopted.
These are all elements that Chile bore in mind when we
lent our support to the resolution.
Mr. Antonio de Aguiar Patriota (Brazil) (spoke
in Spanish): I should like to welcome to the General
Assembly Ministers Héctor Timerman and Axel
Kicillof, other officials from Argentina, including
Permanent Representative María Cristina Perceval,
and commend her leadership on this issue of strategic
importance to all Members of the Organization. I
also take this opportunity to commend the Permanent
Representative of the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
Ambassador Llorentty Solíz, and to thank him for
his dedication in conducting the work of the Ad Hoc
Committee on Sovereign Debt Restructuring Processes
over the past few months.
My delegation aligns itself with the statements
made by the representatives of South Africa on behalf
of the Group of 77 and China, Paraguay on behalf of the
Common Market of the South, and Uruguay on behalf

18/30

The 10 Basic Principles that we have adopted
today are the outcome of lengthy consultations in the
United Nations and reflect reasonable parameters for
the effective, sustainable, fair and orderly conduct of
sovereign debt restructuring processes. The delegation
of Brazil regrets the fact that not all international
financial mechanisms participated in the discussions of
the Ad Hoc Committee on Sovereign Debt Restructuring
Processes, but we would urge them to take those into
account in a timely fashion.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 13.
Agenda item 120
Strengthening of the United Nations system
Draft resolution (A/69/L.87/Rev.1)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Iraq to introduce draft resolution
A/69/L.87/Rev.1.
Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): The
Republic of Iraq, in its capacity as Chair of the Group
of Arab States for the month of September, has the
honour of introducing, on behalf of all Arab countries
and 52 States Members of the United Nations, draft
resolution A/69/L.87/Rev.1, entitled, “Raising the flags
of non-member observer States at the United Nations,”
under agenda item 120, “Strengthening of the United
Nations system”.

15-27659

10/09/2015

The draft resolution before the Assembly appears
to be rather restrained, but it conveys a great deal
symbolically. It has been drafted according to the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, and
reaffirms our faith in the equal rights of men and women
and of nations large and small. The draft resolution
pertains to the participation of non-member observer
States that maintain permanent observer missions at
Headquarters and recalls that the State of Palestine
became a non-member observer State at the United
Nations on 29 November 2012, and previous relevant
resolutions.
Paragraph 1 of the draft resolution stipulates that
“the flags of non-member observer States at the
United Nations maintaining permanent observer
missions at Headquarters shall be raised at
Headquarters and United Nations offices following
the flags of the States Members of the United
Nations”.
Paragraph 2 requests the Secretary-General to
“take the measures necessary for the implementation
of this decision during the seventieth session of
the General Assembly and within 20 days of the
adoption of the present resolution”.
In conclusion, I would urge Member States to
lend their full support to and to vote in favour of the
draft resolution because it represents an important step
towards supporting the Palestinian people and their
right to self-determination, independence and their due
place among States.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
proceed to consider draft resolution A/69/L.87/Rev.1.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote before the voting, may I remind delegations
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Braun (Germany): Germany has thoroughly
considered the draft resolution before it today, the
adoption of which changes decades of an uncontested
and established practice within the United Nations.
The raising of flags at Headquarters has always been
associated with full membership within the United
Nations, in accordance with the Secretary-General’s
Flag Code of 1952 and regulations dating from 1967.
Germany is unaware of any compelling reason that
would justify changing the established practice. That

A/69/PV.102

is why Germany will abstain in the voting on draft
resolution A/69/L.87/Rev.1.
Our abstention should in no way give rise to
any interpretation on the state of relations between
Germany, the Holy See and Palestine. Germany is aware
that the Holy See is not a sponsor of the draft resolution.
Germany firmly believes in a negotiated two-State
solution and strongly supports the aim of establishing
an independent State of Palestine, living side by side
in peace and security with Israel. We actively worked
towards that end for years and contributed to the
development of governmental institutions and State
infrastructure in the Palestinian territories.
However, a two-State solution that is not based on
a comprehensive final status agreement that ends all
claims and fulfils the aspirations of both sides will
not be sustainable. We call on both sides to engage
in serious negotiations without conditions or further
delay. Germany stands ready to support all efforts
towards relaunching a substantial negotiation process
and underlines the importance of renewed engagement
on the part of the international community, including
the Quartet and regional actors.
Mr.
Nickert
(Austria):
Draft
resolution
A/69/L.87/Rev.1, before us today, deals with the display
of flags — a matter that has always been associated
with full membership of the Organization. It has to be
kept in mind that the decision today will set a precedent
for the future that will also apply to all future observer
States. We also note that many of the current Member
States from the European Union, including Austria, had
observer status before joining the Organization as full
Members and had to wait for their full admission before
their flag was raised at Headquarters. That represents
the common practice for all international organizations.
We were not provided with a convincing reason of a
general nature to justify changing the long-held practice
of limiting the display of flags to those of Member
States. Furthermore, we would like to point out that a
display of flags at all United Nations premises is the
prerogative of the Secretary-General, as mandated by
the General Assembly in resolution 92 (I) of 1946.
I would like to note in that context that our position
does not affect Austria’s support of Palestine’s wish
to become a full Member of the United Nations, as
part of a comprehensive solution to the conflict.
Together with our partners in the European Union, we
have consistently worked to advance the Palestinian

15-2765919/30

A/69/PV.102

10/09/2015

Authority’s State-building efforts, and we will continue
to do so. We believe that the focus needs to be on a
return to meaningful negotiations between Israelis
and Palestinians in order to achieve a lasting and just
solution to the conflict, which can only be a two-State
solution. Based on the considerations of principles
heretofore outlined, Austria will therefore abstain in
the voting on the draft resolution.

Namibia, Nicaragua, Niger, Pakistan, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Africa, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Turkey and Zimbabwe.

Ms. Power (United States of America): The United
States has long been, is today, and will remain committed
to achieving the peace that Palestinians and Israelis
deserve: two States for two peoples, with a sovereign,
viable, and independent Palestinian State, living side by
side in peace and security with a Jewish and democratic
Israel. We all know that a sustainable and just resolution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict will be reached only
through hard choices and compromise and negotiated
by the parties. Raising the Palestinian flag outside
Headquarters is not an alternative to negotiations and
will not bring the parties closer to peace.

In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo
Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, Honduras,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libya,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Zimbabwe

The United States will vote against draft resolution
A/69/L.87/Rev.1, but this vote is not a vote for the
status quo or a rejection of Palestinian aspirations for
statehood. Our vote reflects the reality that the parties
themselves must ultimately take the constructive and
responsible steps required to achieve a two-State
solution and end the cycle of violence and suffering that
has persisted for far too long in the Middle East.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/69/L.87/Rev.1, entitled “Raising the flags
of non-member observer States at the United Nations”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution,
and in addition to those delegations listed in the
document, the following countries have also become
sponsors of A/69/L.87/Rev.1: Afghanistan, Argentina,
Bangladesh, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Chad, Comoros,
Cuba, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
El Salvador, Guinea, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,

20/30

The Acting President: A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, Tuvalu,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Andorra, Austria, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Colombia, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary,

15-27659

10/09/2015

Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Monaco,
Myanmar, Nauru, Netherlands, Norway, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, Singapore,
Slovakia, Switzerland, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Trinidad and
Tobago, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, Vanuatu
Draft resolution A/69/L.87/Rev.1 was adopted
by 119 votes to 8, with 45 abstentions (resolution
69/320).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Zambia advised the
Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to speakers in explanation of vote, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): Once again, the Assembly
has convened to debate a crucially important matter.
Member States will be asked to make a decision that
will reflect on how this institution will be perceived.
No, I am not referring to the Palestinian flag. The
lives of Israelis and Palestinians will remain the same
whether or not a Palestinian flag flies in New York. I
am speaking of a much more important decision. The
real question we face is not whether the Palestinians
will raise a flag, but whether the United Nations will
raise a white flag and surrender the principles of this
institution itself.
Next month, I will complete more than four years
as Israel’s Permanent Representative to the United
Nations. During my time here, I have met with
diplomats from all around the world, I have participated
in many meetings of the General Assembly and the
Security Council, and I have even had the honour to
preside over this very Assembly. In my four years, I
have seen hypocrisy, I have seen duplicity and I have
seen a triple standard: one for democracies, one for
dictatorships and a special standard designed only for
Israel. I thought I had seen everything, but I have to
admit that this time the Palestinians have managed to
take cynicism to a whole new level.
The goal of resolution 69/320 is a photo opportunity.
The Palestinians want to bring together world dignitaries
and the media to gather around and watch as Mahmoud
Abbas raises a flag. They plan to use the prestige of the

A/69/PV.102

United Nations as a backdrop for this charade. Surprise,
surprise — they did all this in contravention of all the
established rules and procedures of the United Nations.
During every session of the Assembly, hundreds of
resolutions are adopted and hundreds of decisions
are taken, from the most significant to the merely
procedural. Yet, I cannot remember one time — not a
single one — where Member States were not given an
opportunity for discussion, debate and reflection.
Representatives here in this Hall know better
than anyone else how exhausting, cumbersome and
frustrating this process can sometimes be. Do we always
enjoy this process? Probably not, yet we do it because we
all understand that this deliberative and collaborative
process represents the ideals that this institution was
supposed to stand for: democracy, transparency and
open communication. We do it because, although we
have real differences, we all value the process and
have respect for the countries represented here — their
points of view and beliefs. We all understand that this is
the only way that this institution can function.
However, in my time here, I have learned that there
is one delegation that all those rules and procedures do
not apply to. Again and again, the Palestinians seem
to be able to do whatever they want and are free to act
with impunity. In short, they have learned that the more
they say no, the more the international community says
yes to their every whim and caprice. So it is no surprise
that the Palestinians show no regard for the values of
this institution and that they cynically manipulate the
United Nations to score political points. Time and again,
the Palestinians use and abuse the United Nations. The
sad part is that delegations in this Hall allow them to
get away with it.
Let us consider the events of the past two weeks. As
the summer began to wind down and this session was
drawing to a close, the Palestinians surprised Member
States with a draft resolution proposing to change
a rule that has been in existence since the United
Nations was founded. Did they circulate a zero draft
of the resolution? Perhaps they just forgot. Did they
invite Member States to any informal consultation? I
guess they could not be bothered. Did they negotiate
the language of the resolution with Member States?
Of course not. They knew that most Member States
would sign on the dotted line no matter what it said.
As a matter of fact, the Palestinian delegation simply
announced its plan, promoted it in a dishonest and

15-2765921/30

A/69/PV.102

manipulative manner, and expected Member States to
fall in line behind it.
As if this behaviour were not bad enough, the
story does not end there. Not only did the Palestinians
blatantly disregard United Nations practices, they
deliberately deceived Member States. When they
introduced their initiative, the Palestinians informed
Member States that the Vatican was a partner in their
plan. Apparently, the Vatican did not get the memo.
This blatant lie was exposed to all by the media. As
a matter of fact, the Vatican declared that it is not a
partner to this initiative; it did not ask for it and it has
no aspiration to raise its flag at the United Nations. The
Palestinians were caught red-handed violating every
principle of honesty and integrity we hold dear.
Yet, despite this brazen deception, which every
delegation in this Hall knows of, many representatives
here still voted to adopt this resolution. Voting in favour
of the resolution means that, when it comes to the
Palestinians, the standard rules no longer apply. More
important than whether we permit the Palestinians to
fly a flag is whether we permit them to undermine the
rules and procedures and, ultimately, the credibility of
this institution. How ironic is it that this resolution was
considered under the agenda item “Strengthening of the
United Nations system”, when it clearly weakens and
undermines the United Nations.
Let no one in this Hall or around the world be
fooled by the outcome of today’s vote. The Assembly
would vote to declare that the Earth was flat if the
Palestinians proposed it. By the way, the European
Union (EU) would probably try to reach a consensus
to abstain in the voting, but some EU countries would
consider it a matter of principle to declare that the world
is indeed flat if it now is how the Palestinians see it.
Speaking of consensus, apparently the EU’s principles
of maintaining a holy consensus cannot withstand
Palestinian pressure. Yet they stand firm when the
consensus is against Israel.
However, no vote can turn an empty, symbolic
gesture into a State. The international community must
make it clear to the Palestinians that the only way to
achieve statehood is through direct negotiations. As
long as the Palestinians believe that they can achieve
their political goals without making concessions, they
will continue to avoid taking the difficult decisions
needed for peace. Maybe the international community
should recommend that the Palestinians download the

22/30

10/09/2015

Waze GPS application so that they can find their way
to the negotiating table. Then they would be able to
discover that the distance from Ramallah to Jerusalem
is less than 10 miles. There is no need to fly halfway
around the world to New York in order to make peace.
Unfortunately, instead of trying to guide the
Palestinians down the path to peace, the international
community is helping them to ride off the tracks. We
do not need support groups or preconditions that only
complicate the situation. Too many are addicted to the
process. This is not a meeting of Diplomats Anonymous.
What we do need is for the international community to
tell the Palestinians to go back to the negotiating table.
Enough with empty symbols, enough with political
showmanship, enough with hijacking the United
Nations agenda. Stop stalling and start negotiating.
Palestinians and Israelis need real steps to peace,
not empty gestures. The vote today may serve the
interests of Palestinians leaders, but it will not help the
Palestinian people.
The whole situation would be different if the flag
they want to raise represented democratic values,
which are all too rare in the region. Those who support
raising this flag should ask themselves: is it a flag of
good governance? Is it a flag of gender equality? Is it a
flag of free elections, so desperately needed in a place
where President Abbas is in his 11th year of a five-year
term?
If the international community does not demand that
the Palestinians enact these basic rights and freedoms,
the flag they raise will be a flag of disappointment
rather than hope, and of failure rather than progress.
The people of Israel seek peace with our neighbours.
Just this morning, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu
met with Prime Minister David Cameron in London
and declared once again that he was ready to come
and resume direct negotiations with the Palestinians,
anywhere, without preconditions.
We all remember the historic images of Prime
Minister Begin and President Sadat, and of Prime
Minister Rabin and King Hussein, coming together
in peace. History proves to us that negotiations can be
fruitful, that peace is possible and that we can create a
new reality for the peoples of the region.
And now, in my final statement as Israel’s
Permanent Representative, I say to the Assembly that
I look forward to seeing the image of an Israeli Prime

15-27659

10/09/2015

Minister and a Palestinian leader standing side by side,
raising the flags of our two peoples, living together in
peace. That would be a photo truly worth taking.
Mr. Radomski (Poland): Poland takes the floor
to explain its decision to support the draft resolution
on raising the flags of non-member observer States,
the Holy See and Palestine, at the United Nations. We
would like to emphasize that we treat resolution 69/320
as a technical matter, without any consequences for the
position of Poland on the issue of the Middle East peace
process. A flag is a symbol. People fight and sometimes
die for what it represents. A flag is an important element
of identity. We the people of Poland know how much it
means. The Polish flag was our symbol at a time when
there was no Poland on the maps of the world.
Let me reiterate that Poland supports the settlement
of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in the form of a
comprehensive political agreement between the parties
to the conflict guaranteeing a lasting and durable
peace. We share the view that the only possible way
to resolve the conflict is through direct negotiations
between the parties. It is important that they refrain
from unilateral measures and acts on the ground that
undermine confidence in the viability of the two-State
solution.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
voted in favour of the draft resolution submitted today
that authorizes non-member observer States to raise
their flags at the United Nations following those of
Member States.
This vote is first of all a vote in favour of the
two-State solution, which must remain our common
goal; it is more than ever that of France. France has
also made the choice of consistency. As early as 1982,
before the Knesset, President Mitterrand called for the
creation of a Palestinian State. France has since then
not diverged from that path, supporting at each stage
the enhancement of the the status of Palestine. In 2011,
France voted in favour of the admission of Palestine as
a member of UNESCO. In 2012, it voted in favour of
resolution 67/19, which made Palestine a non-member
observer State of our Organization.
Allowing Palestine to raise its flag at the United
Nations is a new step in that direction. France could
not but once again show its commitment to the right
of Palestinians to a State and to the two-State solution,
which is today in danger. France misses no opportunity
to reiterate Israel’s right to exist and to live in safety.

A/69/PV.102

We agree that this vote is primarily symbolic.
But symbols are essential in politics, particularly for
the Palestinian people, who should not despair of the
future. This flag is therefore a powerful symbol and a
glimmer of hope. Let us have the courage and the clearsightedness to say that, unfortunately, every day that
goes by takes us further from the two-State solution.
The pursuit of the illegal settlement process is a direct
threat thereto. This absence of political perspective
is not only unfair to the Palestinian people; it is also
dangerous for Israel, for the other States of the region,
for the European Union and for the world as a whole. It
fuels despair and leads to violence.
We must therefore be clear. The negative dynamic
that is unfolding before our eyes cannot serve the
interests of the parties. It can only fuel hatred and
extremism, on which terrorists feed, especially Daesh.
In this disturbing context, every opportunity must be
seized to recall the hope of the two-State solution.
France believes that this conflict can be resolved
only by the establishment of an independent, viable
and democratic Palestinian State, living in peace and
security side by side with Israel.
But while we appreciate the importance of symbols,
we cannot be satisfied with gestures alone. Given the
gravity of the situation, symbols are no longer enough.
All that counts is action. France, which for more than
a year has been endeavouring to create new prospects
and a credible dynamic, is more convinced of this than
ever before. Everyone agrees that the peace process
that we have pursued for 20 years has failed. For
France, credible and strong action can be based only
on two complementary pillars. In the short term, we
must promote increased commitment on the part of
the international community through international
support for the peace process that complements the
efforts of the Quartet and strengthens its ability to
generate consensus. Following that, a framework must
be defined for future negotiations to which the Security
Council can contribute in due course.
The seventieth session of the General Assembly
must mark the launch of the first pillar of this action
with the establishment of an international support
group that includes new partners alongside the members
of the Quartet, namely, the permanent members of
the Security Council and some Arab and European
countries. Doing nothing is not an option and would
run the risk of major destabilization. France advocates
action and the convergence of the international

15-2765923/30

A/69/PV.102

community’s efforts towards the shared goal of a twoState solution in order to achieve peace and justice.
That is the rationale behind France’s vote today and of
its ongoing commitment.
Mr. Díaz de la Guardia Beuno (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): I wish to raise two brief points with respect to
resolution 69/320, on raising the flags of non-member
observer States at the United Nations.
First, Spain’s vote in favour of the resolution was
consistent with its support for resolution 67/19. Secondly,
Spain’s vote in favour should not be interpreted as
recognizing Palestine as a State, which can occur
only in the framework of a final and comprehensive
settlement in the Middle East peace process based on a
two-State solution reached in the course of negotiations
between the parties that guarantees peace and security
for both, respect for the rights of all citizens, and overall
stability.
Mr. Carrera Castro (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): Guatemala thanks the State of Palestine
for its initiative concerning resolution 69/320. The
Government of Guatemala recognizes and supports
Palestine as a free, independent and sovereign State.
We considered this initiative carefully. We believe
that the resolution focuses on one of the exclusive rights
of a full Member of the Organization, as distinct from
an observer State. In that regard, we should have liked
to see the resolution discussed by the membership, and
to have had enough time to consider its implications and
precedents respecting other international organizations
and their observer States. We therefore decided to
abstain in the voting on the resolution adopted today.
We reiterate that our decision to abstain is without
prejudice to the excellent relations we enjoy with the
observer States of the United Nations and is confined
to the procedural and institutional context.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): Sweden decided to vote
in favour of resolution 69/320. That is a natural step
following Palestinian State-building efforts, recognized
by the General Assembly on 29 November 2012 in
resolution 67/19, in which Palestine was accorded
status as a non-member observer State at the United
Nations. It is also a logical consequence of the Swedish
recognition of the State of Palestine on 30 October 2014.
That recognition was aimed at making the parties to
the conflict less unequal, providing a positive injection
into the dynamic of the Middle East peace process, and
rendering the two-State solution possible again.

24/30

10/09/2015

Unfortunately, the situation on the ground has
worsened and the peace process is stalled. We hope that
the General Assembly, with this vote today, will send
forth a tiny ripple of hope to the young generations in
the region — Israelis and Palestinians — that peace is
still possible.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): Azerbaijan voted in
favour of resolution 69/320. We consider this initiative
to be a reflection of the legitimate will and aspiration of
the State of Palestine to become a full-fledged Member
of the United Nations. We reiterate our support for
Palestine’s application for admission to membership of
the United Nations and look forward to a solution to that
issue based on international law. Azerbaijan remains
committed to a two-State solution that will bring peace
and stability to the Middle East.
Mr. Sauer (Finland): Let me start by reiterating
Finland’s steadfast support for the non-member
observer status of Palestine at the United Nations,
in line with resolution 67/19, which Finland voted in
favour of in 2012, as well as our support for the similar
status enjoyed by the Holy See.
However, we have considered resolution 69/320,
before us today, on its own merits and without direct
reference to the situations of Palestine and the Holy See.
We have considered that the current practice of raising
only the flags of Member States at United Nations
Headquarters, as stipulated by the United Nations flag
code and regulations, has been well in line with the
common practice in all international organizations.
We therefore decided to abstain in the voting on the
resolution.
Finland is committed to a just and comprehensive
resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, in
accordance with the common European Union position,
and continues to lend its support to the formation of
the Palestinian State as part of the negotiated two-State
solution.
Mr. Menkveld (Netherlands): The General
Assembly has decided today to change the protocol to
include henceforth the flags of non-member observer
States at the United Nations. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands chose to abstain in the voting on resolution
69/320 for procedural reasons. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands is not convinced that compelling reasons
exist for changing the established practices concerning
the flag protocol at the United Nations.

15-27659

10/09/2015

The Kingdom of the Netherlands would also like
to reiterate that the Netherlands will continue its longstanding support for the Palestinians. We support the
Palestinian State-building efforts. Our contribution
in such key sectors as water, agriculture, security and
the rule of law totals approximately €50 million a year.
Just recently, we pledged an additional contribution
of €2 million to enable the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
to continue its landmark education programme.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands remains in favour
of a two-State solution, with the State of Israel and an
independent, democratic, sovereign and viable State
of Palestine living side by side in peace, security and
mutual recognition. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
is committed to a just and lasting peace and supports
initiatives for a renewed approach to the peace
process, including a new format for negotiations with a
substantial role for the European Union (EU) and Arab
partners alongside the United States. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands fully subscribes to the EU position
on parametres, which we believe provides a basis for
achieving consensus on a way forward.
Mr. Menelaou (Cyprus): Cyprus abstained in the
voting on resolution 69/320, on raising the flags of
non-member observer States at the United Nations.
Cyprus’s abstention should be viewed in the light of the
challenges and issues that have arisen from the situation
in Cyprus since 1974, which compel us to adhere to the
principle that only full Members of the United Nations
should be entitled to all the privileges enjoyed by the
Members of the Organization.
Cyprus has recognized the State of Palestine since
1988, and we voted in favour of resolution 67/19, which
acknowledged Palestine as a non-member observer State
in this Organization. Furthermore, in December 2012,
Palestine’s representation in Cyprus was upgraded
to a full embassy and the Palestinian Ambassador
was added to our protocol list of foreign diplomatic
missions. Cyprus looks forward to the revival of a
peace process aimed at achieving a two-State solution
for an independent, democratic, viable and contiguous
Palestinian State within its 1967 borders, living side
by side in peace and security with Israel and its other
neighbours.
Mr. Ellinger (Czech Republic): The Czech Republic
has considered resolution 69/320 based on its substance
and in an objective manner, unrelated to consideration

A/69/PV.102

of any individual observer State that the resolution
may concern now or in the future. The Czech Republic
fully aligns itself with the principle that raising a flag
at the headquarters of any international organization
is a right reserved exclusively to the members of such
organizations. Such has been the practice so far not
only in the United Nations but in other international
organizations as well. We have not been presented with
any convincing reasons for departing from that principle
and established practice, since the participation of
non-member observer States in the meetings and work
of the General Assembly is in no way affected by the
measures proposed in the resolution. For those reasons,
the Czech Republic abstained in the voting on the
resolution.
Mr. Hannigan (Iceland): In December 2011,
Iceland recognized Palestine as an independent and
sovereign State. In November 2012, Iceland voted
in favour of granting the State of Palestine observer
status at the United Nations. Iceland would like to see
Palestine become a State Member of the United Nations
as soon as possible. Flying a flag is not a substitute
for membership, but it will underline the presence and
participation of the State of Palestine in the work of the
United Nations. The flying of observer State flags will
be a new tradition, but we see no danger of its blurring
the line between members and observers. We therefore
welcomed resolution 69/320 and voted in favour of it.
Mr. Meek (United Kingdom): The Government
of the United Kingdom decides its voting position
based on the text of each draft resolution presented.
It has traditionally been the case that only flags of
States Members of the United Nations are flown at
its Headquarters. Despite our long-held support for
the creation of a Palestinian State, we have not been
provided with any compelling reason to justify changing
that long-standing practice. We have therefore chosen
to abstain on resolution 69/320.
Our abstention does not change our long-standing
position on resolving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
A just and lasting settlement is long overdue. The
prospect of a peace agreement has been diminishing in
recent years, and a clear political horizon is desperately
needed. The worsening situation on the ground in the
occupied Palestinian territories is of great concern and
must be addressed. As we said when Palestine was
granted non-member observer State status in November
2012, we want to see a Palestinian State represented
throughout all the organs of the United Nations.

15-2765925/30

A/69/PV.102

10/09/2015

However, it remains our firm belief that a negotiated
two-State solution is the only way to end the IsraeliPalestinian conflict once and for all, and that it remains
the best way to achieve Palestinian national aspirations
in reality and on the ground. Our priority continues to
be one of working with the parties and our international
partners to safeguard the prospects for a two-State
solution and create an environment conducive to a
return to peace talks. We will continue to encourage
and support both the Palestinian and Israeli leadership
in taking the difficult decisions needed to achieve
peace. That is the only way to end the occupation and
to deliver the peace and security that both Israelis and
Palestinians so deserve.

appeal to both sides to urgently resume comprehensive
negotiations.

Mr. Zaayman (South Africa): South Africa wishes
to be among the first to endorse and congratulate this
non-member observer State of the United Nations. Our
long and principled support of the Palestinian people’s
inalienable right to self-determination is informed by
our own history and struggle for freedom, justice and a
high regard for human rights. The struggle of the people
of Palestine has been long and full of upheaval, but with
the passing of time, their resilience and persistence has
brought them closer and a step further towards their
cherished goals.

We have listened carefully to every speaker,
because there has unquestionably been a great deal of
food for thought. If we really believe in this — and I
think that has been the case today — we have voted not
just for raising the flag, we have voted for what the flag
of the Palestinian State means and symbolizes. And we
have therefore also voted for the right of the Palestinian
people to return to their territory and their right not to
be killed. That began with their territorial displacement
and has now led to the terrible slaughter of a people.

South Africa wishes to reaffirm its support for
international efforts aimed at establishing a viable
Palestinian State, existing side by side in peace with
Israel, within international recognized borders based
on those existing on 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem
as its capital.
Ms. Stener (Norway): Resolution 69/320 deals
with the question of raising flags, which is traditionally
associated with membership in all international
organizations. In our view, the resolution constitutes
a precedent that contributes to erasing the difference
between member States and observers in international
organizations. That is why Norway abstained in the
voting on the resolution. That should in no way be
interpreted as a change in Norway’s position supporting
Palestine as a non-member observer State within the
United Nations.
Norway continues to support the vision of two
States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side within
secure and recognized borders. A comprehensive,
just and lasting peace can be achieved only on the
basis of a negotiated solution between the parties. We

26/30

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote for this meeting. We will
now hear statements after the adoption of resolution
69/320.
Ms. Rodríguez Gómez (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Today we have
seen an afternoon of justice in the General Assembly
through our adoption of resolution 69/319, by which
we deprived vulture capital funds of their power, and
resolution 69/320, by which we approved the raising of
the Palestinian flag.

I know that there is a shared concern in the hearts
of all those who voted in favour of raising that flag and
in the conscience of all the countries who voted for it.
We know about the terrible and continued violations of
human rights of the Palestinian people, who are being
exterminated. I emphasize that the issue now is not just
one of defending territory but of defending a people’s
very existence, and it is for that vital reason that we
raise our voices and open our consciences and our
hearts today.
This year, Pope Francis called the President of the
Palestinian State an angel of peace. We say that all the
children boys, girls, women and elderly people who
continue to resist extermination and the violation of
their human rights are also angels of peace. Therefore,
if we truly believe in the existence of two States, how
much longer will we have to wait for Palestine to be
a State enjoying full rights in the Organization? How
much longer will we have to bear witness to the slaughter
of the Palestinian people? I have heard the arguments
of the delegations that opposed the resolution, and
I have just one thing to say. Theirs was the voice of
the arrogant forces of war. There is no other way to
describe such arrogance when the entire world does not
support such criminal, bellicose stances.

15-27659

10/09/2015

We in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
warmly embrace the Palestinian people. We express
our commitment to their cause and call on all peoples
to join together so that the search for true peace may
continue. It is very hard to talk of a State in terms of
equality when children are being killed and families
burned. It is very difficult to talk of a State in terms
of equality when jailers force-feed prisoners. It is very
difficult to talk of equality of States and peace when
there is territorial segregation in every sense of the
term.
I know that the vote that took place today in the
General Assembly came from the hearts and consciences
of all present. There is concern as to whether the best
will exists to move towards a true process of peace so
that the Palestinian State can be recognized and enjoy
full rights in the Organization. Let us move forward
and reaffirm our support for the right to determination
of that fraternal people, which has resisted military
savagery and seen its rights trampled upon for decades.
Our afternoon today concludes as an afternoon of
justice. We stand side by side with peoples and their
quest for justice.
Mr. Timerman (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
The Argentine Republic and its people are the children
of a struggle for liberation. The Argentine Republic
recognizes the right to self-determination of peoples
and the territorial integrity of States. The Argentine
Republic believes that the only entity with the right
to decide on the existence of a Palestinian State is the
Palestinian people itself, which must not be pressured
or to decide its own future or burdened with conditions.
That is why the Argentine Republic recognizes the
Palestinian State as a sovereign State.
We should have liked to vote today on the inclusion
of the Palestinian State as a full member of the General
Assembly. However, since the Organization still needs
reforms, the Palestinian State cannot be a Member
because its membership first has to be approved
by a minority of countries in the Security Council.
We therefore happily voted for the inclusion of the
Palestinian flag among those of the other countries
represented in front of this building.
Since the Holy See itself will be represented with
its flag, allow me to reiterate a statement made by Pope
Francis: Let us tear down walls and build bridges. Now
is the time for us to do so with the Palestinian people. We
give the Palestinian people the right to decide for itself

A/69/PV.102

on the creation of a Palestinian State. The Assembly
gives it the right, without the Security Council’s sayso, to be able to vote on the inclusion of the Palestinian
State as a full Member.
Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf
of the Group of Arab States, I take the floor again
to express sincere thanks and appreciation to all for
their efforts and to all those who voted in favour of
resolution 69/320, which reminds us that the whole
world stands by people languishing under colonization.
I congratulate the Government and the people of
Palestine on the adoption of this resolution, which is
symbolic. Within a legal framework, it represents a
step towards the establishment of a Palestinian State,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, within the pre-1967
borders. The resolution, which is based on international
law, is important for the following reasons.
The resolution is in line with resolution 67/19
of 2012, which accorded to Palestine non-member
observer State status in the United Nations. Secondly,
it falls within the framework of the right to raise
a flag that has a cultural and symbolic value for the
Palestinian people. Thirdly, it sends a message from
the General Assembly that the Israeli occupation and
the siege imposed on the Palestinian people are not
welcome at the United Nations. The Charter of the
United Nations affirms the right to self-determination
of people languishing under occupation. The raising
of the Palestinian flag is a testament to the serious
commitment of the international community to the
establishment of a contiguous, independent Palestinian
State based on the pre-1967 borders.
Mr. Eler (Turkey): Today we took a symbolic
yet important step in order to address the historical
injustice against the Palestinian people. It can be
considered as another milestone on the path towards
Palestine’s full membership of the United Nations. To
that end, a historic decision was taken by this body
when Palestine was accorded non-member observer
status on 29 November 2012. On that day, Prime
Minister Davutoğlu, who was then Foreign Minister of
Turkey, came to New York and addressed the General
Assembly to express our heartfelt support of Palestine.
That day, in his speech, Prime Minister Davutoğlu said,
“If we are to talk about an international order
and place our trust in the United Nations system,
then the Palestineian flag should fly beside
this building ... That is our responsibility to

15-2765927/30

A/69/PV.102

the Palestinian people ... Our vision for justice,
international order and human rights will not
be achieved until we see the flag of the State of
Palestine standing side by side with ours, as a full
Member of the United Nations. And that day will
come soon” (A/67/PV.44, p. 10).
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): The
Islamic Republic of Iran welcomes the decision of the
General Assembly to adopt resolution 69/320 on raising
the flags of non-member observer States at the United
Nations. The number of Member States that sponsored
the resolution and the number of votes cast in its favour
demonstrate the importance that the international
community and world public opinion attach to the
right of peoples to self-determination. We have fully
supported the objective of the resolution and sponsored
the text.
The non-member observer States participate in the
sessions and work of the Organization as States. It is
therefore quite logical to see their flags raised at the
Headquarters and other offices of the United Nations.
Since the State of Palestine also falls under the category
of non-member observer States, we believe that the
resolution acquires more importance and deserves
special attention and support. By voting in favour of
the resolution, we sent a message of solidarity with
the Government and people of the State of Palestine.
We earnestly hope that what the people of Palestine
deserve — that is, to live free from occupation, acquire
full independence and take their rightful place among
members of the international community — will soon
be realized.
Mr. Abbas (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Today’s
vote in favour of raising the flag of Palestine as a
non-member observer State at the United Nations is a
great achievement. However, it is more important that
the international community redouble its efforts to end
the occupation of Palestine and assist the Palestinian
people in achieving their independence in order to give
Palestine full membership, on an equal footing with all
the States members of the General Assembly.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): I shall be very brief. Bolivia of course
voted in favour of resolution 69/320. Although it is of
a symbolic nature, symbols are very important. When
the flag is raised in front of United Nations premises, it
will be a permanent reminder of what the international
community has done well and what it has so far failed

28/30

10/09/2015

to do for the Palestinian people. When we see the flag
flying in front of those premises, we must remember
the wall that is being built. When we see the flag
flying in front of those premises, we must remember
the forced displacement of thousands upon thousands
of Palestinian men and women. When we see that flag,
we must remember the usurpation of their land and
territory. When we see that flag, we must remember the
illegal settlements that have been built in Palestinian
territory. When we see that flag, we must remember
the Palestinian prisoners who are being held in Israeli
cells. When we see that flag, we must remember those
who have been wounded in the merciless attacks of
the Israel Army on the Palestinian people. When we
see that flag, we must of course remember those who
have laid down their lives for the Palestinian cause,
and above all, we must remember that the international
community has not yet been able to give the Palestinian
people what it needs: the definitive establishment of a
Palestinian State.
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
Permanent Observer of the observer State of the Holy
See.
Archbishop Auza (Holy See): My delegation
would like to make four points regarding resolution
69/320, which has just been adopted. First, the Holy See
has always respected the 70-year practice and tradition
of the United Nations, whereby only flags of Member
States have flown at the United Nations Headquarters
and offices. Secondly, the Holy See was not opposed to
the introduction of the resolution, in accordance with
the rules governing the General Assembly. Thirdly, with
regard to the resolution itself, the Holy See respects and
accepts what the General Assembly has just decided.
Fourthly, my delegation reiterates the position of
the Holy See on the two-State solution — Israel and
Palestine living side by side in peace and security.
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
Permanent Observer of the observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): On behalf of the State
of Palestine, I am honoured to address the General
Assembly, following its historic vote on the adoption
of resolution 69/320 on raising the flags of non-member
observer States at the United Nations — namely, the
flags of the State of Palestine and the Holy See.
We are grateful to all the Member States that
supported the resolution and convey the deepest
appreciation of the Palestinian people and their

15-27659

10/09/2015

leadership for the honourable position they have taken
on this most meaningful issue for our people. We also
express special thanks to the sponsors of the resolution
for their consummate support for this initiative,
consistent with their abiding support for the just cause
of Palestine. The votes in favour cast by member States
today constitute a reaffirmation of the long-standing
principled position of the international community in
support of a just, lasting, comprehensive and peaceful
solution to the question of Palestine, and in support
of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people,
including to self-determination and independence.
The General Assembly has today sent an important
message to our people that cannot be underestimated,
for it comes at a very critical time in their long journey
towards freedom and dignity. The Palestinian people
are in despair, as they continue to suffer under Israel’s
nearly half-century foreign occupation and as more
than 5 million Palestine refugees in camps throughout
the region continue to endure repeated tragedies, all
awaiting the realization of their rights. Hopelessness
is dramatically rising as Israel, the occupying Power,
persists in the illegal colonization and siege of our land
and the cruel subjugation of our people and, as the
political process remains stalled and turmoil, conflict
and extremism are spreading in our region, undermining
faith in the rule of law, in the international system and
in the prospects for peace.
Yet, even in the midst of these grim realities, we are
proud to say that the will and spirit of the Palestinian
people have not been broken. At this critical moment,
as they have come to the international community once
again peacefully appealing for support of the symbolic
yet significant step to raise their national flag at the
United Nations, we are grateful that this appeal has
been so rightly fulfilled.
Today’s vote is a reaffirmation of the legitimacy of
the national aspirations of the Palestinian people, of their
existence among the nations of the world and of their
right to self-determination to be a free people in control
of their lives and destiny in their own independent State.
The General Assembly’s adoption of this resolution will
help to restore some hope to our people and leadership
as they continue on the peaceful, non-violent, political
and legal path that they have chosen and to which they
remain committed to against all odds, so as to fulfil
the rights of the Palestinian people, achieve a just and
sustainable peace and secure Palestine’s rightful place
among the community of nations.

A/69/PV.102

It is another step towards the fulfilment of the
promise of independence made to the Palestinian people
nearly seven decades ago, and repeatedly thereafter,
which remains unfulfilled to the present day. It is
another step towards redressing this historic injustice.
Today’s vote is also a contribution to the
international efforts to salvage the two-State solution
based on the pre-1967 borders and in accordance with
the relevant resolutions of the United Nations and
the Arab Peace Initiative — a solution that has been
gravely damaged by the occupying Power but which
we nevertheless continue to strive for so that we may
see the day when the State of Palestine and the State
of Israel live side by side in peace, coexistence and
security, thereby ushering in the dawn of a new era in
our region and in our global community.
Today, with the support of the Assembly for this
peaceful and legitimate initiative, the international
community has reaffirmed our people’s faltering faith
in the international community’s commitment to their
just cause and reaffirmed the centrality of the role of
the United Nations in this respect.
In 1974, the Palestine Liberation Organization,
recognized as the sole legitimate representative of
the Palestinian people, received a standing invitation
to participate in the work and sessions of the General
Assembly as an observer. That was more than four
decades ago. In 2012, the Assembly adopted its historic
resolution 67/19, which grants non-member observer
State status to Palestine. This resolution today is yet
another significant step in affirming the international
consensus in favour of Palestinian independence.
In this year of the seventieth anniversary of the
United Nations, which has had the question of Palestine
on its agenda since its inception, this step must be
matched by concrete actions, without delay and
consistent with the relevant resolutions and the standing
political, legal and moral responsibilities to end the
occupation and achieve the rights of the Palestinian
people and a peaceful settlement, all long overdue. The
international community must rise to the urgency of
this matter to advance peace in a region where all trends
are tragically to the contrary. The Security Council in
particular must uphold its Charter duties and cannot
remain paralysed, failing the cause of peace.
As we continue to exert all efforts towards that
objective, we look forward with great anticipation to
the day when the Palestinian flag will be raised at

15-2765929/30

A/69/PV.102

the United Nations — a moment that will surely be
emotional and full of pride and unity for the Palestinian
people. Of course, we know that raising our flag will
neither end the occupation nor solve the conflict.
We also know that our application for admission to
membership to the United Nations remains pending
before the Security Council and that much hard work
remains to be done. But raising the flag will signal to
our people everywhere, who are watching us tonight,
that their freedom is inevitable and that the international
community supports them in their journey towards
justice, for their rights and for the independence of their
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Allow me to say a few words in Arabic to our
people who are watching us tonight in Palestine and in
the Middle East.
(spoke in Arabic)
We, the Palestinian people, await the day when
the flag of Palestine will be raised at United Nations
Headquarters at the end of the month and in the presence
of President Mahmoud Abbas. We hope that on that
day the flag will also be raised in Palestinian homes,
schools, shops, farms, universities and institutions

30/30

10/09/2015

everywhere else appropriate so that we can thereby
assert our commitment to putting an end to the Israeli
occupation of our territory since 1969, to establishing
an independent Palestinian State with East Jerusalem
as its capital through the achievement of the two-State
solution on the basis of international consensus. That
will be a historic and eternal day in our struggle to have
our legitimate national rights and aspirations prevail.
The flag will fly with the flags of all other nations at
United Nations Headquarters.
Let all of us work together so that that day will
be one of dignity for our people, for our martyrs, for
our prisoners, for the besiseged city of Gaza and for
our beloved country, Palestine. I send a greeting to the
people of Palestine from here at the General Assembly.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker on this agenda item.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item
120?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 6.30 p.m.

15-27659
