A /76/PV.52

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-sixth session

52nd plenary meeting

Thursday, 16 December 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shahid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Maldives)

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda item 115 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in principal organs
(b) Election of members of the Economic and
Social Council
The President: The Assembly will proceed to a
by-election to elect one member of the Economic and
Social Council, in accordance with rule 140 of the rules
of procedure, to fill the seat of one member that is
relinquishing its seat before the end of its term.
In that connection, I would like to draw the attention
of members to document A/76/573, containing a note
verbale dated 30 November 2021 from the Permanent
Mission of Germany to the United Nations.
In the note verbale, the Permanent Mission of
Germany, in its capacity as Chair of the Group of
Western European and other States for the month of
November 2021, communicated the fact that Norway
has relinquished its seat on the Economic and Social
Council for 2022 and that the group has endorsed the
candidature of Finland for election to the Council in
order to fill the Group’s seat vacated by Norway.
As a result, one vacancy in the Council will occur,
and a new member must be elected to fill the unexpired
term of Norway, commencing on 1 January 2022 and
expiring on 31 December 2022.
In accordance with paragraph 4 of General
Assembly resolution 2847, of 20 December 1971, of the

twenty-sixth session, and taking into account the fact
that the vacancy will occur from among the Western
European and other States, the new member should be
elected from that region.
I should like to inform the Assembly that the
candidate that receives a two-thirds majority of
members present and voting and the greatest number of
votes will be declared elected.
If no candidate obtains a two-thirds majority, there
shall be additional ballots, the voting being restricted
to the two candidates obtaining the greatest number of
votes in the previous ballot. Also consistent with past
practice, in the event of a tie vote, and when it becomes
necessary to determine the candidate to proceed to the
next round of restricted balloting, there will be a special
restricted ballot limited to those candidates that have
obtained an equal number of votes.
I should like to inform members that as of
1 January 2022, the following States from among the
Western European and other States will be represented
on the Economic and Social Council: Austria, Belgium,
Canada, Denmark, France, Greece, Israel, Italy, New
Zealand, Portugal, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of
America. The names of those 12 States should therefore
not appear on the ballot paper.
In accordance with rule 92 of the rules of procedure,
we shall now proceed to a secret ballot.
Before we begin the voting process, I should like to
remind members that pursuant to rule 88 of the rules of

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-39832 (E)

*2139832*

A/76/PV.52

16/12/2021

procedure, no representative shall interrupt the voting
except on a point of order on the actual conduct of
the voting.

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (b)
of agenda item 115.

We shall now begin the voting process. Members
are requested to remain seated until all ballots have
been collected.

Agenda item 116 (continued)

Ballot papers will now be distributed and will be
given only to the representative seated directly behind
the country’s nameplate.
In accordance with General Assembly resolution
71/323, of 8 September 2017, the name of the State that
has been communicated to the Secretariat has been
printed on the ballot papers. Also, an additional blank
line corresponding to the one vacant seat to be filled has
been provided on the ballot paper for inscribing another
State, if desirable. I request representatives to use only
those ballot papers that have been distributed. Members
are requested to write an “X” in the box next to the
name printed on the ballot paper or write the name of
another eligible State on the blank line. If the box next
to the name of a State is checked, the name of that State
does not have to be repeated on the blank line.
There should be no more than one checked box or
handwritten name for the vacant seat to be filled, as
indicated on the ballot paper.
A ballot will be declared invalid if it contains votes
for more than one eligible Member State from the group
of Western European and other States.
Accordingly, members can only check the box
printed on the ballot paper or write one name of an
eligible Member State from the Western European and
other States in the space provided.

Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(a) Election of members of the Committee for
Programme and Coordination
Note by the Secretary-General (A/76/364/Add.1)
The President: Pursuant to General Assembly
decision 42/450, of 17 December 1987, and on the
nomination of the Economic and Social Council, the
Assembly elects the members of the Committee for
Programme and Coordination.
Members will recall that at its 30th plenary
meeting, held on 11 November 2021, the General
Assembly elected five members to the Committee for a
three-year term of office beginning on 1 January 2022
and expiring on 31 December 2024.
The Assembly has before it a note by the SecretaryGeneral circulated in document A/76/364/Add.1 which
contains nominations by the Economic and Social
Council of the Dominican Republic for election by
the Assembly to fill an outstanding vacancy in the
Committee for Programme and Coordination for a
term of office beginning on the day of election and
expiring on 31 December 2023, and of France to fill an
outstanding vacancy in the Committee for a three-year
term of office beginning on 1 January 2022 and expiring
on 31 December 2024.

If the ballot paper contains a vote for a Member
State that does not belong to the Western European and
other States or for a Member State that will remain a
member of the Council next year, the ballot paper will
be declared invalid. Finally, if a ballot paper contains
any notation other than a vote in favour of an eligible
Member State, those notations will be disregarded.

In accordance with rule 92 of the rules of procedure,
all elections should be held by secret ballot. However, I
should like to recall paragraph 16 of General Assembly
decision 34/401, whereby the practice of dispensing
with the secret ballot for elections to subsidiary organs
when the number of candidates corresponds to the
number of seats to be filled should become standard,
unless a delegation specifically requests a vote on a
given election.

At the invitation of the President, the representatives
of Guyana, Hungary, Japan, Mauritius, the
Netherlands and Viet Nam acted as tellers.

In the absence of such a request, may I take it that
the Assembly decides to proceed to the election on the
basis of dispensing with the secret ballot?

A vote was taken by secret ballot.
2/7

It was so decided.
21-39832

16/12/2021

A/76/PV.52

The President: The number of States nominated
from among the Latin American and Caribbean States
and the Western European and other States is equal to
the number of seats to be filled for each group.

By the same resolution, the General Assembly also
decided that each of the five regional groups shall have
no less than three seats in the overall composition of the
Organizational Committee.

May I therefore take it that the Assembly wishes to
declare the Dominican Republic elected as a member
of the Committee for Programme and Coordination for
a term of office beginning on 16 December 2021 and
expiring on 31 December 2023, and France elected as a
member of the Committee for a term of office beginning
on 1 January 2022 and expiring on 31 December 2024?

Members will also recall that at its seventy-fourth
session, the Assembly elected Peru and Slovakia as
members of the Organizational Committee of the
Peacebuilding Commission for a two-year term of
office, beginning on 1 January 2020.

It was so decided.

Consequently, the General Assembly will need to
fill the seats to be vacated by Peru and Slovakia, whose
two-year term of office expires on 31 December 2021.

The President: I congratulate the Dominican
Republic and France on their election as members of
the Committee for Programme and Coordination.

The Assembly will now proceed to the election of
two members of the Organizational Committee of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

Members are reminded that two vacancies for
members from the Western European and other States
remain to be filled: one for a term of office beginning
on the date of election and expiring on 31 December
2021 and one for a term beginning on 1 January 2022
and expiring on 31 December 2024.

By its resolution 60/261, of 8 May 2006,
the Assembly decided that the members of the
Organizational Committee shall serve for renewable
terms of two years, as applicable. Accordingly, Peru
and Slovakia are eligible for immediate re-election.

The General Assembly will be in a position to act
on those vacancies upon nomination by the Economic
and Social Council.
We have thus concluded this stage of our
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 116.
(c) Election of members of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission
The President: Members will recall that in
accordance with paragraphs 4 (a) to (e) of General
Assembly resolution 60/180, of 20 December 2005,
the Organizational Committee shall comprise the
following: seven members of the Security Council,
including permanent members; seven members of the
Economic and Social Council, elected from regional
groups; five top providers of assessed contributions to
United Nations budgets and of voluntary contributions
to United Nations funds, programmes and agencies,
including a standing peacebuilding fund; five top
providers of military personnel and civilian police
to United Nations missions; and seven additional
members elected by the General Assembly, giving due
consideration to representation from all regional groups
in the overall composition of the Committee.

Regarding candidatures for the two vacant seats,
I should like to inform members that from among
the Eastern European States, one candidate has been
communicated, namely, Bulgaria. From among the
Latin American and Caribbean States, one candidate has
been communicated, namely, the Dominican Republic.
Members will recall that by its resolution 60/261, the
General Assembly decided that the rules of procedure
and established practice of the Assembly for the
election of members of its subsidiary bodies shall apply
to its election of members of the Committee. For this
election, rules 92 and 94 are applicable. Accordingly,
the election shall be held by secret ballot.
However, I should also like to recall paragraph
16 of General Assembly decision 34/401, whereby the
practice of dispensing with the secret ballot for elections
to subsidiary organs when the number of candidates
corresponds to the number of seats to be filled should
become standard, unless a delegation specifically
requests a vote on a given election.
In the absence of such a request, may I take it that
the Assembly decides to proceed to the election on
that basis?
It was so decided.

21-398323/7

A/76/PV.52

The President: Since the number of candidates
corresponds to the number of seats to be filled, may
I take it that the General Assembly decides to elect
Bulgaria and the Dominican Republic as members of
the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission for a two-year term of office beginning on
1 January 2022?
It was so decided.
The President: I congratulate Bulgaria and
the Dominican Republic on their election as
members of the Organizational Committee of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (c)
of agenda item 116?
It was so decided.
The meeting was suspended at 10.25 a.m. and
resumed at 10.30 a.m.
Agenda item 115 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in principal organs
(b) Election of members of the Economic and
Social Council
The President: The result of the voting is as follows:
By-election — Western European and other States
(1 seat)
Number of ballot papers:
185
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
185
Abstentions:
5
Number of members present and voting:
180
Required two-thirds majority:
120
Number of votes obtained:
Finland
179
Liechtenstein
1
The President: Having obtained the required twothirds majority, Finland has been elected a member
of the Economic and Social Council for a term of
office beginning on 1 January 2022 and ending on
31 December 2022.
I congratulate Finland on having been elected a
member of the Economic and Social Council.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this stage
of its consideration of sub-item (b) agenda item 115.
4/7

16/12/2021

Agenda item 116 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(g) Election of members of the Permanent Forum
of People of African Descent
The President: In accordance with Assembly
resolution 75/314, of 2 August 2021,
“the Permanent Forum shall consist of 10 members:
5 members to be nominated by Governments,
based on equitable geographical distribution, and
elected by the General Assembly, and 5 members to
be appointed by the President of the Human Rights
Council following consultation with the Bureau and
the regional groups through their coordinators, on
the basis of broad consultations with organizations
of people of African descent; membership shall
take into account the diversity and geographical
distribution of people of African descent in the
world, ensuring gender parity as well as the
principles of transparency, representativity and
equal opportunity for all people of African descent,
and all members shall serve in their personal
capacity as independent experts on issues of people
of African descent for a period of three years with
the possibility of re-election or reappointment for
one further period”.
Accordingly, in my letter dated 18 October 2021, I
stated that:
“With regard to the five members to be elected by
the General Assembly, Member States are kindly
requested to present candidates to the Secretariat
[…]. Pursuant to said resolution, membership shall
take into account the diversity and geographical
distribution of people of African descent in the
world, ensuring gender parity as well as the
principles of transparency, representativity and
equal opportunity for all people of African descent”.
The initial three-year term of office of the five
members elected by the General Assembly will begin
on the date when five other members are appointed by
the President of the Human Rights Council.
I wish to recall that this is the first time that the
Assembly is electing the five members to the Permanent
Forum, as mandated in resolution 75/314.
21-39832

16/12/2021

The election will be held in accordance with the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly. In that
regard, rules 92 and 94 shall be applied.
As more candidates have been communicated to
the Secretariat than the number of seats to be filled by
the General Assembly, the Assembly will proceed to
the election by secret ballot, in accordance with rule 92
of the rules of procedure.
Each delegation will receive a single ballot paper for
the five seats to be filled. In accordance with General
Assembly resolution 71/323, of 8 September 2017, the
names of the candidates that have been communicated
to the Secretariat at least 48 hours prior to the election
today have been printed on the ballot paper.
Representatives are requested to use only the ballot
paper that will be distributed in the General Assembly
Hall and to put an “X” in the boxes next to the names of
any five candidates for whom they wish to vote.
Representatives may vote only for those candidates
whose names appear on the ballot papers, and for no
more than the number of seats to be filled by the General
Assembly, namely, five. A ballot paper containing more
than that number of votes will be declared invalid.

A/76/PV.52

The President: Before we begin the voting process,
I should like to remind members that pursuant to rule
88 of the rules of procedure, no representative shall
interrupt the voting except on a point of order on the
actual conduct of the voting.
We shall now begin the voting process. Members
are requested to remain seated until all ballots have
been collected.
Ballot papers will now be distributed. Ballot papers
will be given only to the representative seated directly
behind the country’s nameplate. If a ballot paper
contains any notation other than votes in favour of
eligible candidates, those notations will be disregarded.
If a mistake is made in filling out the ballot paper,
delegations should request a new ballot paper from the
Secretariat at the front of the General Assembly Hall.
At the invitation of the President, the representatives
of Guyana, Hungary, Japan, Mauritius, the
Netherlands and Viet Nam acted as tellers.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (g)
of agenda item 116.

If all five seats are not filled on the first ballot, in
accordance with rule 94 of the rules of procedure, there
shall be additional ballots to fill the remaining places,
the voting being restricted to the candidates obtaining
the greatest number of votes in the previous ballot to
a number not more than twice the places remaining to
be filled.

Agenda item 15 (continued)

Consistent with the practice of the General
Assembly, if more than the required number of
candidates obtain the votes of the majority of the
members present and voting on the same ballot, those
candidates who have obtained the largest number of
votes above the required majority will be considered as
elected, up to the number of seats to be filled.

The President: The General Assembly will
now take action on the draft resolution contained in
document A/76/L.28.

Also consistent with past practice, if, due to a tie
vote, it becomes necessary to determine a candidate or
candidates to be elected or that will proceed to the next
round of restricted balloting, there will be a special
restricted ballot limited to those candidates that have
obtained an equal number of votes.
May I take it that the General Assembly agrees to
proceed accordingly?
It was so decided.

Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/76/L.28)

I now give the floor to the representative of
Kyrgyzstan to introduce draft resolution A/76/L.28.
Mr. Utebaev (Kyrgyzstan): At the outset, on
behalf of Kyrgyzstan, I have the honour to introduce
draft resolution A/76/L.28, entitled “International
Year of Sustainable Mountain Development, 2022”,
under agenda item 15. It is also my pleasure to inform
the Assembly that since the submission of the draft
resolution, more than 80 Member States have become
co-sponsors of the draft; we invite those who have not
yet done so to join us today.
The initiative of the proclamation of next year
as the International Year of Sustainable Mountain

21-398325/7

A/76/PV.52

Development was put forward by the President of
Kyrgyzstan, His Excellency Mr. Sadyr Zhaparov,
during his statement delivered during the seventysixth session of the General Assembly, in September
(see A/76/PV.3).
Mountains are the habitat of unique species of flora
and fauna. Home to glaciers, they are a source of water,
which means the source of life for many countries
and billions of people. Today more than 1 billion
people live in mountain countries, while more than
half of the planet’s population obtain water, food and
environmentally friendly energy thanks to mountains.
However, mountain countries are currently suffering
from global warming. These regions constitute unique
types of ecosystems and face specific problems owing
to climate change.
Therefore, adaptation to and mitigation of climate
change, as well as sustainable development, in those
countries require the implementation of a special set of
measures addressing their needs. Mountainous regions
have already faced the retreat of glaciers, frequent
emergencies and the destruction of ecosystems,
increasing the threat to public health.
Furthermore, the global economic downturn, the
coronavirus disease pandemic and the rapid increase in
food prices have led to a sudden increase in the number
of starving and malnourished people, and the residents
of mountain regions are in particularly vulnerable
situations. Those problems need urgent attention and
concerted efforts in order to be resolved.
Due to the importance of promoting the mountain
agenda, taking into consideration the fact that it has been
20 years since the declaration of the International Year
of Mountains, in 2002, the Bishkek Global Mountain
Summit and the adoption of the Bishkek Declaration,
Kyrgyzstan has submitted this draft resolution to be
considered by the General Assembly.
The proclamation of the International Year of
Sustainable Mountain Development not only recognizes
the need for preserving the global life-support system,
which is so indispensable to the survival of the global
ecosystem, but also provides a sound basis for further
substantive work on mountain development, thus having
a truly global significance for the future of humankind.
Therefore, the draft resolution invites all Member
States, organizations of the United Nations system,
other international and regional organizations and
6/7

16/12/2021

other relevant stakeholders to observe the International
Year, as appropriate, in order to increase awareness of
the importance of sustainable mountain development.
The draft resolution will enable us to strengthen
international cooperation in the area of mountains,
especially at the regional and subregional levels,
to raise public awareness through a wide variety of
activities and to intensify exchanges of information
and experiences.
The tremendous obstacles facing sustainable
mountain development in the twenty-first century will
not be overcome unless the problems are recognized
and addressed by local communities, national policymakers and international organizations.
In that context, Kyrgyzstan, along with its
partners and friends, intends to take an active part
in the implementation of this initiative. In particular,
along with the members of the Group of Friends of
Mountainous Countries, we will introduce the draft
document entitled “Quinquennium of actions on
developing mountain regions”, which will be launched
next year. We believe that all 27 States members of the
Group of Friends will support that initiative as well.
In conclusion, I take this opportunity to express
my gratitude to all Member States that participated in
the informal consultations and supported our initiative
and to thank them for their flexibility. At the same
time, the Permanent Mission of Kyrgyzstan tried to
be open and transparent during the discussions on the
draft resolution.
We also express our special appreciation to
delegations for their firm commitment to the mountain
agenda from the beginning and for co-sponsoring the
draft resolution.
By supporting this draft, the international
community is sending a clear message to those who live
in mountain areas and need special attention in order to
ensure that no one is left behind.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/76/L.28.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/76/L.28, entitled “International Year of
Sustainable Mountain Development, 2022”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

21-39832

16/12/2021

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to the delegations listed in
document A/76/L.28, the following countries have
also become co-sponsors of the draft resolution:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Austria, Bangladesh, Belarus,
Bhutan, Botswana, Brazil, Cameroon, Canada, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Cuba,
Cyprus, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
the Dominican Republic, France, Georgia, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea, Haiti, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Madagascar,
Maldives, Mongolia, Morocco, Norway, Palau, Papua
New Guinea, Panama, Poland, the Republic of Korea,
the Republic of Moldova, Romania, the Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Singapore, Slovenia,
South Sudan, Spain, Sudan, Sweden, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tonga, Turkmenistan, Uganda and the United States.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/76/L.28?
Draft resolution A/76/L.28 was adopted (resolution
76/129).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 15.
I shall now suspend the meeting for 15 minutes
while the ballots for the election of five members of
the Permanent Forum of People of African Descent are
being counted.
The meeting was suspended at 10.55 a.m. and
resumed at 11.20 a.m.

A/76/PV.52

Agenda item 116 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(g) Election of members of the Permanent Forum
of People of African Descent
The President: The result of the voting is as follows:
Number of ballot papers:
189
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
189
Abstentions:
1
Number of members present and voting:
188
Required two-thirds majority:
95
Number of votes obtained:
Martin Kimani (Kenya)
149
Justin Hansford (United States of America) 138
June Soomer (Saint Lucia)
128
Mona Omar (Egypt)
123
Epsy Campbell Barr (Costa Rica)
113
Manzi Tchilabalo Karbou (Togo)
111
Alexei Avtonomov (Russian Federation) 79
Luisa Leonor Ortíz (Ecuador)
43
The President: Having obtained the greatest number
of votes and the required majority, Epsy Campbell
Barr (Costa Rica), June Soomer (Saint Lucia), Justin
Hansford (United States of America), Martin Kimani
(Kenya) and Mona Omar (Egypt) have been elected
members of the Permanent Forum of People of African
Descent for a three-year term of office beginning on
the date when five other members are appointed by the
President of the Human Rights Council. I congratulate
them on having been elected members of the Permanent
Forum of People of African Descent.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (g) of agenda
item 116.
The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m.

21-398327/7
