66

General ANembly -

should be admitted to membership in the United
Nations, 81
Having considered the application for membership of
the Republic of Mali,82
Deci.des..tt! admit the Republic of Mali to membership
in the United Nations.
876th plenary meeting,
28 September 1960.

1492 (XV). Admission of the Federation of
Nigeria to membership in the United Nations
The General, Assembly,
Having received the recommendation of the Security
Council of 7 October 1960 that the Federation of Nigeria
should be admitted to membership in the United
Nations, 83
Having considered the application for membership of
the Federation of Nigeria, 84
Decides to admit the Federation of Nigeria to membership in the United Nations.
893rd plenary meeting,
7 October 1960.

1495 (XV). Co-operation of Member States
The GeneraJ, Assembly,
Deeply concerned by the increase in world tensions,
Considering that the deterioration in international
relations constitutes a grave risk to world peace and
co-operation,
Conscious that both in the General Assembly and in
the world at large it is necessary to arrest this trend
in international relations and to contribute towards
greater harmony among nations irrespective of the differences in their political and economic systems,
1. Urges that all countries, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, refrain from actions
likely to aggravate international tensions ;
2. Reaffirms the conviction that the strength of the
United Nations rests on the co-operation of its Member
States which should be forthcoming in full measure so
that the Organization becomes a more effective instrument for the safeguarding of peace and for the promotion
of the economic and social advancement of all peoples;
3. Urges further that immediate and constructive
steps should be adopted in regard to the urgent problems
concerning the peace of the world and the advancement
of its peoples ;
4. AppeaJ,s to all Member States to use their utmost
endeavours to these ends.
907th plenary meeting,
17 October 1960.

1503 (XV). Report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency
The GeneraJ, Assembly
Takes note of the report of the International Atomic
81 Ibid., document A/4514.
82 Ibid., document A/4512.
as Ibid., document A/4533.
U Ibid., document A/4527.
1111 Ann-ual report of the Board of Go_vernors to the General
Confermce, 1 July 1959-30 June 1960, Vienna, July 1960 (A/
4531 and Corr.I and Add.l).

Fifteenth Se811ion

Energy Agency to the General Assembly for the year
1959-1960.35
943rd plenary meeting,
12 December 1960.

1513 (XV). Report of the Security Council
The General, Assembly
Talles note of the report of the Security Council to
the General Assembly covering the period from 16 July
1959 to 15 July 1960. 36
943rd plenary meeting,
12 December 1960.

1514 (XV). Declaration on the granting of
independence to colonial countries and
peoples
The General, Assembly,
Mindful of the determination proclaimed by the peoples of the world in the Charter of the United Nations
to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the
dignity and worth of the human person, in the equal
rights of men and women and of nations large and small
and to promote social progress and better standards of
life in larger freedom,
Conscious of the need for the creation of conditions
of stability and well-being and peaceful and friendly
relations based on respect for the principles of equal
rights and self-determination of all peoples, and of
universal respect for, and observance of, human rights
and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction
as to race, sex, language or religion,
Recognizing the passionate yearning for freedom in
all dependent peoples and the decisive role of such peoples in the attainment of their independence,
Aware of the increasing conflicts resulting from the
denial of or impediments in the way of the freedom of
such peoples, which constitute a serious threat to world
peace,
Considering the important role of the United Nations
in assisting the movement for independence in Trust
and Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Recognizing that the peoples of the world ardently
desire the end of colonialism in all its manifestations,
Convinced that the continued existence of colonialism
prevents the development of international economic cooperation, impedes the social, cultural and economic
development of dependent peoples and militates against
the United Nations ideal of universal peace,
Affirming that peoples may, for their own ends, freely
dispose of their natural wealth and resources without
prejudice to any. obligations arising out of international
economic co-operation, based upon the principle of
mutual benefit, and international law,
Believing that the process of liberation is irresistible
and irreversible and that, in order to avoid. serious crises,
an end must be put to colonialism and all practices of
segregation and discrimination associated therewith,
Welcoming the emergence in recent years of a large
number of dependent territories into freedom and independence, and recognizing the increasingly powerful
trends towards freedom in such territories which have
not yet attained independence,
~ Official Records of the Gmernl As.mnbly, Fifteenth Session,
Supplement No. 2 (A/4494).

Reeolutio1111 adopted without reference to a Committee

Convinced that all peoples have an inalienable right
to complete freedom, the exercise of their sovereignty
and the integrity of their national territory,
Solemnly proclaims the necessity of bringing to a
speedy and unconditional end colonialism in all its forms
and manifestations ;
And to this end
Declares that:
1. The subjection of peoples to alien subjugation,
domination and exploitation constitutes a denial of
fundamental human rights, is contrary to the Charter
of the United Nations and is an impediment to the
promotion of world peace and co-operation.
2. All peoples have the right to self-determination;
by virtue of that right they freely determine their
political statt1s and freely pursue their economic, social
and cultural development.
3. Inadequacy of political, economic, social or educational preparedness should never serve as a pretext
for delaying independence.
4. All armed action or repressive measures of all
kinds directed against dependent peoples shall cease
in order to enable them to exercise peacefully and
freely their right to complete independence, and the
integrity of their national territory shall be respected.
5. Immediate steps shall be taken, in Trust and
Non-Self-Governing Territories or all other territories which have not yet attained independence, to
transfer all powers to the peoples of those territories,
without any conditions or reservations, in accordance
,with their freely expressed will and desire, without

*

67

any distinction as to race, creed or colour, in order to
enable them to enjoy complete independence and
freedom.
6. Any attempt aimed at the partial or total disruption of the national unity and the territorial integrity of a country is incompatible with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
7. All States shall observe faithfully and strictly
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations,
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the
present Declaration on the basis of equality, noninterference in the internal affairs of all States, and
respect for the sovereign rights of all peoples and
their territorial integrity.
947th plenary meeting,
14 December 1960.
1592 (XV). The situation in the Republic of the
Congo

The General Assembly,
H<Wing considered the item entitled "The situation
in the Republic of the Congo",
Noting that the previous resolutions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly on this subject are
still in effect,
Decides to keep this item on the agenda of its resumed
fifteenth session.
958th plenary meeting,
20 December 1960.

*

*

Note
Appointment of the Peace Observation Commission
(item 18)

At its 960th plenary meeting on 20 December 1960, the General Assembly
decided to reappoint, for the calendar years 1961 and 1%2, the present members
of the Peace Observation Commission. The Commission is therefore composed as
follows: CHINA, CzEcHOSLOVAKIA, FRANCE, HONDURAS, INDIA, IRAQ, ISRAEL,
NEW ZEALAND, PAKISTAN, SWEDEN, UNION OF SovIET SocIALIST REPUBLICS,
UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND, UNITED STATES
OF AMERICA and URUGUAY.
