S/PV.8957

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8957th meeting

Thursday, 27 January 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Juul. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Norway)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Xing Jisheng
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Mrs. Hackman
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mrs. Toroitich
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Eckersley
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-24127 (E)
*2224127*

S/PV.8957

The situation in the Middle East

see now. Many more Syrian girls and boys are shivering
in tents in the snow. Others are stuck in displacement
camps or detention facilities with little hope of getting
out. And millions more, lucky enough to have housing
and to be with their families, are still missing out on a
healthy diet and reliable schooling.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator; and
Mr. Jan Egeland, Secretary General of the Norwegian
Refugee Council.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Before we begin with our speakers list
today — recalling the Security Council’s latest
note by the President (S/2017/507) on its working
methods — I wish to encourage all speakers, both
members and non-members of the Council, to deliver
their statements in five minutes or less. Note 507 also
encourages briefers to be succinct and focus on key
issues. In that spirit, briefers are further encouraged
to limit their initial remarks to seven to 10 minutes.
Everyone is also encouraged to wear a mask at all
times, including while delivering remarks.
I now give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: I start by saying how extremely
concerned we are — and I am sure we all are — about
the hundreds of children trapped in a terrifying prison
siege in Al-Hasakah. It is critical that all children be
accounted for, evacuated to safety and supported.
But even if they leave the prison, their future is
uncertain. They are not out of danger. Their chance
of a family life or of a return to any kind of normal
is remote. They need to recover, reintegrate into their
communities and rebuild their lives. As Henrietta Fore
of UNICEF has said, the children in that prison should
never have been there in the first place.
Their predicament, if I may, echoes that of the whole
country. It should never have been in the situation we
2/20

27/01/2022

As the country moves further into its second
decade of conflict, and as I have said before, we are
failing the Syrian people, young and old. If civilians
were protected, sufficient relief provided and basic
social services kept going, we could say that we are
providing a bare minimum. But we are not even
managing that, I regret to say. Failure each year cannot
be our strategy. This year, we have to lighten the load
on Syrian civilians. I urge Council members to work
with the United Nations and key humanitarian agencies
on a new approach.
Hotspots in the conflict continue to claim civilian
lives. On 20 January, six civilians, including four
children, were killed when missiles landed in Afrin
city. The support systems for everyday life are at risk.
Another airstrike in early January severely damaged the
main water station servicing Idlib city. The appalling
attack on a prison in Al-Hasakah in recent days and its
aftermath are another vivid reminder — if we needed
one — of how volatile other parts of the country still
are. It is also a chilling reminder of the threat of the
Islamic States in Iraq and the Sham.
In Al-Hol camp, meanwhile, violence continues.
On 11 January, a Syrian health worker was killed.
Another doctor was injured the next day, as we all
know. We need to do better to keep camp residents and
humanitarian workers safe. Above all, we need durable
solutions for the people living in the camps, including
the safe repatriation of all third-country nationals, first
and foremost children.
I reiterate a simple message. Civilians, especially
children, and civilian objects must be protected.
On top of the effects of conflict, unusually bitter
winter storms last week left a trail of destruction.
Thousands of tents, in which people have been living
for so many years, were damaged in camps in the northwest. Displaced people are burning garbage to stay
warm, and risk asphyxiation sheltering from sub-zero
temperatures in those tents. One child was reported to
have died when snow collapsed a tent. I cannot imagine
that. In the last month, at least 24 people have been
injured and two have died due to tent fires.
22-24127

27/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East

People should not have to suffer like this every
winter. We could and should get them the support
they need and a different kind of housing, even if it
is temporary. But with our current funding, we can
help only half of the over 4 million people across Syria
who need protection from the elements and the basics
of survival.
Meanwhile, the economic crisis continues to
deepen. Food is getting ever more expensive. The
cost of an average food basket has reached new highs
in every one of the past four months. Domestic food
production is also a concern. The Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) reports
that wheat production dropped by over 60 per cent
in 2021 — a single year. While needs are increasing,
international aid resources are declining, despite the
generosity of many member States represented here,
including your own, Madam President. The food aid
we provide to millions of people each month is just
not enough.
However, despite the daunting circumstances and
the sad and tragic picture that I have been trying to
depict, we can continue to make a difference with
smart funding and creative humanitarian efforts. For
example, we run early recovery projects to support
food production so that we can reduce dependency on
food aid. FAO is expanding irrigation projects along the
Euphrates river, specifically with such an objective in
mind. Expanding early recovery projects — and we have
seen reference to them in resolution 2585 (2021) — is
crucial. We continue to reach people in need in northwestern Syria through cross-line deliveries. As we
discussed at our last meeting on this issue in December
(see S/PV.8937), two cross-line operations have been
completed and a third is expected to take place soon, in
line with the six-month plan that we discussed earlier.
I urge ongoing support from all here to ensure that
timely and predictable deliveries continue. I thank the
authorities responsible for those permissions for the
actions they have taken. Distribution of that aid also
continues. Food delivered cross-line has reached more
than 40,000 people again this month.
These developments are positive, and we must use
all avenues to reach those in need. However, let me
reiterate that cross-line operations do not replace the
size or the scope of the massive cross-border operation
at this point. Each month, the United Nations and
its partners deliver food and other critical items for
millions of people in the north-west of Syria — people

S/PV. 8957

who need our support and deserve it. Through that
support, people can see a doctor, get essential medicine
and send their children to school. As the SecretaryGeneral stated in his report on resolution 2585 (2021)
(S/2021/1029) in December, our cross-border operation
is one of the most closely monitored operations in the
world. We know what the needs are, what aid is being
delivered and where aid is going.
As if it needs repeating, civilians need food,
medicine and other life-saving items. They need access
to basic services. They need a chance to live a dignified
life. They need protection from harm.
To achieve that, we need to expand access. We
need the funds to sustain humanitarian operations. We
need to reach more people with immediate life-saving
assistance. We need to scale up early-recovery
programmes, and we will play our part in that. Such
programmes offer a pathway to more self-sufficiency
and the possibility of basic services for those families
who must have them but so often do not.
The President: I thank Mr. Griffiths for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Egeland.
Mr. Egeland: I returned to Syria yet again in
December, travelling to Dara’a in the south, which was
recently struck by renewed armed conflict, as well as
Damascus and eastern Ghouta.
While Syria has faded from the international
headlines, the situation on the ground has become
dramatically worse. The armed conflict continues
to cause death, destruction and displacement among
civilians, as we saw in recent days in the north-east,
as just described by Mr. Griffiths. At the same time,
the economic crisis, exacerbated by drought, is now so
deep that families had this recurrent message when I
met them: “We have gone from war to hell.” The gap
between assessed needs and the humanitarian funding
that we have available continues to grow. We have
virtually no funding for early recovery.
Syrian civilians feel prisoners of a human-made,
political stalemate that has crippled hope among
children and youth. We ask for help from Council
members and influential Powers with parties and actors
in the region in the following areas. Forgive me for
being blunt, but I think that the situation demands it.

22-241273/20

S/PV.8957

The situation in the Middle East

First, on access, humanitarian work is still hampered
by administrative, logistical, legal and physical barriers
in virtually all parts of Syria. We need more effective
humanitarian diplomacy with parties and actors so that
our aid can reach all Syrians in need.
Russia and others can help on the Government
side, where we are, for example, still unable to provide
legal aid to displaced people and returnees to Syria.
Turkey, the United States and others can help with the
de facto authorities in opposition-controlled areas. The
humanitarian space and action need to be depoliticized
so that we can reach all people in need.
Secondly, we can, and must, prevent a bloodbath
in Idlib. Three million people who are extremely
vulnerable live in opposition-controlled areas in the
north-west. Tents were buried in snow there last week.
We cannot have a war in what is, in reality, a gigantic
string of displacement camps.
We should remember that many of the fighters and
their families were sent to Idlib on buses from besieged
areas elsewhere as part of negotiated agreements. All
conflict parties, including the Russian and Syrian
Governments, and those who can influence armed
opposition groups, including Turkey, must renew
their efforts with United Nations mediators to reach a
negotiated solution and prevent a potential bloodbath.
Neighbouring countries, in particular Turkey,
already generously host millions of refugees. Now is
not the time to close borders. Now is the time for all,
including Europe and others, to jointly shoulder the
responsibility to ensure that Syrian civilians are granted
their right to protection and asylum, in accordance with
the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees.
Thirdly, on deconfliction, hospitals, displacement
camps, apartment buildings and markets are still
bombed and attacked in Syria in blatant violation of
international humanitarian law. Deconfliction is the tool
that we, as humanitarians, have to ensure that conflict
parties, with air forces and heavy weapons, are aware
of — and therefore must actively protect — civilian,
medical and humanitarian sites.
The United Nations-led deconfliction system
for Syria needs to be relaunched, with rebuilt trust
among humanitarian and medical actors and with the
participation of all relevant parties, including Russia. To
be effective, the system needs continuous monitoring of
both the purely civilian nature of deconflicted sites and
4/20

27/01/2022

the monitoring and reporting of all attacks, including
near-misses. There must be immediate investigations
of attacks and accountability for potential war crimes.
The fourth point is on cross-border and cross-line
relief. As Martin Griffiths again mentioned, the United
Nations-led cross-border operation to the north-west
must continue beyond July. It cannot be replaced by us
in a non-governmental-organization-led response or
by cross-line programming at this time. An essential
lifeline to millions of Syrians and the protection of
thousands of humanitarian workers are at stake.
The Security Council therefore needs to ensure a
continued United Nations-led cross-border response
from Turkey, while also improving conditions for
cross-line responses out of Damascus and ensuring a
continued transparent accounting of aid delivery in
Syria. I urge the Council to engage with all parties in
control of territory to reduce bureaucratic impediments
to a cross-line response.
Fifthly, on water, millions of Syrians are devastated
by severe drought and the reduction of water from the
Euphrates River. The bombing of a water station on
2 January has worsened critical access to water for
people in Idlib city. We call on all parties to ensure that
water infrastructure is not attacked.
We urge for unimpeded access for the maintenance
of the northern Allouk water station to ensure its
continuity for half a million people reliant on that
water. We ask all actors to respect water-sharing
agreements and to ensure that water is not used as a
political bargaining chip.
The sixth point is that we must rebuild civilian
rubble. Civilians affected by war have the right to
assistance and essential services, irrespective of who
controls the territory. That is similar all over the world.
Yet any longer-term programming for the rebuilding
of homes, schools and services inside Syria has
become highly politicized, in particular what may be
termed reconstruction.
Children’s schools and basic services should not
be held hostage to progress in political negotiations
elsewhere. We urge a rethink by donor Governments,
development agencies and the private sector. Counterterrorism measures and sanctions have similarly
prevented the timely supply of critical machines,
training, commodities and consumables.
22-24127

27/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8957

We therefore welcome the recent United States
Government amendments on humanitarian general
licences, but we need action on bank de-risking
challenges and help to reduce the impact of sanctions
on fuel, electricity and the public and private sectors.

humanitarian suffering in Syria under extremely
difficult circumstances. I am also grateful to Jan
Egeland for his compelling account. The efforts of the
Norwegian Refugee Council are critical to saving and
protecting lives in Syria.

The seventh and final point is on solutions for
refugees. The first Syrian refugee babies — and we
were witnesses to that — were born in Lebanon’s Bekaa
Valley and in Jordan’s Zaatari camp. Those babies are
now 10 years old. They have never seen the land of their
ancestors. Their chances of reclaiming the property of
their families are reduced each year. After more than
a decade of crisis, displaced Syrians deserve solutions
and hope.

The humanitarian needs of the Syrian people
must be the overriding imperative for our work in the
Council on this agenda item. The unanimous adoption
in July 2021 of resolution 2585 2585 (2021) meant that
the United Nations and its partners could continue to
deliver life-saving humanitarian aid across the border
from Turkey into north-west Syria. On a monthly basis,
millions of people are provided with humanitarian aid,
from health care to food baskets, tents and shelter, and
livelihood opportunities. In 2021 alone, almost 10,000
trucks brought vital assistance across the border.

But there are still no real relocation programmes
to third countries; there is little chance of integration
where refugees have received protection; and conditions
inside Syria are still not conducive to a mass return.
Human rights groups have documented how some
returnees have been detained and tortured. Hundreds
of thousands have only rubble and destitution to return
to, and there is no system for monitoring, assisting,
protecting and supporting those who do return.
We call for the cooperation of all members of the
Council to give options for Syrian refugees. Remember
that the Syrian refugees who recently sheltered in
the 73-year-old Shatila camp for Palestinian refugees
in Lebanon met the fourth generation of refugees,
Palestinians born there, because the Security Council
did not do what it should have done for the Palestinians
to enable them to return in the 1950s.
We need independent monitoring of returns and
conditions in areas of return in Syria according to
international standards in a scale-up and diversification
of legal aid programming.
I shall end there. We are ready to do our part to
rebuild hopes and futures for Syrian children, but we
need the Council’s help to do so.
The President: I thank Mr. Egeland for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of Norway.
I will deliver this statement as co-penholder
together with Ireland.
Let me first thank Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths for his briefing and for all the efforts of
the United Nations and partners to alleviate the

As co-penholders, Ireland and Norway have
repeatedly emphasized our support for all modalities
to provide humanitarian aid to meet the needs of
people across Syria. Our sole objective is ensuring
that humanitarian aid reaches all people in need. That
includes also by cross-line deliveries to the north-east
and the north-west. We therefore welcome the recent
humanitarian convoys from the World Food Programme
and other United Nations agencies across the conflict
line into the north-west. We call on all parties to
facilitate their continuation.
However, as reported by the Secretary-General last
month, the cross-line convoys are not able to replicate
the size and scope of the cross-border operation.
The cross-border humanitarian operation remains
the critical lifeline for millions of Syrians in need of
humanitarian assistance in the north-west. Right now the
severe winter in Syria is causing flooding, windstorms
and heavy snowfall. Children are dying while trying
to stay warm. There has also been a reported increase
in air strikes on civilian infrastructure. On 2 January,
an air strike hit the Arshani water station outside the
city of Idlib. The station can no longer provide water
to the 225,000 people who rely on it, and on 20 January
an attack on Afrin city reportedly killed six civilians,
including children.
We further deplore the recent incidents of
humanitarian workers being attacked, including the
tragic killing of a humanitarian paramedic in north-east
Syria. We are deeply concerned about the humanitarian
consequences of the recent attack on the prison in

22-241275/20

S/PV.8957

The situation in the Middle East

Hasakah city, which reportedly killed civilians,
including children, and caused displacement.
The conduct of hostilities in urban and other
populated areas in Syria is causing unacceptable
large-scale and protracted harm to civilians and
civilian objects. The destruction of critical civilian
infrastructure deprives the population of essential
services such as water, energy, health care and
education, causing grave long-term consequences for
the lives and future of the people of Syria.
We call on all parties to respect international
humanitarian law, including the prohibition of
indiscriminate attacks and the obligation to take all
feasible precautions to avoid and minimize harm
to civilians and civilian infrastructure. Effective
de-confliction mechanisms can be a practical tool in
that regard.
The severe humanitarian situation in Syria has
been further exacerbated by the economic, coronavirus
disease and food crises, and we have serious concerns
about harmful practices and negative coping
mechanisms such as child and forced marriages and
sexual exploitation and abuse. Children born following
conflict-related sexual violence and their mothers are
in a particularly vulnerable situation. It must be a
priority to stop and prevent sexual and gender-based
violence and to respond to the needs of survivors.
The humanitarian imperative will remain the guiding
principle for our work as penholders on this file, and
we trust in the Council’s cooperation to that end. Above
all else, our common goal should be to alleviate the
suffering of the Syrian people.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council wishing to make statements.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Martin Griffiths for his overview of
the humanitarian situation in Syria. We also welcome
Jan Egeland to today’s meeting and thank him for his
balanced assessment of developments on the ground.
Today is our first meeting since the six-month
extension of resolution 2585 (2021), in early January. At
this stage, we considered it more important to maintain
and step up the emerging new trends in the organization
of humanitarian aid in Syria, and we chose not to focus
on the small amount of work that had been done. It is
6/20

27/01/2022

no exaggeration to say that that is based on our trust in
the Security Council as a whole, as well as our desire
to give the newcomers to the Council an opportunity to
contribute to this common cause. The United Nations
mandate for cross-border supplies of humanitarian aid
to Syria through the Bab al-Hawa crossing now runs
through 10 July 2022.
A significant number of problems need to be tackled
now; we have no time to waste. The problems that
need to be solved to ensure balanced United Nations
humanitarian efforts in Syria are vast. In concrete
terms, over the next five and a half months we have a
number of critical tasks to accomplish.
First, it is important to ensure that the established
mechanism for cross-line aid deliveries not only
works effectively and without interruption but is also
expanded, especially to those areas that are inaccessible
through the cross-border mechanism.
As far as we know, the critical nature of that step,
especially given the difficult winter in Syria, is clear,
and therefore any delay in the dispatch of humanitarian
convoys, including to Idlib, cannot be regarded as
anything other than deliberate sabotage and a deliberate
threat to the lives of ordinary Syrians. At the very
minimum, the existing clear operational plan articulated
in October 2021 by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs should be implemented in full.
So far we have seen little progress in that respect. We
hope that our colleagues in the Security Council will
adopt a principled stance on that issue.
Once again, we reiterate the need to ensure a United
Nations presence in the north-west of Syria, which will
enhance control of the distribution of humanitarian
assistance to those in need.
It is extremely important to step up efforts to rebuild
infrastructure facilities in order to ensure basic living
conditions for Syrians. Humanitarian organizations are
already exhausted in their efforts to explain a simple
fact: no amount of humanitarian aid can effectively
replace hospitals, power plants, factories and schools
that are running smoothly. The contributions of donors
to these areas of work will not only help to normalize
the situation of ordinary people in Syria but also make
the cost of the humanitarian work itself cheaper while
increasing its impact. In our view, it is very difficult to
argue with this simple mathematical logic. We would
like our colleagues in the Security Council to redouble
their efforts accordingly.
22-24127

27/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East

In our further work on the Syrian humanitarian file,
we must not turn a blind eye to the negative impact that
sanctions and coercive measures have on the lives of
ordinary Syrians. Jan Egeland spoke about this today.
From time to time, the Secretary-General also mentions
this topic in his reports. We hope that António Guterres
will pay more attention to it in his reports until the
problem in Syria is completely eradicated.
And in our view, there are plenty of grounds for the
Secretary-General to do that. The most recent evidence
of this is contained in the recent reports of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the
World Health Organization, which directly spoke about
the destructive impact of sanctions on agricultural
production and on the supply of drugs and medical
products to the country. The only people affected are
ordinary Syrians who lack food and medical treatment.
Responsible United Nations entities are writing about
this. We are grateful to them for their integrity and
honesty in fulfilling their professional duty.
Unfortunately, the beginning of the year was marked
by a real disaster at one of the prisons in Al-Hasakah.
Considering the scope of this tragedy and the emerging
threats to the security of the region as a whole, we have
requested a separate meeting of the Security Council
to be held immediately after this meeting. We trust
that this will allow us not only to voice our evaluation
of what happened, but also to understand what is
happening in these trans-Euphrates areas that are still
being illegally occupied by the United States.
Mrs. Hackman (Ghana): My delegation welcomes
the insightful briefing by Mr. Martin Griffiths, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs. We
also thank Mr. Jan Egeland, the Secretary General of
the Norwegian Refugee Council, and commend his
organization’s extensive humanitarian work amid the
difficult circumstances of the conflict. Let me also
welcome to this meeting the representatives of Syria,
Turkey and the Islamic Republic of Iran.
At the outset, let me reiterate my delegation’s
unreserved condemnation of the attack by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant on the Ghweiran prison
and the ensuing escalations in the north-eastern city of
Al-Hasakah, which has resulted in civilian casualties
and the displacement of over 45,000 people. Terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations, committed by
whomever, wherever and for whatever purposes,

S/PV. 8957

constitutes a threat to international peace and security
and is unjustifiable and unacceptable.
Ten years of conflict in Syria has had a profound and
painful impact on the lives of the people, particularly
women, children and elderly persons. As we have
heard from today’s briefings, the situation is defined
by violent escalations, air strikes and shelling, grave
economic conditions, food shortages, a water crisis,
and the bitter, wintry cold of sub-zero temperatures.
These precarious humanitarian conditions, intensified
by the coronavirus disease pandemic, should drive
our collective commitment to prioritizing life-saving
humanitarian assistance to the millions of Syrians in
need. There is a most urgent need to scale up food and
non-food aid across the whole of Syria in response to
what is indeed a humanitarian emergency.
As other members of the Security Council have
rightly pointed out, a political solution is a sine qua
non to ending the humanitarian crisis in Syria once
and for all. This would require the parties to respect a
nationwide ceasefire and allow progress on the political
track through dialogue and consensus. The international
community must lend its full support to the accelerated
implementation of the road map outlined in resolution
2254 (2015) to ensure a comprehensive and lasting
solution to the multifaceted crisis in Syria.
Secondly, we welcome the renewal of the crossborder mechanism authorizing United Nations aid
delivery through the Bab Al-Hawa crossing until
10 July 2022. This renewal is our act of humanity in
offering a lifeline to the 3 million vulnerable people
requiring urgent humanitarian assistance in the northwest of Syria. In the face of the compounding crisis, we
believe that all modalities of delivery must be deployed
to avert a humanitarian catastrophe. We deplore the use
of humanitarian aid as a weapon of war and call on the
parties to allow unimpeded and sustained access to the
communities in need.
My third point relates to the protection of civilians
and critical infrastructure. In December last year,
air strikes and shelling in the north-west killed three
civilians, including two children, and injured 16
civilians, including four women and six children. On
2 January 2022, the Arshani water station that provides
water to nearly a quarter million people in Idlib was
also substantially damaged by an air strike.
Ghana is also concerned about the safety of the
hundreds of children who were recently caught up in

22-241277/20

S/PV.8957

The situation in the Middle East

the attack at the Ghweiran prison. We urge all parties to
the conflict to prioritize civilian protection and adhere
to their international obligations to protect children and
civilian infrastructure.
Lastly, we support the call for increased
humanitarian funding, including support for earlyrecovery and livelihood assistance. Comprehensive
support to the people of Syria must respond to present
needs and extend to laying the foundations for postconflict reconstruction and sustainable development.
In closing, I must emphasize that the collective
support of the members of the Security Council and the
international community is crucial to ensure sustained
and effective assistance to the Syrian people as they
grapple with this monumental humanitarian crisis.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me thank UnderSecretary-General Griffiths and Mr. Egeland for their
valuable information on the situation on the ground.
At the outset, we fully support the efforts of the
United Nations and civil society organizations, which,
as we heard in today’s briefings, provide life-saving
assistance to the men, women and children of Syria.
After nearly 11 years since the start of the Syrian
crisis, the humanitarian situation remains catastrophic.
The figures are staggering. More than 14 million
people depend on humanitarian aid. More than
12 million people in Syria, which equals 60 per cent of
the population, have trouble meeting their basic daily
food needs. Further, over 90 per cent of the population
has been pushed below the poverty line — the majority
of them women and children, many of whom are
especially vulnerable, such as persons with disabilities.
More than 12 million people are displaced internally or
are refugees abroad, and they must battle with the harsh
winter cold to survive. Further to the 500,000 victims,
around 100,000 people have been unlawfully detained
or have disappeared.
We strongly believe that saving lives must be the
number-one priority, but there is more to saving a life
than just to provide food and medicine, when even this
is a challenge. The people of Syria need education,
they need freedom and rights, they need hope. People
need an end to the conflict, early-recovery support and
respect for their fundamental human rights.
While there is no political solution in sight and the
Government neglects the needs of its people, crossborder assistance remains life-saving for millions of
8/20

27/01/2022

people in need in the north-west of the country. The
Security Council has shown many times that it has
the power to take action and to make change. When
the Council is united, it can make a difference to the
lives of millions of people. This is why cross-border
assistance is so important and why it must continue. We
urge the Council to reopen the Al-Yarubiyah and Bab
Al-Salaam border crossings, in addition to preserving
Bab Al-Hawa, in order to allow aid workers to do
their work and reach those millions of people I have
mentioned with basic aid.
We welcome the latest report of the Secretary
General on cross-border assistance (S/2021/1030).
We fully support the recommendations and measures
contained therein. We strongly believe that the measures
need to be extended through all available corridors.
The measures need to be extended through all
available corridors. We call on the United Nations
and its Member States to take the necessary actions
to ensure respect for international humanitarian law,
including as it relates to the protection of civilians. We
call on all parties to the conflict to allow and facilitate
the rapid and unimpeded passage of humanitarian relief
for all civilians in need.
Finally, people in Syria must be protected. We
should support the Syrian people in what they need,
what they deserve and what they are entitled to, in terms
of humanitarian assistance and protection. Albania will
continue to support the Syrian people as they pursue
their future in peace and justice and hopes that the
voice of the Syrians will be heard.
Mrs. Toroitich (Kenya): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Martin Griffiths and Mr. Egeland for their
briefings and welcome the participation of Syria, Iran
and Turkey in this meeting.
Earlier this week, we had the benefit of holding a
high-level open debate on wars in cities and protection
of civilians in urban settings (see S/PV.8953). I am
certain that as delegations prepared their statements,
several — if not most — recalled the destruction that
the cities and towns of Syrian have suffered.
Syria stands as the clearest evidence of the Security
Council’s struggle to rise above narrow interests to offer
hope to a battered and brutalized people. We remain
gravely concerned about the deteriorating security
across parts of the north-west, north-east and south of
Syria. Syrians are facing severe protection concerns,
22-24127

27/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8957

with shelling and air strikes that have resulted in deaths,
injuries, displacement and destruction of civilian
property. We condemn, among others, the attack on the
Arshani water station in January, which disrupted the
provision of water to thousands of people.

facilitate consensus and collaborative approaches for
reconciliation through a Syrian-led and -owned process.

Also worrying is the persistent insecurity in Al-Hol
camp, where 56,000 people, most of whom are women
and children, reside in a constant state of fear due to
rampant attacks. Kenya calls on countries to repatriate
their citizens in order to ease tensions in the country.
We reiterate the importance of protecting civilians,
humanitarian workers and civilian infrastructure. All
parties should honour the nationwide ceasefire.

Time and again, we come to the same
conclusion — civilians continue to pay the price of the
conflict and to suffer through another winter. Close to
14 million Syrians are in need of humanitarian assistance,
as was mentioned today, 90 per cent of the population
is living below the poverty line and, as Mr. Egeland
stated earlier, the majority of Syrian children have
only known war. We must urgently and immediate
implement a ceasefire at the national level, with United
Nations monitoring. The protection of civilians and
civilian infrastructure is an absolute priority.

Turning to the economic situation, the statistics are
alarming, with 50 per cent of households being food
insecure and 75 per cent of households buying food
on credit. Furthermore, unilateral coercive measures
have contributed significantly to the grim economic
situation and the inability of the Government to provide
for the vulnerable members of society. We call for the
lifting of such measures, especially when humanitarian
operations are affected.
It is against that backdrop that Kenya is certain that
all means that ensure access to humanitarian assistance
are crucial, especially during these winter months. We
commend the continuous delivery of the most essential
supplies, including the distribution of coronavirus
disease vaccines through the cross-border mechanism.
Kenya also welcomes the development and
operationalization of the six-month plan to upgrade
cross-line assistance in order to ensure sustained and
predictable deliveries to underserved parts of northwest Syria. We encourage continued engagements for
sustaining timely approvals for all parties, as well as
the consideration of an intersectoral delivery in order
to ensure that medical supplies are also included in
future deliveries. We also call on stakeholders to scale
up funding for early recovery programmes that will
improve livelihoods and build resilience for thousands
of Syrians.
As we deliberate, month after month, and often
repeat our unsettled and moving positions, the Syrian
people are not being heard. The Syrian people need
an international community that speaks with a single
voice on offering humanitarian relief. We call on and
encourage members to recapture the spirit that led
to the adoption of resolution 2585 (2021) in order to

Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I would like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths and
Mr. Jan Egeland for their briefings.

Humanitarian personnel must also be protected.
It is unacceptable that they are still being targeted,
as occurred recently in Al-Hol camp. The
recommendations issued by the Panel of Experts to
improve the deconfliction mechanism are useful in that
regard, and they must now be put into action.
The rise in humanitarian and medical needs make it
more essential than ever to ensure safe and unhindered
humanitarian access, which is also critical in order
to ramp up the coronavirus vaccination campaign,
including in north-east and north-west Syria. All
parties to the conflict, especially the Syrian regime,
must respect their obligations under international
humanitarian law.
The developments shared by Mr. Griffiths with
regard to cross-line convoys are indeed positive, and
we fully support the implementation of the inter-agency
plan of the United Nations. But let us be clear — a
cross-border mechanism will be necessary until aid can
reach all populations in need throughout the territory.
The European Union and its member States
will continue to ensure impartiality, independence,
neutrality and transparency with regard to the delivery
of humanitarian assistance. Those principles are not
currently being respected by the Syrian regime.
Attempts to accuse Europe and its partners
of
conditioning
humanitarian
assistance
or
instrumentalizing that aid or sanctions should fool no
one. I recall here that the European Union and its member
States are the primary donors to the humanitarian
response in Syria, including in the regions controlled by

22-241279/20

S/PV.8957

The situation in the Middle East

the regime. Since 2011, €25 billion have been mobilized
by Europe in response to the crisis. European sanctions
are targeted and contain robust provisions for ensuring
the delivery of humanitarian and medical aid to the
intended recipients.
Without a political solution well under way, there
is absolutely no reason to normalize relations with
the Syrian regime. Without a political solution, our
positions on the lifting of sanctions and reconstruction
remain unchanged. The States that are calling to rebuild
Syria should start by bolstering their contributions to
the humanitarian response.
Syrian refugees will be unable to return while the
regime continues to oppose their return, threaten their
lives and deprive them of their property. It is crucial that
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
have access to all returning refugees.
Finally, the regime’s crimes will not go unpunished.
France will continue to fully support mechanisms to
fight impunity.
Mr. Xing Jisheng (China) (Spoke in Chinese):
I thank Under-Secretary-General Griffiths and
Mr. Egeland for their briefings.
The Syrian humanitarian file is considered on
a monthly basis in the Security Council and, every
time, the briefings have been deeply worrisome. The
economic crisis has already affected every aspect of
Syrian society. Food and oil prices are soaring, while
people’s incomes are constantly in decline. At the same
time, the coronavirus disease is rapidly spreading.
Certain parts of the country are suffering, from severe
water shortages. The refugees and displaced persons
are in dire need of an increase in winter supplies.
The Syrian Government has taken a series of
measures to develop its agricultural sector, help
and support small and medium-size enterprises and
engage in energy cooperation, which have yielded
positive results. Yet the joint efforts of the international
community continue to be required to address the
serious consequences of the protracted civil war,
terrorism and unilateral sanctions.
The international community must help Syria
respond to the challenges related to its economic
and humanitarian reconstruction endeavours in an
integrated manner. It is important both to provide Syria
with emergency humanitarian assistance, including,
inter alia, vaccines, food, water, supplies and services,
10/20

27/01/2022

and actively move forward Syria’s economic recovery
and post-war reconstruction.
The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, the World Food Programme (WFP), the
World Health Organization, UNICEF and other
United Nations agencies have carried out large-scale
humanitarian assistance operations throughout Syria.
China appreciates that. We welcome the two cross-line
WFP humanitarian assistance operations in north-west
of Syria. We hope that the third and fourth cross-line
deliveries will go smoothly.
China appreciates the Syrian Government’s active
cooperation in the cross-line assistance operations and
urges the relevant de facto local authorities in northwestern Syria to provide access and security guarantees
for the cross-line deliveries, facilitate the distribution
of supplies and jointly implement the United Nations
six-month plan for cross-line humanitarian assistance
for north-western Syria.
China welcomes the early-recovery and livelihood
projects in Syria carried out by United Nations
agencies, including the United Nations Development
Programme and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. We hope that the United
Nations will step up investment in this regard to help
the Syrian people become self-sufficient. The countries
concerned should immediately lift their unilateral
sanctions and economic blockade on Syria to create the
conditions necessary to enable humanitarian assistance
and reconstruction. There should be no political strings
attached in providing assistance to Syria.
China knows that the Security Council’s mandate
concerning the Bab Al-Hawa border crossing has
been extended to July. I would like to reiterate that
humanitarian assistance must be carried out on the
basis of respect for the sovereignty and the territorial
integrity of the country concerned, and the cross-border
mechanism should gradually be transitioned to the
cross-line mechanism. As the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2021/1030) mentions, cross-border assistant
operations involve complex environments, and the risk
of humanitarian supplies being diverted cannot be
ruled out. We urge the United Nations to strengthen
the monitoring of the cross-border mechanism to
ensure the humanitarian nature of the cross-border
assistance operations.
22-24127

27/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Eckersley (United Kingdom): I thank
the Under-Secretary-General and Mr. Egeland for
their updates.
As we enter 2022, the twelfth year of the conflict, the
Syrian crisis continues to deteriorate. As we have heard
today, the humanitarian costs are clear — 13.4 million
people are in desperate need of humanitarian assistance
across Syria. We will talk specifically about the very
concerning situation in north-eastern Syria a bit later.
In north-western Syria, there are 3.4 million people
whose humanitarian needs can currently only be met by
the scale of assistance provided by the United Nations
cross-border mandate.
Daily air strikes and artillery shelling continue,
with 35 air strikes recorded in one week over the
New Year period, including increased attacks against
civilian infrastructure. Civilians are being killed,
maimed and forcibly recruited in flagrant violation of
international humanitarian law. We are particularly
concerned about the continued use of besiegement and
starvation as tools of war, as well as grave violation
of children’s rights. In that context, I wanted to touch
on the work of the Independent Senior Advisory Panel
on Humanitarian Deconfliction in the Syrian Arab
Republic and reflect on the executive summary of their
work that was published yesterday.
As the Security Council knows, the Panel was set
up to build on the work of the United Nations board
of inquiry, which investigated some of the appalling
attacks against facilities either on the United Nations
deconfliction list or supported by the United Nations
in Idlib in 2019.
As the board of inquiry set out in April 2020, it was
highly probable that the Syrian regime and/or its allies
were behind attacks against four civilian facilities — a
school, a health-care centre, a hospital and a childcare
facility. The United Kingdom has continued to call for
accountability for those crimes and has condemned
similar attacks throughout the conflict, including the
attack on Al-Atarib hospital last year.
It is clear from the summary of the Panel’s work
that there remains a lot more to do. It is, of course,
essential that the United Nations implement the Panel’s
recommendations in Syria and beyond. Fact-finding,
investigations and accountability in the case of abuse and
attacks are particularly important, but any mechanism
that sets out to support the protection of civilians and
the facilitation of humanitarian aid depends on armed

S/PV. 8957

actors taking their obligations seriously, including
through participation in the deconfliction mechanism.
Without that, the necessary relationship of trust
between armed actors and humanitarians is impossible
By targeting schools, hospitals and emergency
first responders, the Al-Assad regime and Russia
have demonstrated scant regard for international
humanitarian law throughout the conflict. The
protection of civilians is paramount. We reiterate
the obligation incumbent upon all parties to make
every effort to avoid civilian casualties, including by
avoiding the use of indiscriminate weaponry in urban
environments, and the United Kingdom will continue
to call for those violating international humanitarian
law to be held accountable for their crimes.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation too thanks Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths and Mr. Egeland for their briefings,
and we express our great appreciation for their tireless
efforts, as well as for not losing hope.
Mexico condemns the escalation of violence in
Al-Hasakah and notes its concern about the humanitarian
consequences of the new wave of violence in the northeast of the country, about which we also spoke yesterday
(see S/PV.8955). We echo UNICEF’s call for ensuring
the protection and evacuation of the children inside the
prison, but I will leave my comments on that situation
for our next meeting a little later.
Together with the 45,000 people who have been
displaced as a result of the clashes, we cannot let ourselves
forget even more staggering statistics — 14 million
people depend on humanitarian aid. How much longer
will this go on? And what is to become of the girls and
boys living in the Al-Hol and Roj camps, to cite only
one example, who have unfortunately paid the greatest
price as they have known nothing but war since their
birth and who will surely be the ones who will have
to rebuild their country? What will conditions be like
then? What will their psychological state be? In these
meetings, we have spoken little about the mental and
spiritual health of the victims, which we will need to
revisit as soon as possible.
As for the other end of the country, in the northwest, we appreciate the update provided on the progress
of the six-month plan for cross-line humanitarian
crossings, while recalling their central role as needs
continue to rise. Winter has already had even greater
deadly consequences for the displaced people in the

22-2412711/20

S/PV.8957

The situation in the Middle East

north-west. The six-month plan will help alleviate the
situation, but it is not a long-term plan in the absence
of a much broader reconstruction plan. Much more
is required than an early recovery project to rebuild
people’s lives. I also thank our briefers for having
provided us with very useful information concerning the
deconfliction mechanism That is certainly encouraging
in terms of preventing attacks and allowing the
humanitarian community to carry out its activities in
less adverse conditions.
But all of that will remain insufficient without a
political will that leaves no room for impunity, as has
already been said. Mexico will continue to lend its
support to the accountability mechanisms of various
organizations to that end.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I join others in thanking
Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths for his
briefing today. I also thank Jan Egeland, Secretary
General of the Norwegian Refugee Council, for
his insights.
The humanitarian situation in Syria has not seen
any significant improvement in recent months. The
over a decade-long crisis has had an immeasurable
socioeconomic impact on the population. Nearly
14 million people are in need humanitarian assistance,
of whom 9.8 million are being covered by various
initiatives, including those of the United Nations.
In recent times, the economic situation in the
country has become dire, with increasing shortfalls
in essential items such as wheat and barley. Further,
prices continue to rise and the removal of subsidies
on fuel gas and depreciation of the Syrian pound has
worsened the situation. The ongoing winter season has
also compounded the people’s miseries, particularly
women, children and the elderly.
The fundamental reason for the aggravating
humanitarian situation in Syria is a lack of progress on
the political track. Yesterday, we had an opportunity
to deliberate on the recent political developments. In
that regard, we reiterate the need for commitment by all
parties, in particular the external players, to a Syrianled, Syrian-owned and United Nations-facilitated
political process in line with resolution 2254 (2015).
We also believe that a comprehensive nationwide
ceasefire is paramount to the interest of the Syrian
people. While cross-border operations are predictable
and important, they cannot continue to exist in
12/20

27/01/2022

perpetuity. We therefore encourage the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and
other United Nations agencies to expend efforts to
enhance cross-line operations. In that regard, we take
positive note of recent efforts on crossline operations,
however more concerted efforts are required as we
move towards the end of the one-year authorization of
cross-border humanitarian assistance.
In order to help the people of Syria in these
difficult times, the international community needs to
constructively look at promoting projects to create jobs
and economic opportunities for the Syrian people. In the
face of the falling production of food staples and issues
related to water shortages in the region, including those
brought about by the actions of upstream countries with
regard to water flow in the Euphrates, the collective
concerns of the Syrian people need to be treated with
the utmost seriousness.
We cannot discuss the humanitarian situation in
Syria in isolation without referring to the growing
activities of terrorist groups such as Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)/Da’esh. The attack on a
prison in Al-Hasakah city by ISIL/Da’esh last week
demonstrates the severity of the problem.
The resulting hostilities have also displaced nearly
45,000 people. India has been consistently highlighting
how external players have contributed to the growth
of terrorist groups in Syria. The continuing neglect of
the issue by the international community will cause
irreparable damage to our collective fight against
terrorism. The situation in the internally displaced
persons camps housing women and children also
remains serious. We strongly condemn the killing
of a humanitarian worker in the Al-Hol camp earlier
this month.
Taking
into
consideration
the
difficult
socioeconomic situation in Syria, which has been
further compounded by the global coronavirus disease
pandemic and the onset of winter, there is an urgent
need to scale up humanitarian assistance. In that
regard, we are concerned that humanitarian assistance
to Syria was in fact reduced in 2021. We urge OCHA
to harmonize the data related to early recovery and
resilience projects in a comprehensive manner so that a
holistic view is obtained.
In conclusion, for our part, India has continued to
extend developmental assistance and human resource
development support to Syria through grants and lines
22-24127

27/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8957

of credit for various projects, the supply of medicine and
food, artificial limb fitment camps, a next-generation
information and communications technology centre
and capacity-building training programmes. Since the
beginning of the conflict, India has always stood by the
Syrian people and will continue to do so.

For its part, my country has sent more than 97 tons
of medical aid to Syria, in addition to more than 200,000
vaccine doses. We have also completed a vaccination
programme for nearly 12,000 Syrian refugees in the
Emirati-Jordanian refugee camp in Mrajeeb Al-Fhood
and other camps in Jordan.

Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, for his comprehensive briefing. I
also thank Mr. Jan Egeland, Secretary General of the
Norwegian Refugee Council, for his valuable opinions.

Thirdly, we encourage the United Nations and
Council members to put greater effort into supporting
the early recovery of civilian infrastructure and vital
sectors, including education and health, which have
been impacted by the conflict. Early recovery will help
not only in supporting the provision of basic services,
but also in supporting the economy, thereby reducing
the assistance required to meet urgent needs in Syria.
Regarding the increase in international support for early
recovery projects, we hope that efforts will be made to
address the issues that are obstructing the financing of
those projects.

The provision of aid to Syrian civilians remains a
priority, particularly in the north-west and in the south
of Syria. That also applies to north-eastern Syria,
where the recent Da’esh offensive in Al-Hasakah has
resulted in a wave of internal displacement, impeding
the delivery of humanitarian aid.
In addition to the repercussions of hostilities on
the humanitarian situation, repeated water service
disruptions, the spread of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic and the severe cold winter have
also exacerbated the suffering of millions of Syrians.
With so many humanitarian crises accumulating in
Syria for more than a decade now, I would like to focus
my statement today on the following issues.
First, in relation to humanitarian operations,
we welcome the continuation of the delivery of
humanitarian aid to Syria for an additional six months
until July, in line with resolution 2585 (2021). We
commend last year’s resumption of the cross-line
delivery of humanitarian assistance into north-western
Syria for the first time since 2017. As a result, two
shipments of aid from the World Food Programme have
been distributed, the latest of which commenced on
16 January, in coordination with the Syrian Government.
We also support the development and implementation
of the six-month plan of the United Nations to regularly
deliver and distribute humanitarian aid across conflict
lines to north-western Syria.
Secondly, the provision of medical supplies to
the Syrian people remains a priority, especially the
provision of vaccines against COVID-19. The percentage
of people fully vaccinated against COVID-19 is less
than 5 per cent. That requires greater focus from the
international community, particularly in the camps.

In all aspects of the humanitarian response, Syrian
women must be supported and protected and their
resilience strengthened, especially in camps where
women and girls are at risk of sexual and genderbased violence.
In conclusion, we stress that the only way to end
the suffering inflicted upon the brotherly Syrian
people is by making progress on the political process.
That requires at present a focus on reaching a political
solution in line with resolution 2254 (2015). The United
Arab Emirates will continue to support the efforts of
the United Nations Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Geir
Peterson, and his initiative in that regard.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): Continuous violence, an
acute economic crisis with escalating hunger, a raging
pandemic, systematic human rights violations and a
stalled peace process — that is the gloomy scenario
described by the briefers today and yesterday (see
S/PV.8955) and by the latest reports presented to the
Security Council on the crisis in Syria.
I thank Mr. Martin Griffiths and Mr. Jan Egeland
for the comprehensive description of the situation on
the ground. We also take this opportunity to thank
the Secretary-General for the report (S/2021/1030)
presented last December, in compliance with resolution
2585 (2021), which gave a comprehensive overview
of the work of the United Nations in delivering
humanitarian assistance following a careful assessment
of the needs on the ground.

22-2412713/20

S/PV.8957

The situation in the Middle East

Brazil supports the United Nations cross-border
humanitarian operations in Syria, in accordance with
resolution 2585 (2021), as essential to provide help to
some of the most vulnerable people in Syria. As a bitter
winter exacerbates the already terrible situation of
people living in camps and informal settlements across
Syria, the continuous flow of life-saving international
aid should continue.
Brazil underlines the importance of keeping
those humanitarian operations under detailed and
close monitoring and of seeking ways to facilitate
the increase in cross-line operations in a regular and
predictable way. We also reiterate the call on all parties
to comply with their obligation to ensure free and
unimpeded humanitarian access, which must comply
with the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality
and independence.
Brazil reiterates the Secretary-General’s call for a
national ceasefire to alleviate the suffering of the Syrian
population and its condemnation of indiscriminate
attacks, the deliberate targeting of civilians and
critical civilian infrastructure, such as hospitals and
schools, the targeting of humanitarian workers, forced
disappearances, arbitrary detentions and summary
killings. We once again call on all parties to refrain
from harming civilians and comply with international
humanitarian law.
The continued and growing presence of terrorist
groups in Syria is of particular concern, especially for
its spillover effects on the entire region. We are alarmed
by UNICEF reports of nearly 850 children who are in
detention in Hasakah, some as young as 12 years old,
threatened by the recent episode of violence. We call
on the parties to ensure that children’s rights are fully
respected. Children, both boys and girls, should be kept
safe and should not be part of the conflict. Brazil echoes
the concerns over the situation of foreign children in
camps and underlines the importance of giving due
attention to the issue of the repatriation of children to
their home countries.
We also draw attention to the potential harmful
consequences of unilateral sanctions on the civilian
population in a scenario of acute economic crisis and
escalating hunger. We call for a thorough and permanent
review of such measures with the aim of bringing relief
to the population and supporting early recovery actions.
Brazil remains convinced that only a Syrianowned, Syrian-led, United Nations-facilitated political
14/20

27/01/2022

process, with due regard for the preservation of Syria’s
territorial integrity, will bring lasting peace and
alleviate the suffering of the Syrian population.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): The situation
in Syria has brought us here again today to address the
humanitarian issues. The briefing by Under-SecretaryGeneral Martin Griffiths and the moving message from
Jan Egeland paint a devastating picture of the extent of
the needs and the tremendous humanitarian challenges
in Syria.
For the past 10 years, the Syrian people have been
facing a crisis that has become internationalized. It is
undoubtedly the greatest crisis of refugees and displaced
persons in our time, worsened by the coronavirus
disease pandemic, widespread military operations,
in particular in the north-east, massive population
displacements in the north-west, economic sanctions,
air strikes by some belligerents and the collapse of the
economy. With a growing mistrust among the warring
parties that undermine efforts to reach an agreement
on a new Constitution, there is unfortunately no viable
prospect for hope on the near horizon for more than
11 million Syrians in need of humanitarian aid.
Despite that unspeakable situation, humanitarian
aid flows to Syria are in sharp decline. The international
pledges made at the Brussels conference on Syria in
June 2020 remain far below expectations. That has
resulted in an increase in the number of people living
in food, insecurity, a lack of basic services, a clear
reduction in access to drinking water, sanitation, health
care, education and employment opportunities, which
has reduced the vast majority of the Syrian people to
living under the poverty threshold.
That situation is humanly untenable and morally
unacceptable, even more so for women and young
girls, who are exposed to sexual abuse in camps. The
international community must be mobilized even
more for Syria. In that context, the implementation of
resolutions 2504 (2020), 2533 (2020) and 2585 (2021)
is crucial to ensure that the available humanitarian aid
reaches those who need it most.
In that regard, I would like to echo the appeal just
made by Mr. Egeland reiterating that that humanitarian
aid should not be subject to politicization. I express
Gabon’s support for the Secretary-General’s report on
cross-border aid (S/2021/1030).
22-24127

27/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East

Transparency and the involvement of all
stakeholders at all levels, from the planning to the
operational deployment of humanitarian aid, is essential
in order to gain and maintain the trust of people and
local authorities, particularly in the context of crossborder operations. Likewise, it is important to continue
to establish and maintain measures to ensure the
effective, traceable and rational delivery of aid. That
requires strengthening norms and follow-up measures,
adopting mandatory indicators, guidance documents
and follow-up and assessment strategies tailored to the
Syrian context.
While we note with interest some progress on
the ground with regard to the opening of new border
crossings for humanitarian aid, enabling many people
to emerge from isolation, especially in the north-west,
we must continue to work to perfect the network system
for monitoring the implementation of United Nations
projects through specialized agencies and thirdparty actors, as well as assessment and risk-reduction
measures that enable adjustments on the ground.
In that regard, the agreement among the various
parties regarding cross-line operations in that area
authorized by the Syrian Government clearly give
greater hope of increased momentum in addressing
the concerns of refugees and internally displaced
persons considering returning home and providing
humanitarian aid to those who returned voluntarily.
In those various configurations, what is important
is to increase their independence and minimize their
communities’ need for aid. We therefore must support
the deconfliction mechanism.
In conclusion, I would highlight the courage
of humanitarian workers and express my country’s
support for the various humanitarian organizations
and their personnel, who, often under extremely
difficult conditions and sometimes risking their own
lives, continue to provide a ray of hope to the Syrian
people on the ground and to help the victims. Indeed,
their belief is that these are, after all, desperate human
beings — people who should not have to continue to
pay the price for unresolved conflicts.
While we await a resolution to deadlocked political
processes, their lives must continue. The Council must
help them to live in dignity.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank you, Madam President, as well as
Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for the sobering

S/PV. 8957

briefings on the vast humanitarian needs in Syria. I
also thank Jan Egeland for his update and for the work
of the Norwegian Refugee Council to improve the
humanitarian situation in Syria and for Syrian refugees
in the region. I also want to thank Jan for his work on the
Senior Advisory Panel on humanitarian deconfliction
in the Syrian Arab Republic. I know that the report was
just released yesterday; we look forward to studying it
and its findings.
Today I would like to discuss three aspects of
Syria’s humanitarian situation: the crisis that this cold
winter presents; expanding all modalities for getting
aid and vaccines to the Syrian people; and protecting
Syrian refugees.
First, as the Syrian people grapple with freezing
temperatures and inclement weather, millions need
basic supplies for winter — tents, blankets, coats and
heating fuel. How is it that after the 11 frigid winters
since the beginning of the Syrian uprising, the Syrian
people continue to face the same dangers from the same
conflict and the same inaction? This winter is somehow
even worse — exacerbated by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19), the economic crisis and the escalation in
violence. Food needs are at their highest levels since
the crisis began, and millions of people cannot reliably
access sufficient and safe water across northern
Syria. The prevalence of water-borne diseases has
risen sharply.
The United States remains the single largest donor
of humanitarian aid to Syria. But collectively, as a
Council, we must do more to alleviate this ongoing
humanitarian emergency. Everyone needs to step up
their financial support to aid the estimated 4 million
Syrians in need of winterization support. The Council
must therefore pursue every opportunity to maximize
the reach of humanitarian aid in Syria. Failing to do so
would further immiserate a people who have suffered
far, far too much already.
That leads me to my second point: we support
all modalities that bring aid to the Syrian people
throughout the country, including both cross-line and
cross-border deliveries. We are encouraged by the
cross-line missions conducted in north-west Syria.
But they were dangerous, difficult undertakings that
took months to coordinate. That is why cross-line aid
is a complement, not a substitute, for cross-border aid.
Cross-line deliveries simply cannot match the scale of
cross-border assistance. We need to be honest about that

22-2412715/20

S/PV.8957

The situation in the Middle East

reality and respect the conclusions of the United Nations
stating as much. Dozens of reports from the SecretaryGeneral and dozens of testimonies from humanitarian
organizations have made that crystal-clear. At the
very least, that means recognizing that cross-border
assistance is indispensable, and we must renew and
expand the authorization for cross-border humanitarian
access this summer.
The Council must work together to ensure not only
that Bab al-Hawa stays open but that all cross-border
options are available to meet humanitarian needs. If we
put politics aside and focus exclusively on the needs
of the Syrians, that simple act would get essential
items, including medical supplies, to those who are
in desperate need. Medical supplies are particularly
important right now in Syria, which has one of the
lowest COVID-19 vaccination rates in the Middle East
and across the entire world. In north-west Syria, only
2.9 per cent of the population was fully vaccinated as of
the end of December 2021. The Security Council sent a
unified message when it adopted resolution 2565 (2021)
in February 2021, which extends strong support for
facilitating COVID-19 vaccine access in areas affected
by armed conflict and post-conflict situations, and
during complex humanitarian emergencies.
This is a complex humanitarian emergency if there
ever was one. I saw it first-hand during my visit to
Bab al-Hawa last year. So let us make progress on our
shared goal of facilitating vaccine access and work with
United Nations agencies and other partners to get those
vaccines across the border.
Thirdly and finally, I would like to reiterate our
deep appreciation to all States that are hosting Syrian
refugees, particularly Turkey, Lebanon, Jordan, Iraq
and Egypt. Those countries are strengthening regional
and global stability by providing protection to those
who are currently unable to return safely to their
homeland. Let us be clear: forcing or coercing Syrian
refugees to return to Syria would endanger their lives
and subject them to possible torture, arbitrary detention
and death. It is simply inhumane to force Syrians to
return home right now. Any and all returns must be
safe; they must be voluntary, informed and dignified.
The humanitarian situation in Syria is a threat to
international peace and security. It should animate the
Council to pursue political solutions to this conflict. In
the meantime, we must do everything — everything — in
16/20

27/01/2022

our power to alleviate this humanitarian suffering and
ground our actions in the needs of the Syrian people.
The President: The representative of the
Russian Federation has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I wanted to take the floor to express our
surprise at the statements to the effect that Russia’s
non-participation in the deconfliction mechanism is
not acceptable and violates the norms of international
humanitarian law. It was very surprising to us to be
accused by the United Kingdom, whose armed forces
have struck Syria more than 4,000 times, as well as
Iraq. During one of those attacks on Raqqa, in August
2017, dozens of peaceful citizens died, as confirmed
by the the leadership of the Global Coalition to Defeat
ISIS. However, London explained it as follows:
“The risk of the murder of civilians cannot be
fully excluded. That is because of the inhumane
actions of our enemy, which is using people as
human shields”.
Russia has always been guided by the belief that
the issue of the deconfliction of civilian objects and
the humanitarian assistance being provided must be
resolved by the United Nations in direct cooperation
with the legitimate Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic, a State Member of the United Nations.
We have repeatedly noted that it is unacceptable
to accord protected status to certain objects in Idlib to
which the United Nations has no access, meaning that it
cannot determine whether those objects are being used
as directed or have been taken over by terrorists and
converted into military facilities.
I think that, more than anyone, our Syrian
colleagues would in fact be able to describe what the
situation is with regard to de-conflicting.
The President: I wish to again remind all
speakers to limit their statements to no more than five
minutes in order to enable the Council to carry out its
work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): The suffering of millions of Syrians is
on the increase these days as a result of the extreme
cold in Syria. They are finding it very difficult to
22-24127

27/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East

meet their basic needs, in particular to obtain fuel for
heat, electricity, food, medicine and health care. This
situation is the result of the blatant economic terrorism
and collective-punishment policies underlying the
unilateral coercive measures imposed by the United
States of America and the European Union on my
country, Syria, in grave violation of all international
legal standards and the provisions and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.
The catastrophic impact of this illegal and
inhumane siege has touched all aspects of life in Syria.
It greatly limits the ability of the Syrian Government
and its institutions to provide for basic needs. It has
also prevented the implementation of many of the
humanitarian cooperation programmes and projects
between the Syrian Government and its partners, such
as the United Nations and its specialized agencies, the
International Committee of the Red Cross and dozens
of foreign non-governmental organizations licensed
to operate in Syria, including projects reaffirmed by
resolution 2585 (2021).
The unethical practices of some internationally
influential countries opposed to Syria prove the
falsehood of their claims that they are concerned
about the humanitarian situation in my country and
reveal their politicization of the basic principles of
humanitarian work by using it as a blackmailing
tool to apply pressure in pursuit of their anti-Syrian
political objectives.
Western countries that are permanent members
of the Security Council, together with their allies,
have impeded efforts to improve the humanitarian
situation in Syria. They have withheld funding for the
humanitarian response plan. The fulfilment of their
pledges during the past year did not exceed 45 per cent
of the overall amount required by the United Nations.
They have obstructed the implementation of the
provisions of resolution 2585 (2021) on taking practical
steps to meet the urgent needs of the Syrian people,
enhance cross-line access inside Syria and implement
early-recovery projects to provide education, health and
water. They have also deliberately impeded the adoption
of the Strategic Cooperation Framework between the
Syrian Government and United Nations to support my
country’s efforts to achieve the goals of 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, guarantee that we are
not left behind and provide favourable conditions for a
dignified, voluntary and safe return of the displaced to
their homes.

S/PV. 8957

A few days ago, on behalf of my country’s
Government, I addressed to the Council two identical
letters on the crimes perpetrated by the terrorist Da’esh
organization and the separatist Syrian Democratic
Forces militia, as well as the United States occupation
forces in Al-Hasakah governorate, in north-eastern
Syria, which claimed the lives of innocent civilians and
injured many others, including women and children.
Those crimes have led to the destruction of many
civilian facilities and infrastructure, as well as to the
collective displacement of thousands of Syrian families
into areas under the control of the Syrian State, seeking
safety. What has happened in Al-Hasakah over the past
few days shows the inability of the United Nations,
its specialized agencies and other international
organizations to efficiently meet this challenge, despite
the fact that the Syrian Government launched an urgent
appeal on 22 January and provided them with many
facilities so that they can carry out their work.
The Syrian Government has borne the brunt of
the burden imposed by the practices of parties to these
events, despite our limited capacity even to meet our
own needs, owing to the coercive measures imposed
on the Syrian people. The Syrian Government has
made every effort to urgently respond to the needs of
the displaced by providing them with shelter, food,
medicine, relief items and heating supplies in this
extreme cold weather.
Some representatives mentioned in their statements
the targeting of public civilian health and education
facilities. They took advantage of the summary
work published by the Independent Senior Advisory
Panel on Humanitarian Deconfliction in the Syrian
Arab Republic to make false claims and demand
accountability. Since these delegations seem to have
forgotten the crimes of the illegal global coalition that
led to the destruction of the entire city of Al-Raqqa and
other cities, which claimed the lives of many Syrians,
the crimes carried out by the United States occupation
forces in Al-Hasakah a few days ago should awake
their memory.
In just a few hours, the United States Air Force
destroyed facilities at the Al-Furat University, another
educational institution, a bakery, a fuel station among
other sites. These attacks claimed the lives of many
innocent people. Should those behind the attack not be
held accountable for that?

22-2412717/20

S/PV.8957

The situation in the Middle East

The crimes of the United States occupation forces
and their affiliated organizations in the north-east
complement the crimes of the Turkish regime forces and
their terrorist affiliates in north-western Syria, notably
Al-Nusra Front/Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, which has been
designated by the Council as a terrorist group. Although
we have made several requests over the past few years
to move against these terrorist groups, the Security
Council remains unable to shoulder its responsibilities,
given that some Western countries continue to go
along with Erdoğan’s regime, which knows very well
how to blackmail and deceive. They provide him with
protection from any accountability for his crimes of
murder, plunder, confiscation of lands, displacement,
demographic changes, Turkification, deprivation of
drinking water, trade in the suffering of refugees and
the displacement of Syrians. Most of these crimes are
tantamount to war crimes and crimes against humanity.
My delegation reaffirms our position rejecting
the so-called cross-border mechanism as a violation
of the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic. The mechanism
allows Al-Nusra Front and other terrorist affiliates
to continue to control Idlib and detain its residents
as hostages and human shields. My delegation also
stresses that internal access, through close cooperation
with the Syrian Government, is the best way to meet
needs throughout Syria. The Syrian Government’s
efforts, as well as the facilities and approvals granted,
should be commended and appreciated. On the other
hand, terrorist groups, separatist militias and their
sponsors are impeding internal access in order to find
pretexts for extending the cross-border mechanism and
continuing the violation of Syrian sovereignty.
Before I conclude, I would like to mention the
suffering of our citizens in the occupied Syrian Golan
as a result of the practices of the Israeli occupation
authorities, including oppression, terror, arbitrary
arrest and the confiscation of land. My delegation calls
on the Council to condemn the holding of a meeting
by the Israeli Government in the occupied Syrian
Golan on 26 December 2021, and its declaration that
it seeks to double the number of Israeli settlers there,
in blatant violation of international law and relevant
United Nations resolutions. My delegation also looks
forward to the Security Council taking urgent action
to put an end to the recurrent Israeli attacks against the
sovereignty of the Syrian territories and to implement
18/20

27/01/2022

its resolutions to ensure the withdrawal of Israel from
all the Syrian Golan to 4 June 1967 borderline.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Keçeli (Turkey): The Syrian people are
once again caught between violence, starvation, the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and a harsh
winter. This year, the number of people requiring
humanitarian assistance has risen to 14 million people.
Earlier this week, the United Nations Deputy
Regional Humanitarian Coordinator for the Syria Crisis
provided an insight into the current needs in north-west
Syria. He made an appeal for safer, more dignified
shelters as 150,000 Syrians contend with sub-zero
temperatures. Turkey has our own national project
to alleviate shelter needs in Idlib, but we continue to
encourage other international stakeholders and donors
to prioritize funding such projects.
The United Nations cross-border mechanism is a
lifeline to 3.4 million people in the north-west. There
is simply no alternative available in scale or scope that
could address the increasing needs in the north-west.
The lives of millions of vulnerable people depend on
the aid channelled through the single border crossing at
Bab Al-Hawa, where the most scrutinized monitoring
system in the world is in place.
Last year alone, almost 10,000 trucks left Turkey to
deliver life-saving assistance to 2.4 million people. More
than 90 per cent of the trans-shipped cargo contained
food items. The remaining materials were used to aid
in providing shelter, sanitation, nutrition and education.
In addition, over 1.9 million doses of COVID-19
vaccines were transported into Syria using this crossborder mechanism. Turkey is proud to cooperate with
the United Nations and humanitarian partners so as to
ensure that the cross-border remains operational.
Under-Secretary-General Griffiths alluded to the
recent developments in cross-line deliveries and their
distribution through the newly established distribution
method. Turkey is fully committed to contributing to
the implementation of resolution 2585 (2021) in all its
aspects, including cross-line access. We interpret the
current United Nations requests with that understanding.
This also requires the effective engagement of the
United Nations with local actors on the ground.
As noted in resolution 2585 (2021), early recovery
projects can broaden humanitarian activities. It is
22-24127

27/01/2022

The situation in the Middle East

important that those projects are implemented without
discrimination throughout Syria based on the needs
assessment of the United Nations.
Continued funding to the Organization’s
humanitarian response activities is essential. Last
year, the United Nations appealed for $4 billion to
aid the Syrian people. It received less than half of
that. Humanitarian assistance is needed because the
Syrian regime, Da’esh and the Kurdistan Workers’
Party/People’s Protection Units (PKK/YPG) continue
to violate international humanitarian law. For over a
decade, the Syrian people have demonstrated resilience,
and we cannot abandon them now.
The effectiveness of the humanitarian response is
also undermined by the ongoing ceasefire violations
and attacks against civilians and civilian infrastructure
in Idlib. Recent examples include the destruction of a
United Nations supported farm and the attack against
the Arshani water station, which interrupted access to
water for almost a quarter million people in the region.
While the Al-Assad regime continues to attack its
own people, terrorist organization PKK/YPG pursues
the same evil agenda by committing war crimes in
northern Syria.
Humanitarian assistance is just a band-aid with
which we are trying to treat the cancer. The United
Nations has become the aftermath intervention service
in Syria, Afghanistan, Yemen and South Sudan. The
international community throws money to keep the
problems at bay.
We need to address the root causes of conflicts.
In the case of Syria, the root cause of the conflict is
clear — the restriction of fundamental rights and
freedoms by the Al-Assad regime. The humanitarian
crisis will continue unless we address the political
problem and achieve a political settlement in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015).
The Council must act united in doing what is right
for the people whom we have pledged to serve. We are
not going to honour the lies and baseless allegations of
the regime with an answer. Their presence here is an
affront to the Syrian people who lost their lives at the
hand of the regime.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iran.
Ms. Ershadi (Iran): The relatively calm situation
in Syria in 2021 has further enabled the safe and

S/PV. 8957

dignified return of refugees and displaced persons and
has accelerated reconstruction efforts.
Yet, the suffering of the Syrian people continue
and alleviating their anguish requires more efforts in
various areas. Obviously, nothing is more important
and urgent than ensuring Syria’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity. That can be done through ending
the occupation of Syria and the aggressions of the
Israeli regime against Syria, confronting threats posed
by terrorists, as well as removing unlawful inhumane
sanctions against the Syrian people. Concurrently, the
ongoing activities for the effective implementation
of resolution 2585 (2021), particularly with respect
to water, sanitation, health, education and shelter, as
well as early recovery projects, must be redoubled
and accelerated.
We fully support the Secretary-General’s call to
further expand early recovery efforts in Syria and share
his view that such efforts are critical to the continued
success of the humanitarian response in the country.
In that context, the guarantors of the Astana format,
in their meeting in December, called for improving the
humanitarian situation in Syria and accordingly, urged
the international community, the United Nations and
its humanitarian agencies to enhance their assistance to
the whole of Syria through early recovery and resilience
projects. As the Secretary-General has rightly stated,
such activities are key to preventing a further increase
in the number of people in need, as well as reducing
immediate and protracted humanitarian needs and,
therefore, reducing dependence on external assistance.
Serious efforts are also needed for the removal of
unilateral sanctions imposed on Syria. Those unlawful
measures have prolonged the suffering of the people
and adversely affected the work of international and
national humanitarian agencies there.
Given the dire humanitarian needs in Syria, where,
according to United Nations reports, significant parts
of the civilian infrastructure have been destroyed or
are disintegrating, the Security Council must seriously
push for the full, balanced and effective implementation
of resolution 2585 (2021).
Resolution 2585 (2021) was adopted with the aim
of addressing the urgent needs of the people of Syria,
a country in a situation of complex humanitarian
emergency, as stated by the resolution. That has yet to
happen. At the same time, the Syrian people are, in fact,
the ones who should practically feel and, accordingly,

22-2412719/20

S/PV.8957

The situation in the Middle East

confirm the usefulness of this resolution and the full
realization of its objectives.
We call for an increase in funding and allocation
of humanitarian aid to cross-line operations in Syria.
It is extremely disappointing that, due to the lack of
cooperation by other sides, progress on the cross-line
operations in areas not controlled by the Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic is much lower than expected.
It is also important to ensure that aid entering
Syria through cross-border operations reaches the
actual beneficiaries and does not fall into the hands of
terrorist groups.
In 2021, 10 Syrian detainees were released,
thanks to the efforts of the Working Group on the
Release of Detainees/Abductees, Handover of Bodies
and Identification of Missing Persons, established

20/20

27/01/2022

by the Astana format. It was a positive development,
which must continue in 2022 on a larger scale. Iran
will continue to contribute to such efforts and urges
all parties to cooperate in advancing that noble
humanitarian objective.
We call for the facilitation of the safe, voluntary and
dignified return of the Syrian refugees and internally
displaced persons and, at the same time, warn about
attempts to discourage them from returning home,
including by disseminating inaccurate information
about current conditions in Syria.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion of
the subject.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

22-24127
