THIRTY-SECOND

YEAR
rd
MEETING:

NEW

19 JULY 1977

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2023)

.............,.........,......

pa;

..,... .........,....,.............,.

1

........,.............................

1

Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New Members concerning the
application of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for admission to
membership in the United Nations (S/l 2367) . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Statement by the President
Adoption of the agenda

S/W.2023

I
/

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbo1 S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.

Supplements

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 196.5, became fully operative on that date.

2023RD MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 19 July 1977, at 10.30 a.m.
tihves

vote.
&serrt: The reprcscntativcs
of the following States:
Bellin, Cig-uKiil, China, France. Germany, Ikieral Iiepllblit of, India, Libyan Arab Jnmahiriyn, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United I(ingdom of Great Hritain and Northem Ireland,
United States of America and Vcnc~uela.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2023)
1. Adoption of the agCnda
2. Admission of new hlcrnbcrs:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members concerning the application of the Socialist
I{eputAic 01’ Vict Nam for admission to membership
in the United Nations (S/ 12367)

Statement by the President
1. The PRESIDENT (translutictrr /Ian Chinese): I have
just leamcd that our collcaguc hnibnssador Simcin Alherto
Consalvi has been appointcrl hlirlistcr for I:.stem:tl Relations
of Venezuela. I wish to tilkC this opportunity, on 1lly own
behalfandon hCllillf or all tllc mcnit~crsof the Council,to
expressto him our warm congratulations and to wish him
furthersuccesses
in his irllp~lrli~I~t
nCW poSt.
Adoption of the agenda

to Participate

in the discussionwithout the right

to

3. In view of the limited numberof placesavailableat the
Council table, I invite those representativesto take the
Placesreservedfor them at the sideof the Council chamber,
on the usualunderstandingthat they will be invited to take
a Placeat the COUIIC~~ table wheneverthey wish to address
the Council.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. de Figueiredo
(Allgol~l, Mr. Yankov (Bulgaria), Mr. Gdmez Anzardo
(Cuba), Mr. Jachek (Czechoslovakia), Mr. Zachmnnn
(German Democratic Republic], Mr. M. S. Camaru
(Guinea), Mr. Joseph (Guyana), Mr. Hollai (Hungary),
Mr. Anwar Suni (Indonesia), Mr. Kanazawa (Japan),
Mr. Boulom (Lao People’sDemocratic Republic), Mr. Yeo
(Malaysia), Mr, Nyamdo (Mongolia), Mr. Reyes (Philippines), Mr, Czarkowski(Poland) and Mr. Amerasinghe(Sri
Lanka) took the placesreservedfor them at the sideof the
Councilchamber.
4. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese): I should
like alsoto inform the membersof the Council that I have
received a letter from the Permanent Observer of the
SocialistRepublicof Viet Nam which reads:
“The Security Council is discussingthe application of
the SocialistRepublicof Vict Nam for membershipin the
United Nations, I shouldlike to requestyou to allow me,
like last year, to make a statement after the vote is
taken.”

5. I also wish to inform membersof the Council that I
have received a letter from’ the representativesof Benin,
China,.France, India, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, MauriAdmission
of new Members:
tius, Pakistan, Panama,Romania, the Union of Soviet
Report of the Committee on the Admissionof New SocialistRepublics and Venezuela, requestingthat during
Membersconcerning the application of the Socialist the present debatein the Council an opportunity shouldbe
Republicof Viet Num for admissionto membershipin
afforded to the representativeof the Socialist Republic of
theUnited Nations (S/12367’)
Viet Nam to present his Government’s views on the
questionon our agenda[S/12365]. If there is no objection,
2. The PRESII)IINT (trunslution Ji~n C’hincsc):I llave I propose to invite the representative of the Socialist
receivedletters dated 10 July 1077 from the representatives Republicof Viet Namto make a statement at the Closeof
Of Allude, Rulgaria, (lllhil, Czechoslovakia, thC German this discussion.
DemocraticRepublic, (;uincn, Guyana. Ilungary, Indonesia,
It wassodecided.
Japan,the i..ao ~+~plc’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia,
Mongolia,the l’I\ilipl~incs, I’oland and Sri Lnnka in which
6. The PRESIDENT (translation from ChineSe):
The
fiCY requestto be invited to p;WticipiltC in the discussion
of
Council has before it for consideration the report of the
the questionon the ilgelldil. Thcreforc, in accordancewith
Conmllttee on the Admissionof New Membersconcerning
the provisionsof /\rticlc 31 of the C’IlilrtCr and rule 37 of
the provisionalrules of l?roCedurc,aswell ilS with the usual tllc application of the Socialist Republic of Vict Nam for
Practiceof the c’ou~~ci],1 propc)seto invite thosereprescn- membershipin the United Nations[S/12367/.

True, our political, economic and social r&imes differ; but
why should that bar understanding and friendship? The
United Nations is there to prove the contrary and to affirm
that differences of this kind cannot constitute barriers to
understanding and co-operation. As the President of the
Republic of France said during the visit to France of His
Excellency Mr. Pham Van Dong:

7. Members of the Council have also received the draft
resolution sponsored by Benin, China, France, India, the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan, Panama,
Romania, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and
Venezuela (S/12366].
8. Mr. HUSSON (France) (interpretation j?om French):
First of all I wish to congratulate Ambassador Consalvi on
having been appointed Minister for External Relations of
Venezuela. The outstanding qualities he has shown as
representative of his country at the United Nations will, I
am sure, be put to full and striking use in the post to which
he has just been appointed.

“It is for each people to define in complete sovereignty
the principles of its organization and the means of its
development. We assess the importance of the State of
Viet Nam and the role it is called upon to play for
equilibrium and peace in South-East Asia. We consider
that Viet Nam should be able to occupy as early as
possible its rightful place at the United Nations.”

9. My country was one of the first to affirm that the
United Nations should admit Viet Nam as one of its
Members. Since 1975, when that country was not yet
reunited, France pressed for consideration of the question
on its own merits. Last autumn, when the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam presented its candidature, we spared
no effort to have it accepted, and we regretted that it was
not successful. Accordingly, we are all the more gratified
that a further consideration of the Vietnamese application
is taking place today under new conditions. Everything
leads us to believe that this time the Council will be able to
decide unanimously
to recommend
to the General
Assembly the admission of a State which in adversity has
proved its inflexible tenacity and its passion for independence.

13. My delegation believes, furthermore, that all SouthEast Asia will benefit from the entry of Viet Nam into the
United Nations. That great country is of necessity called
upon to exercise a profound influence on the future of the
region. We firmly hope that Viet Nam, together with all the
countries concerned, will contribute to the restoration of
the atmosphere of security and confidence indispensable to
the progress of the surrounding nations and thereby to the
safeguarding of peace in the world. For its part, my country
is convinced that the people of Viet Nam will place at the
service of peace the qualities it has demonstrated in
adversity.
14. Indeed, Viet Nam now looks towards the future. It has
already resolutely undertaken the immense and inescapable
task of reconstruction. In this respect, our Organization can
pfay an important role by making a valuable contribution.
For its part, France is determined to assist Viet Nam in its
development effort. We have already signed important
co-operation agreements with it. As was emphasized by
Prime Minister Barre, France is prepared, within its means,
to develop with that country “fruitful and exemplary
relations”.

10. It is fitting that Viet Nam should address itself to the
United Nations so that its rightful place within our
Organization may be finally recognized. That country has
requested the application in its favour of Article 4 of the
Charter, according to which all peace-loving States which
accept the obligations contained in the Charter and are able
and willing to carry out those obligations may become
Members of the United Nations. The Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam undoubtedly fulfils those conditions. Has it not
often affirmed its will to carry out a policy of peace and
co-operation not only with its neighbours but with the
entire international community? Furthermore, has it not
been for some years a member of the non-aligned movement, whose contribution to the work of the Organization
is considerable?

15. In the presence of Ambassador Dinh Ba Thi, the
Permanent Observer of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam,
whom I see here and who is a well known and esteemed
personality at the United Nations, I conclude by saying that
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam fully deserves a place
among us. It should therefore be by a unanimous decision-as indeed we hope will be the case-that the Council
wil1 make this possible.

11. In co-sponsoring
the draft resolution before the
Council, France is not only fulfilling a duty towards a State
whose application is legitimate. Our action is not only in
accordance with the ideal of universality of our Organization. We also wish to manifest our profound friendship
for the people of Viet Nam, a friendship which has its roots
in history but also, above all, in the esteem we have for. the
ancient civilization, the energy and the qualities of that
nation.

16. Mr. JAIPAL (India): First of all, I should like to join
other members in extending my delegation’s warm congratulations to the representative of Venezuela, Ambassador
Consalvi, on his elevation to the post of Minister for
External Relations of his country. My delegation and I
personally cherish the excellent relations we have enjoyed
with Ambassador Consalvi, and we offer him our good
wishes for much success in his new important assignment.

12. We may recall that the multiple links earlier forged
between our two peoples in the course of history have
withstood
vicissitudes. The official visit of the Prime
Minister of Viet Nam to Paris last April is a sign of that
renewal. Now that peace has returned, our relations have
resumed on a broad scale based on mutual esteem and the
devotion of our peoples to ditente and to international
co-operation with respect for the characteristics of all.

17. Turning now to the agenda item before us, this is the
fourth time that the Security Council is considering the
application of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for
admission to the United Nations. We are doing so now, not
only at the request of the General Assembly, but also
because of yet another application for admission from Viet
2

Nam. The Committee on the Admission of New Members
has recommended approval of this latest application without any reservations.

of the Soviet Union, to take this opportunity to congratulate warmly the representative of Venezuela, Ambassador
Consalvi, on his appointment to the very responsible post
of Minister for External Relations of a country with which
mine has excellent and developing relations. We wish him
great successin his functions in that very important post.
We are sorry he is leaving us, becausewe are all aware of Ms
tact, his tranquillity, his ability to find ways out of difficult
situations and his excellent humanitarian qualities. At the
sametime, we are very pleasedthat he is beingappointed to
such a position of responsibility because we hope that,
when he takes up his position as Minister for External
Relations of Venezuela, he will be able to make an even
greater contribution to the successful activities of the
United Nations.

18. The fact that Viet Nam meets all the conditions for
admission of a new Member stipulated in Article 4 of the
Charter has never been disputed. Moreover, according to an
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice given
in 1948,l no other conditions than those in Article 4 may
be imposed on States applying for membership.
19.. On the present occasion, there appears to be no
negative reaction on the part of any member of the
Council. At long last, it would seem that the sign of the
veto is absent, and the moment seems auspicious for
recommending to the General Assembly the admission of
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam.

24. AS hasbeenpointed out, it is the fourth time now that
the Security Council is discussingthe question of the
admission of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to
membershipin the United Nations. The admission of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam-this very important, much
respectedfreedom-loving State in South-East Asia-is something which should have been achieved some time ago. The
policies of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam are in Full
accord with the requirementslaid down by the Charter of
the United Nations and the admissionof that country to
United Nationsmembershipwilllead to agreat strengthening
of the international community, will make it more universal, and will also help to promote the further strengthening of the authority and the viability of the United
Nations, This is something which is fully graspedand fully
understood by the overwhelming majority of Member
States, as was shown by the result of the vote on the
question of the admissionof the Socialist Republic of Vict
Nam to United Nations membership at the thirty-first
session of the General Assembly. As members of the
Council are aware, 124 States voted in favour of the
immediate admissionof the Socialist Republic of Viet N~~IJ
and thus unreservedly came out in favour of speedily
granting to that country its rightful place at the United
Nations. In resolution 31/21, the General Assembly expressedthe firm conviction that the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam shouldbe admitted to membershipin the United
Nations. The General Assembly recommended that the
Security Council should reconsiderthe matter favourably in
strict conformity with Article 4 of the Charter.

20. Having reached this final stage in the admission of Viet
Nam, we cannot help recalling that no people under
colonial rule have struggled so hard and for so long as the
Vietnamese people for their national independence and
territorial integrity. Historically, the Vietnamese liberation
struggle was a part of the wider global movement against
Western colonialism which began in Asia. To us in India,
the Vietnamese struggle meant something more, because
the Vietnamese people have old cultural ties with the
Indian people. It was our expectation that, like other States
under colonial rule, Viet Nam too would be admitted to the
United Nations immediately following the withdrawal of
the colonial Power. Unfortunately, that did not happen.
The country became divided, and the struggle then entered
its last, terrifying phase; even the United Nations seemed
quite helpless.
21. All that is fortunately behind us now, but the
memories of the past may linger a while until, eventually,
time conquers those sad memories. Meanwhile, the physical
wounds of the prolonged war, the damage and the
destruction to the country’s economy and society still
remain. International assistance for the reconstruction of
Viet Nam has thus become a common international duty.
We feel sure that Viet Nam’s admission to the United
Nations will enable it to play its rightful role in world
affairs and also make it possible for the United Nations to
provide the much-needed assistance to Viet Nam for the
rehabilitation of its displaced people and the rebuilding of
its shattered economy.

2.5. We must note with someregret that the admissionof a
major independent Asian State, the Socialist Republic af
Viet Nam, has been blocked by contrived obstacles that
have nothing in common with either the requirements of
the Charter regarding the admission of new States to
membership in the Organization or with other valid
requirements. The invalid requirements imposed on the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam were in djrect contradiction
of the Charter and ran counter to the demandsexpressed
by an absolute majority of Member States that Viet Nam
should be granted its lawful place in the international
community.

22. My delegation, together with 10 others, has sponsored
a draft resolution recommending that the General Assembly
should admit the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to the
United Nations. We would earnestly urge all members to
vote in favour of it. In doing so we would be quietly closing
one door and opening another, which, we trust, will lead
the way to a happier and peaceful future for Viet Nam and
its long-suffering people.
23. Mr. KE-IARLAMOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation
from Russian): Before speakingon the
question on the agenda,I wish, on behalf of the delegation

26. The desire of the independent and peace-loving State
of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to becomea Member
of the United Nations is perfectly natural. The just
liberation struggle of the heroic Vietnamese people won

1 Admission of a State to the United Nations (Charter, Art. 4),
Advisory Opinion: I. C, J. Reports 1948, p. 51.

3

sympathy and support throughout the world. The desire of
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam in this post-war period
to make its contribution
to the great cause of the
strengthening of peace and the implementation of the lofty
ideals and aims of the United Nations is well known. The
devotion of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to the ideal
of preserving peace is also universally known. No one can
have any doubt that this desire is genuine and that the
Vietnamese people has been, is and will continue to be a
true champion in ensuring the security of all peoples.

of ‘the Americans to shrug off participation in the post-war
restitution of Viet Nam cannot be morally or legally
justified. Such attempts would be in direct violation of the
obligations assumed under the provisions of the Paris
Agreements of 1973.2
32. The international authority of Viet Nam has grown
immeasurably. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam is
making a tremendous and positive contribution
to the
strengthening of international peace, friendship and cooperation. As the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union,
Mr. Brezhnev, said:

27. The Vietnamese patriots have victoriously concluded
many years of selfless struggle for their liberty and
independence and the reunification of their country. In
showing this stubborn valour and unswerving desire for
victory, the Vietnamese people, constantly enjoying the
warm sympathy
and fraternal support of the socialist
countries and progressive, democratic people throughout
the world, was able to inflict a defeat on the imperialist
aggressors and their puppets. It protected and consolidated
the achievements of socialism in the north and carried out a
national democratic revolution in the south, creating the
unified Socialist Republic of Wet Nam.

“Viet Nam, with its tremendous experience of heroic
struggle against imperialist aggression in order to achieve
freedom and independence, and with its lofty revolutionary authority, has now become an important factor
for peace and progress in South-East Asia and in Asia as a
whole. ”
33. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam has established
and is developing relations with almost 100 States throughout the world, including 13 members of the Security
Council. These relations between Viet Nam and other
States are based on the principles of respect for independence, sovereignty, equality and mutual benefit. As its
leaders have frequently stated, Viet Nam is prepared to
co-operate with all States which desire such co-operation,
on an equitable and mutually advantageous basis.

28. Through its struggle and its victory, the Vietnamese
people has made a tremendous contribution to the process
of liberation throughout the world. The example of Viet
Nam is very clear evidence of the fact that a people that
struggles for its liberty, its independence and its inalienable
right to take its future into its own hands and to determine
the forms of its life, its present and its future, is invincible.
The result of the long and arduous war in Viet Nam has
shown the tremendous role of international solidarity
among the socialist countries, the vitality and the ineluctable nature of the national liberation movement, whose
joint actions have ensured the resolution of the vital tasks
of world historic scope. The dauntless struggle of thevietnamese people, which spared no effort to achieve that
victory, has provided a powerful stimulus for fresh successes for peace, for socialism and for the new rising up of
the national liberation movement.

34. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam occupies a
prominent place in the non-aligned movement. It is a
member of the Co-ordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned
Countries. In a communique issued in connexion with a
meeting of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the member
countries of the Co-ordinating Bureau, which was held at
Delhi in April of this year, there was an appeal to the
Security Council to consider immediately and constructively the application of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
for membership in the United Nations, in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 31/21. In that communiquC,
furthermore, it was emphasized that it was necessary that
the United States of America should honour the obligations
flowing from article 21 of the Paris Agreements on Viet
Nam.

29. The Fourth Congress of the Communists of Viet Nam,
which was held in December 1976, outlined grandiose plans
for the development of that country, to give it a new life on
the path of socialism. That historic congress consolidated
the results of the glorious victory of the Vietnamese people
in its struggle for liberty and independence and indicated
the correct way to implement Marxist-Leninist ideals and
the legacy of Ho Chi-Minh to the land of Viet Nam, ns well
as opening the way to socialist construction in a unified
Viet Nam.

35. The Soviet Union decisively supports the legitimate
request of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to be
admitted to membership in the United Nations and
considers that a speedy and favourable decision on this
question will be fully in accord with the main purpose of
the United Nations: to ensure genuine international peace
and security. The time has long been ripe for justice to be
done on this question.

30. At the present time, the entire Vietnamese people is
bending every effort to remove the consequences of the war
that was imposed on it, to carry out the comprehensive
development of agriculture and industry, to improve the
life of the workers and of all the people and to develop
culture and science in its country.

36. The Soviet people is proud of the fact that, in the hard
struggle in Viet Nam, giving assistance and support to the
people of Viet Nam was of vital interest to the entire Soviet
people. The Soviet people, which has itself experienced war
and its consequences, is very much aware of the tremendous and cotiplex post-war tasks facing the Vietnamese
--2 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol, 935, p. 2.

31. In this connexion, we cannot fail to refer to the
particular responsibility of those who unleashed the aggression in Viet Nam, and to their responsibility to undo the
damage caused to that country. Any attempts on the part
4

people. Now, ln the post-war period, as previously during
the war Years, the Vietnamese people can rely on the
assistance and support of the Soviet Union in building
socialism.

referfing to the obstacles of the past. As the delegatir 1 of
Romania stated in the Council on 15 November 1976
/1972nd meeting]:
“We sincerely believe it wise t0 loOk courageously
and
honestly to the future, and the future can be based only
on new principles of international relations aimed at a
more just world based on equality and justice for all,
great and small alike.”

37. During his recent meeting in Moscow with the Prime
Minister of the Socialist Republic of Viet Pam, Mr. Pham
Van Dong, General Secretary Brezhnev said that the Soviet
Union would continue to give support to the Vietnamese
people, to help
them accomplish the tasks involved in
SOCiaht
reconstruction.
He emphasized that the Soviet
people ilif&iY
valued the contribution made by socialist
Viet Nam to the struggle for peace, national independence,
democracy and socialism. Mr. Pham Van Dong, in turn,
stated that the eminent successes of the Soviet people,
which was about to celebrate the sixtieth anniversary of the
great October Revolution,
were a matter of joy to all
Vietnamese workers,
and that the adoption of the new
Constitution of the Soviet Union was an inspiring stimulus
to all peoples fighting for peace, democracy, national
independence and socialism.

43. We are particularly pleased that now-as is evident
from the report of the Committee on the Admission of
New Members-there is no longer any obstacle to the
admission of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to the
United Nations.
4. The %XWity
COWId’s
favourable reconsideration of
the apphtiofl
for admission to the United Nations bY the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam is, above all, an act of
justice-so long awaited-towards
a State that fully meets
all the conditions for admission and that, in all its foreign
policy actions, is guided by the purposes and principles of
the Charter. Such an act is in conformity with the
aspirations of the Vietnamese people, which, throughout its
history, has struggled heroically to achieve its independence
and national unity; it is proof of the determination of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to participate, along with
the other Member States, in the activities of the Organization. Such an act is also part of the legitimate requirements of the international community, as laid down, inter
alia, in General Assembly resolution 3 l/2 1 of 26 November
1976.

38. The delegation of the Soviet Union voices the hope
that the Security Council, following its consideration of the
application of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, will
adopt a positive recommendation. Such a decision would be
in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations, and in accordance with the need to
strengthen international peace and security and to improve
ddtente in international
relations. The admission of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam would also help further to
instil the principle of universality in the Organization.

45. Faithful to its policy of militant solidarity with the
Vietnamese people, Romania has from the very outset given
constant support to the just cause of Viet Nam and that
people’s legitimate right to occupy the place it deserves in
the Organization. The favourable recommendation of the
Security Council regarding the application of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam will consequently give real satisfaction to the delegation of Romania. We are convinced
that the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, which carries out a
policy of peace and co-operation among nations, will make
an important contribution within the framework of the
international community towards the strengthening of
peace in South-East Asia and the maintenance of international peace and security in general.

39. The delegation of the Soviet Union welcomes the
rcpresentativcs of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam who
arc present in this chamber and expresses its conviction that
the relations of friendship and co-operation between our
peoples and between
our delegations will continue to
develop and grow.
40. The Soviet delegation fully supports the draft resolution now before the Council, which was introduced bY the
representative of India and of which the Soviet Union,
together with other States, is a sponsor. We would stress
that it would be even better if all 15 members of the
Council were sponsors of the draft resolution.
41. Mr. DATCU (Romania) (interpretation from French):
Once again the Security Council has before it a subject
whose deep political, historic and moral significance is
obvious. The question of the admission of Viet Nam to the
United Nations has always represented far more than one of
the routine cases discussed by the Organization. It is an
event with the force of a symbol; that was, indeed, true of
the entire glorious, epic struggle of the Vietnamese people.
The far-too-prolonged
absence of Viet Nam from our
Organization llad become a real crisis of conscience.
Beyond the question of the principle of universality,
keeping the people of Viet Nam outside the United Nations
placed in question the very foundations of the Charter.

46. me Socialist Republic of Romania has always been at
the side of the peoples struggling for their national freedom
and independence. In that spirit, Romania from the very
outset expressed solidarity with the people of Viet Nam in
its heroic struggle and gave that people moral, material,
political and diplomatic support. This was recently
emP!asized by President Nicolae Ceaugescu in the following
terms:
“The Romanian people, aware from its own experience
of the sacrifices required bY the struggle for freedom and
independence, fully understood the aspirations of the
people of Viet Nam to become liberated and to reunite its
country and gave that people aI1 suPPort during the
difficult Years of the struggle against foreign intervention.”

42. In participating in this debate, which this time is being
held under favourable auspices, we have no intention of
S

affairs, in particular for the good of the third world. The
delegation of Pakistan wishes Ambassador Consalvi all
success in his new high office and the important tasks
which lie ahead of him.

47. The victory of the Vietnamese people was a historic
contribution to the success of the struggle of the progressive, anti-colonialist forces against the policy of force and
diktat, as well as the struggle against interference in
domestic affairs. In that sense, the results of the struggle of
the people of Viet Nam represent a contribution to the
efforts to safeguard the sacred right of peoples to self-determination and to organize their life in accordance with their
aspirations and their national will. It confirms very eloquently the historical truth that a people that resolutely
defends its national independence, dignity and existence
can never be vanquished.

53. The Security Council once again has under consideration the application of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
for admission to membership in the United Nations in
pursuance of General Assembly resolution 31/21 and the
request of the Permanent Observer of the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam to the United Nations. The Council also has
before it the report of the Committee on the Admission of
New Members, reflecting the unanimous view of the
members of the Council that the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam should be admitted to membership in the United
Nations.

48. The people of Viet Nam is at present engaged in the
vast and complex task of reconstructing its country. It
seems natural to us that in these efforts the Vietnamese
people should be able to rely on the support of the
international community and to benefit from the aid
necessary to overcome the consequences of war. III this
respect, we support the legitimate request of the Government of the Socialist Republic of Vict Nam for restitution
for the damage caused by war and for assistance in the
economic reconstruction of the country.

54. At the Council’s 1970th meeting, on 12 November
1976, my delegation had occasion to express our warm
support for the admission of the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam to the United Nations. We reiterate that, in our view,
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam is fully qualified for
membership of the United Nations in accordance with the
provisions of the Charter. We are glad that the Council is
now able unanimously to recommend to the General
Assembly that the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam should
be admitted to membership in the Organization and that
the draft resolution sponsored by 11 delegations, including
my own, will receive full support in the Council.

49. In conclusion, and anticipating a favourable result of
this Council debate, I should like to assure Ambassador
Dinh Ba Thi and all our Vietnamese friends of the complete
co-operation of the Romanian delegation in our common
efforts within the United Nations.

55. The people of Viet Nam won their independence after
a long and arduous struggle involving immense sacrifices
and have already taken their rightful place among the
third-world countries. The people and the Government of
Pakistan hold the people of Viet Nam in great respect and
wish them peace, progress and prosperity. As a member of
the third world, the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam is
certain to uphold and further its just causes and to foster
unity among its peoples and Govern.nellts.

50. Romania, which has at all times supported the people
of Viet Nam, has once again become a co-sponsor of a draft
resolution recommending the admission to the United
Nations of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. The present
draft resolution is simple and clear. Our colleague Ambassador Jaipal of India has just introduced the draft on behalf
of the 11 members who have sponsored it, and we are
convinced it will meet with general agreement.
51. We have learned with great satisfaction that Ambassador Sim6n Albert0 Cons&i has been appointed Minister
for External Relations of his country. While we sincerely
rejoice at this important appointment, we regret the
imminent departure of an esteemed and effective colleague
and close friend. We have admired the lofty political and
diplomatic qualities he has demonstrated here, particularly
as President of the Security Council during the month of
April, when he guided the Council’s work effectively,
discreetly and courteously, winning our complete admiration and appreciation. I wish to congratulate him most
warmly and to express our best wishes for success in his
new function. I express the hope that we shall see him here
with us again very often.

56. We are certain that the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam, as a Member of the United Nations, will make a
valuable contribution to the realization of the purposes of
the Charter and to the implementation of its principles.
Moreover, Viet Nam’s admission to the United Nations will
assist it in the considerable task of nation-building and
reconstruction. It thus remains our firm belief that the
admission of Viet Nam to the Organization will contribute
to the strengthening of peace and stability in South-East
Asia, a region that has undergone tremendous suffering in
the recent past. Further, in our view it will also promote
international peace and security in general.
57. We look forward to welcoming the delegation of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam in our midst during the next
session of the General Assembly and to close co-operation
in all areas at the United Nations and in other intemational
forums between the delegations of our two friendly
countries.

52. Mr. MIRZA (Pakistan): Mr. President, I join you and
other colleagues in extending our warm felicitations to
Ambassador Consalvi of Venezuela on his appointment to
the high office of Minister for External Relations of his
country. As members of the Security Council, we have
witnessed at first hand his deep and humane understanding
of international issues, his outstanding diplomatic skill in
dealing with complex matters and his patience and good
humour. These are the qualities which we are sure will help
him and his country play an even greater role in world

58. Mr. McHENRY (United States of America): First of
all, I should like to offer the congratulations of the United
States to Ambassador Con&vi on his appointment as
Minister for External Relations. My Government looks
6

forward to working with him in his new assignment iI1 the
same spirit of co-operation and warmth we have come to
expect as a result of his work at the United Nations. He has
our best wishes,

64* The Socialist Republic of Vict Nam has amply proved
its willin!Zness to accept the obligations contained jn the
Charter of the United kItiOnS.
It is indeed capable of
carrYing out these obligations as well as any other Mcrnber
State. Above all, it meets all the conditions for admjssjon
as
spelled out in Article 4 of the Charter.

59. When the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam is admitted
to nlembership in the United Nations this fall, one more
nation will join the ranks of the Organization. The principle
of universality of representation will be further advanced.
At that lime, Viet Nam will accept the Purposes and
principles of the United Nations and the obligations of the
Charter. As a Menlber of the United Nations, Viet Nam will
join us in our collective responsibility to maintain intcrnational peace and security, to develop friendly relations
among nations, to settle disputes peacefully and to advance
hunmn rights.

65. MY delegation strongly feels that, in the interest of the
universalitY of the Organization and, further, in the interest
of international peace and security, and alsO because the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam fulfds all the conditions for
membership, it should no longer be denied admission to full
membership of the Organization. The Security Council, by
recommending this application for admission, would further consolidate the trust which the world community
has
placed in the United Nations.

(10. MY Government believes now, as it did when it helped
draft the Charter, that lasting peace lies in the dedication of
all nations to these high principles through universal
lll~mhmhip
in the United Nations. We look forward to
working with Viet Nam, as with all other members of the
(‘uuncil, to bring about a new era of peace, co-operation
and friendship, not only in our bilateral relations but in our
work together at the United Nations.

66. My delegation is honoured to be a co-sponsor of the
draft resolution recommending the admission of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to membership in the
United Nations. I should like to add here that we fully
support the application, and we strongly urge other
members to do so.
67. Mr. RIOS (Panama) (interpretation jkotn Spanish): I
know that Ambassador Sim6n Albert0 Consalvi, a man of
intrinsic virtues, abhors praise however sincere. Nevertheless, I wish, on behalf of the delegation of Panama, to
say that the excellent qualities which characterize him fully
justify the distinction conferred upon him by the illustrious
President of his country, Mr, Carlos And& PCrez. Panama
sees in Ambassador Con&vi a sincere and determined
friend and we could not fail at this time to express our
happiness at his appointment to the lofty post of Minister
for External Relations of the country of Bolivar. We wish
him every success for the good of Venezuela and of the
Hispanic American community.

01 * Mr. 1lOSSEN (Mauritius): I should like first of all to
CX~CIIC~
my delegation’s warmest felicitations to the repreXII tative
of Vencznela, Ambassador Consalvi, upon his
al~l~ointn~ent to the high office of Minister for External
Relations of his country. The Mauritian delegation wishes
him much success in his new assignment.
62. Mr. Prcsidcnt, less than a fortnight ago the Security
Council met under your able and efficient leadership to
consider the application of the Republic of Djibouti for
adniission to nlernbership in the United Nations. The result
was :I resounding unanimous vote in favour of the admission of this newly independent country. Today the Council
is niecting mew
to examine for the fourth time the
application for admission to this concert of nations of yet
another third-world
country, the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nanl, a country
which won its independence from the
clutches of ilnperialist forces against heavy odds and
through sheer indomitable determination. The Mauritian
delegation feels that this country has been denied once too
often the right to membership in the Organization for
rc:Isons that have swept international opinion off its feet.
The resulting frustration has perhaps left a scar even uglier
than tl~osc suffered by the brave and heroic people of Viet
N:II~ during tile protracted war of liberation.

68. The delegation of Panama is a sponsor of the draft
resolution contained in document S/12366. Our action is
consistent with the position which we have taken on this
matter from the very beginning. WC are certain that we are
thereby helping to make up for an injustice committed
against the heroic people of Viet Nam.
69. As we stated at the meeting of the Comrnitb?
On the
Admission of New Members, Panama, like the vast nMjoritY
of the Membersof the Organization, considersthat the
Vietnamesepeoplemeetsail the requirementsto take its
place in the United Nations with all the ensuing
ridlts.
duties andobligations.Its participation will undoubtcdiy be
of benefit to the strengtheningof internationalPeaceand
security. The Socialist Republicof Viet Nam fills all the
conditions laid down in the Charter for llatiOnS
which
aspire to membershipof this world body. Therefore,
nothing
could
be Illore
just than to include Viet Nani
without delay in the full processof internationalco-opcration.

03. ~11c Mauritian delegation has all along believed in and
recognizcd the legitimate aspirations of the people of the
Socialist ~cpublic of Viet Nam. Their unfaltering faith in
this community of nations, their ardent desire to co-operate
with one and &III and their love for peace and stablity arc
qualities that are well known to Members of the United
Nations. lt is our understanding that the long and arduous
path of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to secure
international recognition has now come to an end and that
tllis great country will no longer be denied the right of
assunling its rightful place at the United Nations. We are
further
]qpy
to note that one State member of the
Security Council has finally seen the light.

70. We observewith genuinesatisfactionthat the United
Statesof America, which, in November1976,opposedthe
admissionof Viet Nam, hasnow changedits position and
that, as stated by its representativeyesterday in the
Committee on tile Admissionof New Members,it hasno
7

of Viet Nam can now concentrate on the reconstruction of
the country and devote itself to the peaceful development
of its human and material resources. That is why we are
gratified that it has now been possible to create favourable
conditions for its admission to the United Nations. I should
like here to express the sincere appreciation of my
Government for the efforts which have been made to bring
this about and for the spirit of understanding on the part of
those concerned which made this happy outcome possible.

objections to adopting a resolution which meets the just
aspirations of the Vietnamese people and of the men and
women who have made the principle of universality the
corner-stone of the new world order.
71. My delegation congratulates the United States for this
new approach which is truly positive. We wish to see in this
context a very encouraging sign; it seems to us that, under
the leadership of President Carter, the Government of this
great nation is taking the path of rectification, and, since
my country, Panama, is precisely one of the countries
which has most to hope for from this new policy and from
the philosophy of the new frontier, this decision regarding
Viet Nam generates in us warranted optimism. We believeand I hope that we are not mistaken-that
the hour of
justice for which the Panamanian people have been waiting
for more than 70 long years is drawing near.

77. When it becomes a Member of the Organization, Viet
Nam, whose representative hitherto has been an accredited
observer, will have ampler and more direct opportunities to
participate in the deliberations and the work of the
international community. In stating its adherence to the
principles and the obligations contained in the Charter, Viet
Nam is helping to broaden the application and strengthen
the universal validity of the Charter. It is our hope that this
will contribute to a more effective application of these
principles and that the peoples of the United Nations will
thus enjoy a more peaceful, freer and more prosperous
future than many of them have in the past. It is in this
spirit that we hail the imminent entry of Viet Nam into the
United Nations.

72, Lastly, my delegation wishes to congratulate, with
brotherly affection, the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam on
the triumph of its cause. We at once offer it our most
sincere, loyal and selfless co-operation.
73. We thank you, Mr. President, the representative of the
great nation of China, for having guided these debates with
so much skill and wisdom.

78. We were very much interested to read the last report,
which was transmitted under the cover of a letter from the
Secretary-General dated 8 July, from the Co-ordinator for
Rehabilitation Assistance to Viet Nam. This is the blueprint
for a long and arduous process of reconstruction but it is a
beginning which can serve as a basis for the necessary
efforts which will have to be made hereafter. In this
connexion, we have just communicated to the SecretaryGeneral a report on the contributions being made by a
number of humanitarian organizations in the Federal
Republic of Germany to render assistance to Viet Nam.
These contributions bear witness to the interest my country
has in providing aid to Viet Nam.

74. Mr. VON I-IASSELL (Federal Republic of Germany)
(interpretation from French): First of all, I wish to take
this opportunity to convey my sincerest good wishes to
Ambassador Consalvi on his assumption of the important
duties in his new post. I think it is heartening that once
again one of our colleagues will have an opportunity to
continue to follow the work of the United Nations at a very
much higher level. After the words of praise which you
yourself, Mr. President, as well as preceding speakers have
uttered, I can add nothing more without being repetitious.
However, I should like to join my colleagues in thanking
Ambassador Cons&i for the cordial and close co-operation
he has offered and to wish him every success in his new
responsibilities.

79. The admission of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
will be the result of a judicious and realistic policy on the
part of those concerned in the most recent past. We hope
that this will also augur well for the future participation of
a new Member State in the activities of the United Nations.
1 should like to add to this my personal hope that the
cordial and confident relations which have characterized
the co-operation between our two Missions will be strengthened.

75. A few days ago the Security Council decided to
recommend to the General Assembly the admission of the
Republic of Djibouti. Today we have met to do the same in
the case of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. Thus, for
the second time this month, under your effective leadership, Mr. President, the members of the Council have come
together to deal with a matter on which a decision will
serve as the positive outcome of political developments. I
should like to congratulate you on this and to state that the
Federal Republic of Germany will support this new
recommendation of the Council. We are sure the General
Assembly will ratify the Council’s decision and that the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam wil.I thus be able to
participate in the work of the thirty-second session as a full
Member.

80. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese): I now
invite the representative of Japan to take a place at the
Council table and to make a statement.
81. Mr. KANAZAWA
(Japan): Mr. President, let me first
express the gratitude of the Japanese delegation to you and
the other members of the Security Council for giving us an
opportunity
to speak before the Council on this very
important occasion when the admission to the United
Nations of one of our closest neighbours, the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam, has come up for decision.

76. The Federal Republic of Germany, on 23 September
1975, established diplomatic relations with the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam and, in 1976, the ambassadors took
UP their posts. We should be extremely satisfied to see Viet
Nam take its place at the United Nations. After long years
marked by violence and tragic events, the Socialist Republic

82. The Japanese delegation wishes to take this occasion
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for the month of July. There
8

is no need for me to dwell on the close attachment that my
country and my people feel for your great country and
your great people. My delegation is particularly pleased that
this important question of Viet Nam’s admission to the
United Nations is being discussed under your able guidance
and we are convinced that the decision shortly to be taken
by the Council will constitute a memorable step forward
for the future not only of our part of Asia but of the world
as a whole.

before the Council. I should also like to welcomeYOU to
the United Nations and to extend, on behalf of my
delegatjon, our warm congratulations on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council. It is indeed very
heartening for me to recall the very cordial relationswhich
exist between our countries and the role which both our
Governments and peopleshave played in the development
and broadening of that relationship. It is also very
appropriate that you are presidingover the matter under
consideration, and we are sure that your .considerable
diplomatic skills and experience will be of benefit to the
Council in its deliberationsthis month.

83. I wish also to take this opportunity to congratulate
the representativeof Venezuela, AmbassadorConsalvi,on
his appointment to the elevated post of Minister for
External Relationsof hiscountry.

91. I should also like, on behalf of my delegation, to
congratulate AmbassadorConsalvi on his appointment as
84, The Japanesedelegationstrongly supportsthe admjs- Minister for External Relations of Venezuela and to say
sion of the SocialistRepublic of Viet Namto membership how much my country looks forward to working with him
in the United Nations. Webelieve that the admission
of the
at aI1levels, particularly in the maintenanceof the existjng
Socialist Republicof Viet Nam is most appropriatein view
friendly relationsbetween our two nieghbouringcountries.
of the important placethat that country occupiesin Asia. I
J wish him every success
in his new office.
may recall that, during Japan’smembershipof the Security
Council, the Japanesedelegation voted, both in 1975 and
92. My delegationfully supportsthe recommendationfor
1976, for the draft resolutions recommendingto the
admissionto membershipin the United Nations of the
General Assemblythe admissionof the SocialistRepublic Socialist Republic of Viet Nam ascontained in the report
of Viet Nam, and 1 wish to renew our support for the
of the Committee on the Admissionof New Members.We
admissionof Viet Natn.
have always been convinced-and we have affirmed this
conviction during previous consideration of this matter85. The Government of Japan is confident that the
that the application of the SocialistRepublic of Viet Nam
admission of the Socialist Republic of Vjet Nam will
fully conforms to the requirementsof Article 4 of the
further advancethe principle of universality, which consti- Charter. Indeed, last year the General Assembly, in its
tutes oneof the goalsof our Organjzatjon, and wjll prove to
rcsolutidn 3 l/21, recommendedthat the Security Council
bc a very positive clement in the maintenanceof peaceand
consider favourably the application of Vjet Nam for
security and the promotion of international co-operation. membership.Whiie we cannot be oblivious to the obstacles
My Government feels that the admissionof the Socialist
which impeded the admissionof the Socialist Republic of
Republic of Viet Nam will symbolise the peace and
Viet Nam to membershipin this international body, it is
stability that aretaking root in Asia.
not the intention of my delegationat this time to delve into
the past-history will record those events-but I will
86. My delegationis very happy to say that, sinceJapan’s certainly pay tribute to the long and resolutestruggleof the
establishmentof diplomatic relat,ionswith the Democratic heroic people of the Socialjst Republic of Viet Nam to
Republic of Viet Nun on 21 September1973, two agree- achieve their rightful placein the international community.
mentsfor economicco-operationon a grantbasishavebeen
concluded between the two countries to promote the
93. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam has played a
post-warreconstructionof Viet Nam.
constructive role in the non-aligned movement and has
sharedin that movement’sgeneralconcern for and promo87. It is the strong desireof the Governmentof Japanthat
tion of international peace and justice. We are therefore
the close relationshipexisting between our two countries confident that the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam will
will be further strengthened, not only in the field of
mLakea positive contribution to the attainment of the goals
economicco-operationbut alsoin the political, cultural and
and objectivesof this international Organization. .
all other fields. My delegation is looking forward to
co-operation in the United Nations with the delegationof
94. This recommendationfor admissionbrings us ncarel
the SocialistRepublicof Viet Nam.
to the goalof the universality of the Organization, a goalto
which my Government is ardently committed. Meanwhile,
88. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese):1 thank
it is even more imperative for us to maintain resolutely the
the representativeof Japan for his congratulationsto me
struggle for the completeelimination of the surviving forms
and for his kind wisheswith regard to the developmentof
of colonjrtlism,imperialismand racism.
friendly relationsbetweenJapan and China.
95. We look forward to welcomingthe Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam as a Member of this intcmational Organization, and WCoffer our full co-operation to its delegation
in our earnestdesireto strengtheninternational peaceand
security.

89. The next speaker is the representativeof Guyana,
whom I invite to take a place at the Counciltable and to
makellis statement.
90. Mr. JOSEPH(Guyana): Mr. President,I shouldfirst of
all like to expressmy gratitude to you and, through you,
to all the members of the Council for allowing my
delegationto participate in the discussionof the question

96. The PRESIDENT (translation fiotn Chimse): I thank
the representativeof Guyana for his congratulationsto me.
9

Nationsspecializedagencies.The SocialistRepublic of Viet
Nam enjoys diplomatic recognition by most States and, as
is well known, the overwhelmingmajority of the States
Membersof the United Nations are in favour of giving the
SocialistRepublic of Viet Nam its legitimate place in the
Organization.

The Chinese Government, like the Government of Guyana,
will strive to develop the relations of friendship and
co-operation between Guyana and China.
97. The next speaker is the representative of the German
Democratic Republic, whom I invite to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

104. Links of deep friendship connect us with the
Vietnamesepeople. The fraternal alliance between our
Statesand peopleshasits firm basisin a joint ideology and
in common goals and objectives. It is deeply rooted in
tradition and was reaffirmed by our comprehensivehelp
and support for the Vietnamesepeople in the courseof
their fight againstthe aggressors
and during the years of
reconstruction. Solidarity with the Vietnamese people is
State policy and a causenear to the hearts of all the citizens
of the GermanDemocraticRepublic. The GeneralSecretary
of the Central Committee of the Socialist Unity Party of
Germany, Mr. Erich Honecker, declared at the ninth Congressof the Party:

98. Mr. ZACHMANN (German Democratic Republic):
Mr. President, permit me, on behalf of my delegation, to
extend congratulations to you on your assumption of this
high office and to thank you for giving me the opportunity
to take the floor before this significant gathering and to
speak again on the admission of the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam to membership in the United Nations.
99. Our best wishes go to Ambassador Consalvi on his new
appointment as Minister for External Relations of Venezuela.
100. Linked in solidarity with the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam, we regard it as our duty to raise our voice to
espouse the just cause of Viet Nam. My delegation has
repeatedly had the opportunity to express the full support
of the German Democratic Republic for the admission of
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to membership in the
United Nations. We welcome with deep satisfaction the
resumed discussion on the legitimate claim for admission of
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. We highly appreciate
and fully support the draft resolution which has been
submitted by the representative of Kndia and sponsored by
other members of the Council.

“Solidarity with the heroic Vietnamesepeoplehasat all
times been a causevery near to our hearts. The victory
they won after a struggle involving heavy sacrifices
arousedgreat joy amongour people.Weshallcontinue to
give wholeheartedsupport to the Vietnamesepeople in
healing the wounds of war and building a socialist
society.”
Only a few days ago, on the occasion of a visit by a
Government delegation of the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam to our country, measureswere agreed on for the
further developmentof economicco-operation betweenthe
GermanDemocratic Republicand the SocialistRepublic of
Viet Nam.

101. The time is long overdue to give the people and
Government of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam full
rights in our world. Organization. As has been emphasized
many times in the past, there is no doubt that the
admission of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to United
Nations membership will help to consolidate peace and
strengthen international security. At the same time, it
further increases the authority of our Organization and
complies with the principle of universality, one of the
pillars of its activities.

105. During the cruel war that was forced upon it from
outside, untold misery was inflicted upon the people of
Viet Nam. For this reason alone, it is destined to be
representedas an equal member at the United Nations,
which has made the struggleto strengthen and to secure
durable peace its main objective. Those who bear the
responsibility for the victims and for the suffering and
destructionin Viet Namhave, besidestheir responsibilityto
support its application for membership in the United
Nations, the moral obligation above all to help as soonas
possibleto heal the wounds that were inflicted upon the
Vietnamesepeople.That obligation existsthe more so since
the Paris Agreements provide the basis for it under
international law. We also hold the view that such an
obligation should concern especially those who so often
like to speakof humanity and humanrights.

102. The application made last year by the Government of
the sovereign and independent Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam is fully in accord with the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam is
willing and able to carry out the obligations incumbent
upon all Members of the Organization.
103. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam consistently
pursues a policy of peace and friendship with other States
based on respect for national sovereignty, independence,
equality, non-interference, mutual advantage and peaceful
coexistence. In the relatively short period of its existence as
a reunited, undivided country, it has gained a respected
position in the world. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
stands firmly by the side of the peoples of Asia, Africa and
Latin America in the struggle against imperialism, colonialism, neo-colonialism and racial discrimination and on
behalf of national independence, democracy and social
progress. It makes a constructive contribution in the group
of non-aligned States and co-operates actively in the United

106. My delegationexpectsthat the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam will, in the near future, take its legitimate place
at long last asa full Memberof the United Nations and that
justice will again triumph in spite of all obstacles.The
German Democratic Republic is fully confident that the
SocialistRepublic of Viet Nam asa Member of the United
Nations will make a valuablecontribution to fulfilling the
objectivesof the world Organization.
107. The PRESIDENT (tvanslation from Chinese): The
next speakeris the representativeof Hungary. I invite him
10

to take a place at the Council table and to make ks
statement.
108. Mr. HOLLAI (llungary): First of all, I sl~ould
like
to
jOi* the speakers ~110 have preceded me in extending
my
delegation’s WarnleSt
congratulations to Ambassador Consdvi
On his
appointnlent
as Minister for External Relations
of his country. We should like to join others in wishing
him
Well, good health and success in his important
duties
h the
fllture.
109. Mr. President, I should like to express to you, and
through you to the other members of the Council, my
delegation’s deep appreciation of the fact that we have been
@verl the opportunity to Participate in the discussion as the
Security Council is considering the question of the application Of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for admission to
membership in the United Nations. I also wish to convey to
YOU
OUT
congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Cou~~cil for this month.
110. I should like to welcome whole-heartedly the delegation of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, which is
present here, headed by its well-known and very distinguished and respected ambassador, Mr. Dinh Ba Thi.
11 1. Since August 1975, my delegation has had the
privilege of participating in every discussion on the question
of the admission of Viet Nam to the United Nations.
Mention of the month of August 197.5 is in itself ample
proof that it is now
more than high time that the
Organization Put an end to the unfortunate delay over this
issue. It is our firm view that the reasons why the
I Iungarian delegation has consistently requested to be
allowed to speak on this item are as valid as ever.
Nevertheless, I should like to elaborate on them, although
briefly.
11’. The question of the admission of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam has always been characterized as
being of the utmost significance and of particular importance to the people and Government of the Hungarian
People’s Republic. We have never hidden, nor do we now
hide, the fact that the Hungarian people and Government
fully supported Viet Nam during its national liberation
struggle, and we shall continue to do so in the days ahead,
in tirncs of Peace, with all the means at our disposal. The
peoples of Hungary and Viet Nun are closely bound by ties
of fraternal and comradely friendship and solidarity, as a
result of a historical co-operation of which we are proud.
Our sincere and warmest solidarity, based upon the high
principle of true internationalism as regards the socialist
State of Viet ~~~~1,has also been reflected in the firm and
dclermined support
for the admission of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam to our Organization.
113. There can be no question in anyone’s mind regarding
the willingness of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to
accept and carry out the obligations laid down in the
Charter of the United Nations, and no one has ever
questioned the commitment to this end expressed by the
Vietnamese
Government.
Moreover, this nation Of
40 million people has already contributed effectively to the
maintenance of international peace and security, as well as

to stability in South-East Asia in Particular. The admission
of Viet Nam to the United Nations would definitely
strengthen theOrgankation,ashas
been pointedout
by the
overwhelming majority of Member States.
114. We are still wondering if there is, or ever has been,
any other State more qualified for membership irl the
United Nations than the Socialist Republic of Viet warn.
The heroic struggle of the Vietnamese people
for in&pendence against foreign intervention, and consequently
foreign domination, has been a shining
example
to t]lose
Peoples fighting for self-determination and independence.
me reification Of Vi& Nam has been celebrated and
saluted throughout the world. The Position of Viet Nam on
the international scene iS growing stronger and stronger.
Viet Nam’s constructive contribution to international Peace
and security is widely and rightly recognized and praised.
The consistent Policy of peace followed by the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam has ho contributed to the peace and
security of Asia and of the world in genera].
115. There is, however, a failure to be corrected by the
community of nations: the delay-dictated by unjustified,
selfish and narrow-minded interests-in
admitting the
Socialist State of Viet Nam to the United Nations. We have
been witness to-and it is without joy that we recall
this-the unfortunate experiences of the past two years
with respect to the meetings of the Security Council and
the outcome of those meetings, when a permanent member
of the Council three times vetoed the application of Viet
Nam. Dozens and dozens of Member States demanded and
urged that Viet Nam should be given its legitimate right to
be recognized; wider support for that could hardly have
been expressed.
116. History once again taught us a lesson, and indications
are that by now all of us have learned it. In the course of
the debates in the past two years, delegations have declared
almost unanimously that the realities of history, progress
and justice would prevail, and it appears to US that the
opinions are now going to prove justified.
117. The Socialist Republic of Viet Narn is facing tremendous difficulties arising from the results of the devastating
war launched by imperialism. In admitting Viet Nam to the
United Nations, we cannot in any way heal the deeply
rooted wounds of the war, but we definitely can raise our
voice strongly in this forum to state that those responsible
for the destruction of the national economY and infmstructure of Viet Nam are obliged to carry out their
responsibilities by contributing to the reconstructions
of
Viet Nam, as stipulated
and agreed upon in an international
agreement.
118. It can, ]lowever, be observed with satisfaction that a
significant number of States have expressed their readiness
and
taken
appropriate
action to contribute to the reconstruction of this war-torn country; this has been done alSo
by the United Nations, through the specialized agencies.
1lg. ln the li~lt of the foregoing, it becomes ever more
urgent that favourable consideration should be gLven to
fulfilling the mandatory obligations of States, with due
regard for the often-advocated ideas of moral va1ues,

particularly after the correct signs of goodwill demonstrated by the Government of Viet Nam on several
occasions towards the United States.
120. In concluding my statement, 1 wish to reiterate the
position of the Government of the Hungarian People’s
Republic, which fully and vigorously supports the admission of Viet Nam to the United Nations, all the more since
we believe that it is almost too late for the Members of the
Organization to take such action as to do justice to the
people of Viet Nam, who have suffered so much, by
admitting the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to the United
Nations. That action should have been taken two years ago.
121. Once again I wish to assure our Vietnamese friends
present here that, as in the past, we are determined and
shall continue to be determined to lend our full support to
them. We are convinced, at the same time, that the Security
Council, being aware of its responsibilities, will act in
accordance with the expectations of the nations of the
world.
122. The PRESIDENT (trunslation jkonz Chinese): The
next speaker is the representative of the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
123. Mr. BOULOM (Lao People’s Democratic Republic)
(interpretation from French): I should like first, on behalf
of the delegation of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
to extend to you, Sir, our warmest congratulations on your
accession to the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of July. I should like to take this opportunity to say
to you that the People’s Republic of China and the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic are linked by ties of militant
solidarity and co-operation based on Marxism-Leninism and
international proletarianism. We are very happy to see you
guiding the work of the Council at a time when this body is
reconsidering the exceptionally important problem of the
admission of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to the
United Nations.
124. We wish also to thank you and, through you, all the
members of the Council for having been good enough to
authorize us to take part in the discussion of the question
now before the Council.
125. We would take this opportunity also to extend
sincere congratulations to Ambassador Barton of Canada,
who presided over the Council with such competence
during the month of June.
126. As we so vividly remember, last year, because of the
obstruction of the representative of the outgoing Republican Administration of the United States, the Security
Council was unable to give positive consideration to Viet
Nam’s application for admission to the United Nations.
Today, the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, supported by
the overwhelming majority of Member States, renews its
application for admission.
127. In applying for admission to this international
Organization, the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam is merely

exercising the inalienable right of an independent, sovereign
and peace-loving State t0 occupy its rightful place. This
manifestation of goodwill clearly proves the firm deter.
mination of the heroic, brotherly people of Viet Nam to
contribute effectively to the maintenance of international
peace and security and to the development of friendly
relations among nations, as well as to the achievement of
international co-operation. Indeed, that.people regained its
independence, its national sovereignty and its territorial
integrity only after having waged a long and heroic struggle
and accepting immense sacrifice.
128. The question now before the Council is of the
utmost importance to my delegation, because my country,
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, has close bonds of
solidarity with the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. We have
privileged links based on a spirit of comradeship and
brotherhood, These bonds of active solidarity and co-operation are consolidated and strengthened more and more
from day to day. We have given and shall continue to give
our brotherly support to the endeavours now being
undertaken at the diplomatic level by the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam for admission to the United Nations. We
support and resolutely continue to support the brotherly
people of Viet Nam in their efforts to obtain from the
Government of the United States a contribution for the
healing of war wounds and the postwar reconstruction of
Viet Nam.
129. I avail myself of this opportunity to reaffirm before
the representatives of the United States Government
present here that my country, which still maintains
diplomatic relations with the United States, is prepared to
improve normal relations between our two countries on the
basis of respect for the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Laos. The United States must put an
end to its hostile policy and its hostile acts against the
people of Laos and must honour commitments by contributing to the healing of the war wounds in Laos.
130. In conclusion, my delegation wishes to appeal to
members of the Security Council to re-examine favourably
the application of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam and
to recommend unanimously to the General Assembly its
admission to the United Nations. To act otherwise would
be to disregard the will of the overwhelming majority of the
peoples and countries which constitute the international
Organization, thereby jeopardizing the principle of universality which is essential to its effectiveness.
13 1. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese): I thank
the representative of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic
for the congratulations he addressed to nie. The Chinese
Government and people share the sentiments expressed by
him and will strive to develop the ties of militant solidarity
and co-operation and the feelings of friendship which exist
between our two countries.

Tlzemeeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the world. Consult
your bookstore
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales
Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont on vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaires
du monde entier. Infornez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
g : Nations Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou Gen&ve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE

LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
tlnidas
e&n en venta en librerias
y casas distribuidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte a su librero o dirijase
a: Naciones
Unidas. Secci6n de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: %U.S. 1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

77-70001-April

1978-2,200
