UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
THIR

COUNCIL

T Y-NINTH
i

251 lth

MEETING:

i

6 JANUARY

1984

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/25 11). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 1 January 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Angola to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16244). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

s/Pv.2511

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Siipplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

.

2511 th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday,
President:

Mr. Javier CHAMORRO
(Nicaragua).

6 January

2. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Spanish]:
Members of the Council have before them document
S/16247/Rev.l,
which contains the text of the revised
draft resolution submitted by Angola, Egypt, India,
Mozambique, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, the United
Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta, Zambia and
Zimbabwe.

MORA

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, Egypt, France, India, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Upper Volta, Zimbabwe.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

3. I should like to inform members of the Council that
Malta and Peru have joined the sponsors of the revised
draft resolution.

agenda (S/Agenda/2511)

of the agenda

4. The first speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 1 January 1984 from the Permanent
Representative
of Angola to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16244)
The meeting

5. Mr. GOLOB (Yugoslavia): I should like to express
the greetings of my delegation to the new members of
the Council-Egypt,
India, Peru, the Upper Volta and
the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic-and
to wish
all members of the Council every success in performing
the responsible duty of maintaining international peace
and security at a time fraught with crises which are
deeply disturbing the world.

nws called to order at 12.05 p.m.

Adoption

1984, at 11 a.m.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
6. The Council met 98 times last year, and a good
number of those meetings were related to the aggression and occupation being perpetrated and the death
and terror being sown by the South African armed
forces in the region of southern Africa. The independence and sovereignty of the neighbours of South
Africa are at stake, and the lives of thousands of human
beings are being devoured by the army of apartheid and
expansion.

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 1 January 1984 from the Permanent
Representative of Angola to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16244)
1. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Spanishl:
In accordance with decisions taken at previous
meetings on this item [2509th and 2510th meetings],
I invite the representative of Angola to take a place at
the Council table. I invite the representatives of Algeria, Ethiopia, Mozambique,
Nigeria, South Africa, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Togo, the United Republic of
Tanzania, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia and Zambia to take
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

7. Now the Council enters the new year with another
complaint by Angola about a new escalation of South
African aggression against Angola. But it was hardly
two weeks ago that the Council demanded, inter alia,
that South Africa withdraw unconditionally
all its occupation forces from the territory of Angola [resolution 545 (2983)]. Regrettably the Council’s decision is
being ignored by South Africa.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola) took a place at the Council table; Mr. Sahnoun (Algeria), Mr. Seifu (Ethiopia), Mr. DOS Santos (Mozambique),
Mr. Audu (Nigeria),
Mr. von
Schirnding (South Africa), Mr. El-Fattal (Syrian Arab
Republic),
Mr. Amega (Togo), Mr. Rupia (United
Republic of Tanzania), Mr. Le Kim Chung (Viet Nam),
Mr. Golob (Yugoslavia) and Mr. Lusaka (Zambia) took
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

8. The list contained in the annex to the letter dated
3 1 December 1983 from the representative of Angola to
the Secretary-General
[S/16245] indicates numerous
examples of escalation of aggression by the racist
armed forces of Pretoria in the territory of Angola in the
period between 16 and 28 December. With reference to
these latest developments
the Government of Yugoslavia issued the following statement on 30 December
1983:
I

“The Government
of Yugoslavia most strongly
condemns the flagrant aggression by the racist &
gime of South Africa against [the] independent and
non-aligned People’s Republic of Angola. The latest
attack against Angola and the continued occupation
of southern parts of Angolan territory by South
Africa are an expression of persistent attempts by
South Africa to delay the inevitable decolonization of
Namibia by blatant violation of the norms of international law. The repeated armed attacks show that
the racist regime of South Africa is continuing massive military escalation aimed at destabilizing
the
region, which constitutes a serious threat to peace
and security not only in the region but in the world at
large.

them conditional on the will of the stronger and the
better armed is tantamount to making it possible for the
aggressor to resort repeatedly to the indiscriminate use
of force.
12. The Charter contains principles which are to be
respectedby
all Member States; it also contains the
enforcement measures to be used in drastic cases of the
violation of the most elementary norms of international
behaviour, which the acts of aggression by South Africa
against Angola and against its neighbours certainly are.
13. It is our hope that the Council will adopt urgent
and most energetic measures and will act unanimously
in the face of the grave situation in that region, and
that the Council will shoulder its responsibilities
by
adopting an effective. decision to be implemented
by
South Africa without any delay.

“This time again Yugoslavia calls attention to the
grave situation in that part of Africa as well as to the
situation facing Angola as the victim of the aggressive
policy of South Africa. Yugoslavia expresses its full
support and solidarity with the people of Angola
in defense of its national independence and sovereignty, as well as with other countries and movements threatened by the South African racist r&
gime. Expressing its deep concern, the Government
of Yugoslavia on this occasion as well wishes to point
to the need to undertake concrete measures aimed at
restraining the aggressive policy of the South African
regime and the necessity of an immediate solution of
the question of Namibia in accordance with resolutions and decisions of the United Nations and the
Organization
of African Unity, as well as of the
Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.”

14. Mr. LOUET
(France) [interpretation
from
French]: Allow me at the outset, Sir, to congratulate
you on behalf of my delegation on your accession to the
presidency of the Council.
15. I should also like to congratulate the five new
members of the Council, the representatives of Egypt,
India, Peru, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic
and the Upper Volta.
:
16. I should also like you to convey my delegation’s
thanks to Mr.-van der Steel; the President for the month
of December, for the outstanding way in which he
performed the tasks of his offtce during that month, as
well as to the colleagues who have left us, having made
an active contribution to the work of the Council during
the past two years-the
representatives of Guyana,
Jordan, Poland, Togo and Zaire.

9. The solution to the problem of southern Africa
cannot remain forever hostage to the political inanoeuvres and tactical delays by South Africa nor to its
transparent proposals aimed at procrastination and the
postponement of the solution.

17. For the second time in two weeks the Council is
meeting to examine the complaint of Angola against
South Africa. That fact alone testifies to the aggravation of the situation in the region.

10. The President of Angola has informed the Secretary-General
[ibid.] about a reasonable and cogent
proposal by Angola on how to establish an early, peaceful and durable solution. This time, again, it is’ the
victim that is submitting a constructive proposal based
on reason and dignity; hence the proposal deserves
careful consideration by all concerned.

18. Owing to its magnitude, its duration and the depth
of its penetration, the operation that has been launched
by the South African armed forces in southern Angola
is of exceptional gravity. The facts presentend by the
representative of Angola are undeniable, and the representative of South Africa himself, for that matter, has
acknowledged them at this table [2509th meeting].

11. We have repeatedly demanded that the Council
should enforce the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of all racist military forces from Angolan territory and all territories outside its borders. De’mands
for an immediate
and unconditional
withdrawal by
South Africa are not and must not remain mere rhetoric. The withdrawal of the aggressor and occupier
must be unconditional
if we, as independent and sovereign States, are not to be blackmailed into an endless
discussion of what should be done to satisfy the aggressor and induce it to withdraw. Independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity are the most essential
requirements for world order on the basis of the principles of the Charter of the United Nations. To make

19. My Government vigorously condemns this unprovoked and totally unjustified invasion. We call upon
South Africa to withdraw all its troops from that territory without delay and to respect the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Angola.
20. The arguments advanced by Pretoria to the effect
that those attacks are essentially an act of self-defence
against the fighters of the South West Africa People’s
Organization (SWAPO) are unacceptable. The territory
of the South African Republic is not threatened in any
2

way and nothing gives Pretoria grounds for carrying out
war operations in Angola on behalf of the inliabitants of
Namibia.

forces. In its nine years of independence Angola has
been subjected to an ever-increasing level of violence,
with all the ensuing human suffering and economic
dislocation.
South Africa’s blatant violation of the
Charter of the United Nations has been condemned in
several Council resolutions, but the voice of reason and
international condemnation alike have so far gone unheeded. The most recent acts of aggression against
Angola during and immediately
after the Council debate and the adoption of resolution 545 (1983) are
another indication of South Africa’s obstinate refusal
to implement the Council’s decisions.

21. The immediate cause of the escalation of military
operations is the unjustified continuance of the South
African presence in Namibia and the refusal of the
Government of Pretoria to implement resolution 435
(1978) without pre-conditions. Two weeks ago [2506th
meeting] my delegation bitterly deplored the fact that
the South African Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Information, in a letter dated 15 December addressed to
the Secretary-General [S/16229, annex r], reiterated his
country’s position with regard to the “linkage”
between the implementation
of the United Nations settlement plan for Namibia and a matter which falls completely within the exclusive sovereignty of Angola.

28. My Government strongly condemns South Africa’s most recent military actions against Angola and
deeply deplores the suffering and damage it has
brought. There exists no justification
for South Africa’s use of military force against Angola. As I stated
in the Council’s debate on this issue in December
[250&h meeting],
the .dangerous conditions
now
prevailing in southern Africa are a direct result of
South Africa’s stubborn refusal to terminate its unlawful occupation of Namibia and to implement the United
Nations settlement plan for Namibia. Namibia is not
part of the Republic of South Africa and South Africa
can derive no valid legal claim for the violation of
Angola’s sovereignty and territorial integrity from its
continued illegal presence in Namibia. South Africa’s
actions can lead only to further deterioration
of the
security-situation in southern Africa and complicate the
search for a solution of the problems of that region.

22. Nevertheless, my delegation still felt that the letter in question deserved careful scrutiny. We can
therefore only endorse -the positive action that was
taken immediately
by the Secretary-General.
We deplore the fact that the operation which was launched by
South African armed forces in the southern part of
Angola is so manifestly at variance with the intentions
stated in the above-mentioned
letter. But we are.gratified that President DOS Santos, overcoming the natural
reaction to which that aggression might well have given
rise, in turn addressed a letter dated 3 1 December to the
Secretary-General
(SIZ62&] which, in my delegation’s
opinion, contains an offer that could well reverse the
escalation of operations and lead to peace.

29. It is hard to escape thk conclusion that South
Africa’s military actions make a mockery of the disengagement of forces, proposed by that country’s Minister for Foreign Affairs and Information in a letter dated
15 December 1983 to the Secretary-General
[S/Z6219,
annex I]. My Government hopes that the truce proposed by the President of Angola in his letter of 3 1 De:
cember to the Secretary-General
[S/Z62451 meets with
more success. I would again express my hope that the
Government df South Africa will at long last show a.
willingness to promote the political settlements without
which it andits neighbours will know no enduring peace
and prosperity.

23. France gives its full support to the Angolan proposal. We request South Africa not to miss a possible
decisive opportunity to reach a peaceful settlement in
southern Africa. To make.possible the peace initiative
to which I referred two weeks ago, Pretoria should
immediately
halt its military operation-one
which,
I repeat, France vigorously condemns.
24. Mr. van der STOEL (Netherlands): First, I should
like warmly to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency for the month of January. Your
experienced guidance will no doubt be of great importance for our work.

30. In view of the gravity of South Africa’s aggression
against Angola, the Netherlands will vote in favour of
the revised draft resolutioq before the Council. This
does not mean, however, that my Government is considering taking any measures for the implementation
of
its operative paragraph 6.

25. I join other members of the Council in wtilcoming
the new members-Egypt,
India, Peru, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic and the Upper Volta.
I express the hope that during their term of membership
the Council will be able to make major progress towards
the aim of ensuring international peace and security in
all parts of the world.

31. Mr. MASHINGAIDZE
(Zimbabwe): To make a
formal statement in the Council for the first time at the’
beginning of the month and of a new year entails a
number of special duties and responsibilities.
I want to
discharge them before addressing the subject of this
meeting. Fortunately,
however, these duties and re-.
sponsibilities are pleasant.

26. Finally, my delegation expresses its gratitude for
the contribution
made to our work by those States
whose membership of the Council has now ended.
27. Once again we ,are meeting here to discuss South
Africa’s aggression against Angola and the continuing
occupation of parts of that country by South African

32. First, on behalf of the Zimbabwe delegation,
I welcome thiS opptirtunity to express our warmest and
3

most brotherly congratulations
to you, Mr. President,
and to your great country and people on your assumption of the presidency for the first month of the new year
1984. Even though this meeting of the Council has been
occasioned by tragic and unhappy events and is therefore hardly an occasion for celebration and joy, two
factors nevertheless make us express ourselves in more
hopeful terms than otherwise. The first is the season
and its joyous atmosphere, inspiring feelings of hope for
better things to come. The second factor is that your
sitting in that elevated place at the head of the Council is
itself a source of happiness, pride and satisfaction. Our
two great countries and peoples, joined by a common
struggle for genuine freedom, peace and justice, have
been enjoying the best of relations since the triumph of
our revolutions in 1979 and 1980, respectively. Your
own heroic country’s difftcult experiences during the
past four years at the hands of hostile elements wishing
to overthrow the Sandinist revolutionary Government
eminently qualify you to preside over the Council at a
time when it is considering racist South Africa’s aggression against Angola, for coming from Nicaragua you
better appreciate the Angolans’ nightmare caused by
the brutal activities of the occupying racist forces. We
are confident, therefore, that you will direct our deliberations in a fair and just manner.

if the apartheid regime of Pretoria is not restrained from
flouting Council resolutions, the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and international law.
37. Angola is a sovereign Member of the United Nations and its Government has a very deep faith and trust
in the United Nations, especially the Security Council,
as an instrument of peaceful settlement of disputes.
This faith and trust are clearly demonstrated by the fact
that, despite repeated disappointments
at the Council’s
failure to ensure South Africa’s compliance with its
decisions and resolutions, Angola continues to knock at
the door of the Council for redress. Since March 1976,
the Council has held no fewer than seven debates to
discuss South Africa’s unprovoked acts of aggression
against Angola. The current debate is the eighth one,
and yet Pretoria persists in its stubborn defiance of the
demands of the Council.
38. South Africa justifies its unprovoked aggression
against Angola and its continued military occupation
of southern Angola in terms of the need to protect
the people of Namibia against the SWAP0 freedom
fighters. This so-called justification
has already been
rejected by the Council in several resolutions, the latest
of which, resolution 545 (1983), has not only rejected
that claim, but has also condemned the apartheid rCgime’s aggression against and continued occupation of
parts of Angolan territory as a flagrant violation of
international law and of the independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Angola. The resolution also
demands that South Africa unconditionally
withdraw
its occupation forces from Angola, cease all violations
against that State and henceforth scrupulously respect
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola.

33. M,y second pleasant duty is to pay a very richly
deserved tribute to your predecessor, the representative of the Netherlands,
Mr. van der Stoel, for the
excellent and truly distinguished way in which he presided overthe Council in December. We warmly and
most sincerely congratulate him.
34. Our third, equally pleasant, duty is to extend a
warm welcome to the new members of the Council
-Egypt,
India, Peru, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic and the Upper Volta. We congratulate them
on their election and wish to assure them that we very
much look forward to working and co-operating with
them in the Council during the next 12 months.

39. As the racist Government of South Africa has not
only contemptuously
ignored these just demands by the
Council but has also massively increased and stepped
up its campaign of aggression against Angola, it is
imperative that the Council make an appropriate response. The message to Pretoria from the’ Council
should be unanimous, loud and very clear.

35. Finally in this list of duties, we wish also to add
our voice to those which have paid tribute to the representatives and delegations of Guyana, Jordan, Poland,
Togo and Zaire for their splendid contribution
to the
work of the Council during their term. All of us around
this table are certainly in their great debt.

40. The delegations of Angola, Egypt, India, Malta,
Mozambique,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, the
United Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta, Zambia
and Zimbabwe have presented for the Council’s consideration a draft resolution contained in document
S/16247/Rev.l of 6 January 1984. The draft resolution
requests the Council to strongly condemn South Africa
for its renewed, intensified, premeditated and unprovoked bombing, as well as the continuing occupation of
parts of Angola, which constitute a flagrant violation of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of that country
and poses a serious threat to international
peace and
security. The Council is being requested also to demand
that South Africa cease immediately
all bombing and
other acts of unprovoked aggression and unconditionally withdraw its military forces from Angola, as well as
undertake to scrupulously respect the sovereignty, air-

36. I now turn to the subject of the current meeting of
the Council. As we all know, this is the second time in a
fortnight that the Government and people of Angola
have been compelled to come to the Council in search
of a solution to the serious and tragic situation facing
their country. Pretoria’s naked aggression against and
intimidation
and blackmail of Angola not only‘ have
continued since our last meeting but have escalated and
are now posing a ‘grave threat to international
peace
and security. The’ Council, charged with the primary
responsibility
for the maintenance
of international
peace and security, must discharge this responsibility
in order to avert the disaster that must certainly follow
4

space, territorial integrity and independence of Angola.
Should these and other demands contained in the draft
resolution be ignored by South Africa, the Council
should reserve the right to meet in order to consider the
adoption of more effective measures under Chapter VII
of the Charter.

he proposed the disengagement of the South African
military forces operating in Angola. Obviously, those of
us who considered that offer merely a base manoeuvre
to influence the debate that would take place at this time
and believed that it was aimed mainly at providing a
permanent member of the Council with the necessary
pretext for not supporting any Council action or resolution in this connection have been proved right. No one
could honestly believe in the sincerity of the South
African Government which, for more than 15 years, has
mocked -the international
community and flouted the
universal will.

41. Finally, on behalf of all the sponsors of the draft
resolution,-I
wish to express our-gratitude
to all the
members of the Council for their co-operation and useful contributions during the formative stages of the draft
resolution, and we strongly commend the draft resolution to all members.

48. The authorities of the racist regime of South
Africa have stated that their.most recent savage military offensive is designed to prevent and avoid alleged
future attacks which, according to Pretoria, SWAP0
was preparing to carry out in Namibia from Angolan
territory.
Under the guise of false arguments and
pretexts, the South -African invasion forces have penetrated Angolan territory to a depth of 200 kilometres
north of the Namibian border.

42. The PRESIDENT
[interpretationfrom
Spanish]:
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of NICARAGUA.
43. On behalf of the delegation of Nicaragua, I should
like to wish all Members of the Organization, in general,
and of the Security Council, in particular, a 1984 year
filled with considerable achievements in the ongoing
struggle to build peace in this troubled world, Nicaragua believes that a climate of tranquillity,
relaxation
of tensions and mutual respect is a pressing and indispensable requirement for the achievement of the loftiest goals of mankind. We express the hope that the
powerful will dedicate their efforts and resources to
building a more just and better balanced world and that
an end will be.put to the danger of the raging fire of the
arms race, which has on several occasions placed all
mankind on the brink of extinction.

49. The truth is absolutely different: the counterrevolutionary forces, financed, encouraged and trained
by the racists themselves and their allies, have suffered
successive set-backs at the hands of the forces of the
People’s Republic of Angola. The counter-revolutionary groups have failed in their attempt to establish
.control in the central and northern provinces of the
country, and successive defeats ,have been inflicted
upon these mercenary ,groups. Pretoria’s latest offensive is thus aimed at giving renewed backing and support to the counter-revolutionary
groups, which are
facing the danger of complete elimination as a result of
the successful counter-offensive
by the Angolan Government. It is by now public knowledge, both in Africa
and throughout the world, that the leadership of the
Angolan counter-revolution
is based not in Angola but
in South Africa and that its operations depend, both
militarily
and materially, on Pretoria and the Central
Intelligence .Agency of a great Power.

44. At the same time, I wish most fraternally to welcome the Member States joining the Council: Egypt,
India, Peru, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic
and the Upper Volta. We humbly offer them our cooperation, convinced as we are that they will be able to
make valued contributions to the Council’s work. We
cannot fail to express our gratitude to the retiring members: Guyana, Jordan, Poland, Togo and Zaire, with,
which we had the privilege of working actively and
whose efforts have shaped all the Council’s work of the
last two years.

50. A curious coincidence, obviously because of identical inspiration and origin, is the fact that the ringleaders of the Nicaraguan counter-revolution
find a
safe refuge and provisioning
in countries’ that have
been turned into headquarters for aggression against
our country. This latest act of aggression by South
Africa, part. of its overall policy of destabilization
of
neighbouring States, is an answer to those who have
knowingly let themselves be fooled by South Africa’s
diversionary manoeuvres and used them to defend the
racists in the recently concluded debate in December
1983.

45. Finally, our congratulations
go to Mr. Max van
der Stoel, the representative of the Netherlands, who,
as we had expected, -performed his work as President
for the last month of 1983 with great skill and brilliance,
a recent example that will facilitate our action.
46. Once again we are considering the situation
created in Angola as a result of the illegal and continued
occupation of part of that country’s territory by South
African armed forces and the alarming escalation of the
military aggression that the South African war machine
has been carrying out in recent weeks against that fraternal country.

51. Angola, exercising its rights and with right clearly
on its side, is once again coming to this body in which
it has demonstrated consistent confidence and solid
hope, even though, in fact, the Council has not lived up
to its responsibilities.
Angola deserves the support of
this supreme body entrusted with the maintenance of

47. Only 21 days have elapsed and the ink has not
even dried on the letter sent by the South African
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Information,
in which
5

international peace and security. Its peaceable, heroic
and hard-working people deserves support and solidarity in the face of this continued aggression which is
bleeding it dry and turning it into the victim that has
suffered most from the racist scourge that is poisoning
southern Africa and exasperating and defying the whole
of mankind, safe in the sure protection of the now wellknown “constructive
engagement’*.

Against:

Abstaining:
United Kingdom of Great Britain
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

and

The draft resolution was adopted by I3 votes to none,
with 2 abstentions [resolution 546 (1984)].
56. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation from Spanish]:
I shall now call upon those members of the Council who
wish to make statements following the voting.

52. The Council must act with determination
in such
situations. Its inability to resolve conflicts where reason and justice are clearly defined undoubtedly affects
its credibility and prestige, but, more importantly,
it
compromises international peace and security. We cannot ignore the fact that this body constitutes the last
resort among international
bodies available to States
seeking solutions to situations such as the one facing us
today and that the absence of.solutions leads to frustration and lends legitimacy to other means that the peoples inevitably resort to. South Africa, its odious upartheid regime and its repugnant neo-colonialist
and
expansionist policies must be stopped soon. Entire peoples are victimized on a daily basis. We must put an end
to South Africa’s crimes or run the risk of sharing with
others the verdict of complicity that history will inexorably hand down.

57. Mr. MARGETSON
(United
Kingdom):
May
I join my voice to others who have congratulated you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency, and may
I also add my thanks to the representative of the Netherlands for his very distinguished
presidency last
month.
58. I should like to ‘congratulate and welcome most
warmly the new members of the Council: Egypt, India,
Peru, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic and the
Upper Volta. Perhaps I might be permitted to welcome
particularly warmly a fellow member of the Commonwealth, India. I should also like to thank the retiring
members of the Council with which we had the great
pleasure of working in 1983.

53. The immediate and unconditional
withdrawal of
the South African invading forces from Angolan territory, the recognition of the right of the sister Republic
of Angola to just compensation for the barbarous devastation resulting from the occupation, the clear and
unambiguous condemnation
of South Africa for its
mockery and flouting of every international
rule and
principle are all elements contained in the revised draft
resolution and they deserve the support of all its members. Our position is unequivocal: we are on the side
of Angola; we are in favour of the implementation
of
Council resolutions: we are on the side of international
legal principles, on the side of international conscience,
on the side of history and against those who vainly
attempt to take us back to a past of slavery and infamy
through plunder, death and repression.
54.

None.

59. My delegation abstained on the resolution, and
I should like to take this opportunity
to explain our
reasons for doing so.
’
60. On 20 December 1983, the Council adopted a resolution on the subject of the military presence of South
Africa in Angola [resolution 545 (2983)]. Since then
there have been important developments. South Africa
appears to have taken no notice whatever of the resolution and has continued to take offensive military action
within Angola leading to loss of life.
61. In the face of this the Council has once more
moved to condemn South Africa. In the circumstances,
the resolution has been drafted in stronger language
which goes far beyond the terms ‘of resolution 545
(1983). We join members of the Council in condemning
South African military action in Angola, which is a
flagrant violation of international law and the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola.
We greatly regret the loss of life. We believe that the
withdrawal of South African troops, and indeed of all
foreign troops, from Angola would improve the prospects for peace in the region. At the same time, my
country could not accept the extreme language in which
the resolution was couched. We understand and sympathize with the emotions which have given rise to
such language; but we question seriously whether such
language serves any useful purpose. My Government
would have preferred a dignified reiteration of the
Council’s position last month and would indeed have
joined our partners in the Council in voting for such a
resolution.

I now resume my functions as PRESIDENT.

55. It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the revised draft resolution submitted by Angola, Egypt, India, Malta, Mozambique, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, the
United Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta, Zambia
and Zimbabwe and which is contained in document
S/16247/Rev.l.
Unless anyone wishes to explain his
vote before the voting, I shall now put the draft resolution to the vote.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: China, Egypt, France, India, Malta, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian Soviet
Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Upper Volta, Zimbabwe.
6

62. I now pass on to developments in the diplomatic
field which found no reflection in the resolution just
adopted. There has been a response to last month’s
South African offer [see S/Z62Z9, annex ZJ. In his letter of 31 December 1983 to the Secretary-General
[,S/Z6245], President DOS Santos has said that subject to
certain important conditions, which include the withdrawal of South African military forces from Angola,
he would not oppose the establishment of a truce of
30 days from 3 1 January. The Secretary-General
has a
mandate from the Council to proceed with the necessary consultations to follow this up. Five members
of the Council, the representatives of India, Pakistan,
Malta, France and the Netherlands,
referred to this
development,
which seems to hold out at least some
hope of .positive progress. I wish more speakers had
discerned its importance as something constructive in a
bleak situation.

the Council for the past two years. Mixing my metaphor
thoroughly, I would say to the five new members, “You
have very large seats to fill.”
66. The present hostilities in southern Angola underscore the importance of moving towards peace in that
region., My Government
has always and repeatedly
urged restraint on all the parties. We consider diplomatic rather than military means to be the only acceptable path to the goal ,we all share. The comments made
by Mrs.. Kirkpatrick
on 20 December 1983, when the
Council last considered Angola’s complaint,
remain
valid. Indeed, events since then only underscore the
validity of our statement on that occasion, from which
I now take leave to quote:
“The position of my Government is . . . clear. We
are deeply concerned with the escalating cycle of
violence in southern Africa. We are particularly disturbed by the problem of cross-border violence. We
have urged and will continue to urge military restraint
and respect for national boundaries. We do not be.’ lieve there’ are military solutions to the conflicts in
southern Africa.

63. We have been faced with a resolution drafted in
extreme language on which the authors were not prepared to make more than minor changes, even to meet
the major concerns of other members of the Council.
For example, my delegation could not accept, and does
not accept, the overtones of Article 39 of the Charter of
the United Nations which still remain in the last preambular paragraph and in paragraph 5.. Equally we. could
not and cannot support paragraph 6, which might even
be taken as an invitation to widen the conflict and
exacerbate the problems of finding peace in the region.
Our reservations on these aspects remain as stated on
20 December last [250&h meeting] in relation to resolution 545 (1983). Other parts of the resolution, too, are
unacceptable in substance, ~such as the third preambular paragraph and paragraph 8, or are inappropriate.
In our view, a resolution containing such elements risks
taking the Council down another blind alley. I believe
that the energies of the Council would be best occupied
in discerning where the path of progress may lie and in
lending our weight and our wisdom in encouraging all
parties to follow it as rapidly as possible.

“The policies of the United States are grounded in
the belief that negotiated solutions are both possible
and essential. Cross-border violence cannot be condoned; whether it be in the form of terrorist attack by
externally based organizations or violation of the
territorial integrity of Angola by South African forces. Neither contributes to the process of building
“a structure of peace . :. in the region.” [Ibid.,
paras. 61 and 62.1
67. ,,Let me repeat and emphasize that we remain
deeply concerned at the cycle of violence in southern
Africa and especially deplore all forms of cross-border
violence. There are no military solutions to the problems of the region. Negotiated solutions are both possible and essential. The United States seeks to promote
conditions of peace, security and prosperity in the region. We seek the end of all foreign intervention. -We
seek independence for Namibia in accordance with
resolution 435 (1978). We have no hidden agenda, no
desire for national gain.

64. Mr. LICHENSTEIN
(United States): Mr. President, I wish, first of all, warmly to welcome you to the
important office of President for this month. We fully
anticipate that you will discharge your functions with
dispassionate professionalism,
such as has been exemplified most recently by your predecessor,. the representative of the Netherlands. I might add, in that particular connection, that considering the past history of
this island on which we are today all .seated, and considering the fact that his forebears, whatever the value
of the dollar might have been in those days,.had the
shrewdness and perspicacity to get it all for only $24,
we could have expected, and should have expected no
less from Mr. van der Stoel.

68. In our 20 December statement we welcomed the
South African commitment of 15 December to begin on
31 January 1984 a 30-day disengagement of its forces
from Angola [see S/26229, annex 4. We called this a
significant new development; we called it a hopeful and
encouraging first step.
69. In this regard, the Angolan letter from President
dos Santos [S/26245], now before us, also represents a
new and welcome development which could be an important additional step towards reducing tension in the
area. The South African offer and the Angolan acceptance together provide a hopeful basis for moving
towards a disengagement of forces and a cease-fire.
We would hope that, once begun, this process would
extend well beyond the initial 30-day period proposed.

65. At the turn of this year, it is also appropriate to
express the sentiment of “hail and farewell”. The
United States hails its five new colleagues. We bid a
fond farewell, somewhat tinged with sadness, to the
five colleagues with which we have shared the work of
7

70. In contradistinction
to these hopeful, encouraging
steps towards peace, many of the speeches that we
have heard in the last two days have focused only on
recriminations,
only on condemnation,
with no recognition of these recent and hopeful developments.
We
are forced to conclude that some parties distant from
the conflict, those that seem to seek solutions through
the barrels of guns, are anxious to heighten the violence, anxious to promote instability, even though it
will inevitably be at the cost of African blood.
71. We deplore the South African military activity in
Angola this day. Such action, and any escalation of
hostilities, not only endangers the prospects of a settlement but also poisons South Africa’s relations with
its neighbours and, indeed, with the international community. We have urged restraint on South Africa. We
expect them to respond. Once again we call on South
Africa to desist from these attacks. Once again we urge
all parties to exercise maximum restraint and to seize
the opportunity for peace now before us.
72. As I have said, the resolution just adopted seemed
to us to have the central thrust of focusing on polemics,
on conflict, on recrimination
and on condemnation
rather than on the exploration and exploitation of every
opportunity for peaceful reconciliation.
73. For all of these reasons, we have abstained in the
vote.
74. The PRESIDENT
[inferpretationfrom
Spanish]:
The representative
of Angola has asked to speak.
I invite him to make his statement.
75. Mr. de FIGUEIREDO
(Angola): Mr. President,
I should like to express my Government’s
appreciation for the skilful manner in which you have handled
Angola’s complaint against yet another instance of
South African aggression against Angola. The people of
Angola bear the warmest fraternal regard for the people
of Nicaragua; at present day they both face threats from
the same source.
76. I also wish to thank all those who have once again
spoken out in support of the position of the Government
of the People’s Republic of Angola, those of our nonaligned friends who sponsored the revised draft resolution just adopted and those who voted for it.
77. After all these years and after numerous confrontations with the South African regime’s intransigence,
duplicity and hypocrisy, I still confess to amazement at
how blatantly, blandly, shamelessly the representative
of the racist regime obfuscated the truth and misrepresented reality.
78. All that the racist regime has ever admitted to is
what it calls security operations against SWAP0 freedom fighters, and it alleges that it has no quarrel with
Angola as such. The facts are very different.

79. What about the South African invasions of Angola
in 1975, just prior to, during and after our independence?
80. What about South African sponsoring of its puppets inside Angola before and after Angolan independence and its continuing massive assistance to those
bandits? Without bases in Namibia to retreat to, without the racist regime’s rescue operations, those bandits
would long since have been liquidated.
81. What about South Africa’s aggression
other sovereign southern African States?

against

82. It is hypocrisy for the racist regime to come to the
Council and state that it has but a single objective: to
protect the inhabitants of Namibia. The inhabitants of
Namibia need protection from South Africa!
83. It is in absolute amazement that I have listened
to the representative of the racist regime referring to
in complaining
about armed
Angola’s “effrontery”
aggression. Since when has it been effrontery for a
victim of aggression to bring its case to the Security
Council and to seek redress? Since when has it been
effrontery to appeal for justice, for peace and security?
84. The representative of the racist regime also denied
that the racist armed forces commit atrocities against
the civilian population of Angola. We have documented
proof dating back to 1976 to the contrary.
85. And the only ideology completely
foreign to
Africa is that of apartheid, introduced into southern
Africa by the minority regime in Pretoria, perpetuated
by them, institutionalized
by them, constitutionalized
by them and exported by them across the borders of
South Africa. It is apartheid which is indeed a threat to
peace and security in our region and is leading it to
disastrous consequences, because the people of southem Africa refuse to succumb to the tyranny which has
been imposed on them by the minority regime with the
assistance of its imperialist friends. The international
community will not be taken in by this pathetic and
transparent racist attempt at deception and whitewash.
86. -Finally, I wish to reiterate categorically
that
Angola has never refused to meet, listen, discuss or
negotiate even with our professed enemies. We have
never rejected any genuine offer which might bring
peace to southern Africa. In fact, the Government and
leaders of Angola have often been the ones to break
many an impasse. All the Governments and peoples of
southern Africa will have to comply with the conditions
for peace: the racist regime is not exempt from this
undertaking, which the representative of South Africa
appeared to imply two days ago.
87. The Angolan Government’s offer contained in the
letter of the President of my country of 31 December
1983 to the Secretary-General
[ibid.] still stands.

’

88.

A luta continua!

A vitoria e certa!

concluded the present stage of its consideration
item on its agenda.

89. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation from Spanish]:
There are no further speakers. The Council has thus

The meeting

rose at 1.15 p.m.

.’

6.:

,

/.

<._)!I

_’

,:

,.

.(

.,I

,:

.,

,;

,’

.

:
!

I

‘,

9

.:

. ..

,,.z

,.

of the

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLJCATJONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aupresde votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes. New York ou Get-&e.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLJCACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estan en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas pattes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Seccibn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

00300

_-..-90-61313-January

1993-2.050
