S/PV.8871

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8871st meeting

Monday, 4 October 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kimani . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kenya)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Jürgenson
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Abarry
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. King
Mr. Cherif
Ms. Jacobs
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Mrs. Tra Phuong Nguyen

Agenda
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated Office in
Haiti (S/2021/828)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-27281 (E)
*2127281*

S/PV.8871

The question concerning Haiti

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: I would like to take this opportunity,
on behalf of the Council, to pay tribute to Her Excellency
Ms. Geraldine Byrne Nason, Permanent Representative
of Ireland to the United Nations, for her service as
President of the Security Council for the month of
September. I am sure I speak for all the members of the
Council in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador
Byrne Nason and her team for the great diplomatic
skill with which they conducted the Council’s business
last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
(S/2021/828)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Haiti to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I warmly welcome His
Excellency Mr. Claude Joseph, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Haiti.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Helen La
Lime, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Haiti and Head of the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti; and Ms. Emmanuela Douyon, Executive
Director of Policité.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2021/828, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti.
I now give the floor to Ms. La Lime.
Ms. La Lime: It is an honour to provide the Security
Council once more with an update on the situation in
Haiti, which is currently undergoing one of the most
fraught periods of its recent history.
2/19

04/10/2021

Already reeling from the ghastly assassination of
President Jovenel Moïse on 7 July, the country was
struck on 14 August by a devastating earthquake that
affected over 800,000 people in its south-western
peninsula. The two events have led to the long-awaited
national and local elections to be further postponed.
Meanwhile, insecurity has become rampant in Port-auPrince, as kidnappings are once again on the rise and
gangs have extended their control over large swaths
of the city. In addition, thousands of migrants who
had sought better living conditions in neighbouring
countries are being repatriated. For most observers, it is
difficult to envision an end to the country’s seemingly
never-ending crises, which have pushed the resilience
of the Haitian people to the brink.
Since assuming office on 20 July, Prime Minister
Ariel Henry has spared no effort to reach a political
agreement with the various factions of the Haitian polity.
Adopting an inclusive and consensual approach, he has
sought to create minimal conditions for the holding of
legislative, local and presidential elections, and thus
steer a country in the midst of a profound governance
crisis towards the regular functioning of its democratic
institutions. In a positive step, actors from across the
political spectrum and civil society organizations,
including former opposition and ruling coalition
groups, adhered to such an agreement on 11 September.
The pact captures key demands expressed by national
stakeholders, such as the formation of a new provisional
electoral council and the inclusion of the diaspora. It
also foresees the holding of elections no later than the
second half of 2022.
One can only hope that Haitian political and
civil society leaders will continue to work together to
find common ground around a common project that
will contribute to fostering a more appeased climate
in which decisive action can be taken and essential
reforms enacted.
To be sure, many points of convergence exist.
For instance, there is a large national consensus on
the need to reform the 1987 Constitution, a charter
widely viewed as contributing to the recurrent political
and institutional instability. The draft constitution
submitted to the Prime Minister by the Independent
Consultative Committee on 8 September should provide
a basis for further constructive and inclusive debate on
ways to reshape the Haitian political system.
21-27281

04/10/2021

The question concerning Haiti

Likewise, the re-establishment of security,
especially in the Port-au-Prince metropolitan area,
must be prioritized by Haitian authorities. Since June,
a significant and sudden increase in gang violence has
caused the displacement of some 19,000 people from the
communes of Cité-Soleil, Croix-des-Bouquets, Delmas
and the Port-au-Prince neighbourhood of Martissant.
The control that gangs exercise around strategic entry
and exit points of the capital has had a detrimental
impact on Haiti’s economy and the movement of people
and goods. Applying the recommendations of a team
of United Nations police experts deployed from May
to July following a request from the late President,
the Haitian National Police has sought to improve the
effectiveness of its anti-gang operations by adopting a
more balanced approach to prevention and repression,
relying on increased police presence in problematic areas
and improving its intelligence-gathering mechanisms.
Yet an over-stretched and under-resourced force
alone cannot curb this worrisome rise in crime.
Haiti’s main security institutions will not be able to
achieve sustainable results unless their capacities are
strengthened and Government services are brought
back to the impoverished neighbourhoods that serve as
fertile ground for armed gangs. Therefore, in addition
to sustaining its efforts to reform the police with the
support of the United Nations and bilateral partners, the
Government must implement a more holistic approach
to addressing gang violence, within the framework of
the national strategy for community violence reduction,
which was developed with United Nations support and
endorsed on 5 July.
Haitian citizens have unanimously condemned
President Moïse’s gruesome death and called for a
thorough investigation into his assassination — one
that follows due process and the rule of law. For the
shroud of impunity that has long enveloped Haiti to
begin lifting and for justice to prevail in this and several
other emblematic cases, judicial actors must be allowed
to work independently in an appeased environment,
with reassurance that they will be protected while
undertaking the delicate task of identifying and
prosecuting the perpetrators.
The Haitian judicial system also continues to
contend with the protracted challenge of pretrial
detention, which affects 82 per cent of the country’s
prison inmates, among the highest rates in the world.
National authorities must redouble efforts to urgently
address that issue, in close consultation with all

S/PV. 8871

judicial stakeholders. Furthermore, it is imperative
that the process to review the new penal and criminal
procedural codes continue as, once promulgated, they
will be critical to combating pretrial detention and
harmonizing Haitian law with regional and international
human right standards.
The 14 August earthquake added a new layer of
complexity to an already dire humanitarian situation.
In the face of the most recent catastrophe to befall the
country, the United Nations reiterates its support to
the Government and the people of Haiti and salutes the
active national leadership and coordination of the postdisaster response and recovery.
Even as relief operations are still ongoing, early
recovery and the restoration of livelihoods must be
strongly supported in areas affected by the earthquake.
It is a race against time to ensure that children can
return to school, farmers do not miss the next planting
season and people currently living in spontaneous
displacement camps can return to their homes as
quickly as possible. We must ensure that Haiti does not
become a forgotten crisis. I urge all Member States to
contribute to the $187.3 million flash, appeal launched
on 25 August, to respond to the needs of those affected
by the earthquake, as well as to the $235.6 million
2021-2022 humanitarian response plan, both of which
are currently only about one third funded. Moreover,
in the long term, the reconstruction process will need
the full engagement of the Government of Haiti and
the international community so as to ensure a greener,
resilient and more inclusive recovery.
Similarly, while the United Nations and partners
have worked closely with the Government of Haiti to
ensure it responds effectively to the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, greater cooperation will be
required to sustain and scale-up testing capabilities
and to promote public health and social measures. With
only some 60,000 vaccines administered to date and
less than 1 per cent of the country’s eligible population
inoculated, increasing vaccine uptake in the coming
weeks and months will prove vital to protecting Haiti
and its most vulnerable populations from COVID-19
and the threat of more transmissible variants.
The situation in which Haiti currently finds itself can
only be characterized as bleak. Nonetheless, there exist
encouraging signs that only reinforce my conviction that
through urgent, determined and concerted action, Haiti’s
citizens can address the deep structural challenges

21-272813/19

S/PV.8871

The question concerning Haiti

and the governance and development deficits that feed
their country’s instability, insecurity and ever-growing
humanitarian needs. Along with the United Nations,
the entire international community must continue to
steadfastly stand alongside the Haitian people and their
Government as they endeavour to forge a path towards
stability, security and sustainable development.
The President: I thank Ms. La Lime for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Douyon.
Ms. Douyon: I thank the Security Council for
giving me the time and the opportunity to discuss the
ongoing situation in Haiti and for its willingness to hear
the perspectives of civil society.
Haiti faces a multifaceted crisis characterized
by a deteriorating security situation and increasing
human rights violations, including women’s rights.
More than 162 armed groups operate in the country and
control significant portions of the national territory.
Kidnappings occur daily, and gangs carry out massacres
of civilians in marginalized areas of Port-au-Prince like
La Saline with impunity.
The ongoing political crisis is deepening. Since the
assassination of former President Jovenel Moïse in July,
there has been no president. An acting Prime Minister,
with little to no popular legitimacy, is ruling alone. The
Parliament has been non-functional since 2020. No
new officials have been elected because of the failure
to organize elections since 2016, and there are only 10
elected officials in the entire country. The judiciary is
effectively non-functional, with courts operating only
three to four months a year.
Three consecutive years of negative economic
growth have brought the Haitian economy to its knees.
The country cannot respond to any human-made or
natural disaster. As a result, thousands of people who
have been internally displaced due to gang activity are
now facing a humanitarian crisis.
There is no legal provision to regulate the current
political situation. Political actors are engaged in a fight
for power, thereby making consensus more difficult.
Against that backdrop, I would like to share some
recommendations that, I believe, reflect the aspirations
of the majority of the Haitian people, including with
regard to the mandate and work of the United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH).
4/19

04/10/2021

The United Nations shares a long history with Haiti,
and that should continue. The Organization’s plans to
support Haiti need to be better aligned with the Haitian
people’s shared interest and vision for Haiti. No entity
must try to interfere with that help, and trust should be
at the centre of the cooperation.
Elections have always been the prescribed
solution to all past political crises in Haiti. We can
all acknowledge the pivotal role of elections in a
democracy, but elections help democracy only if they
are free, fair and participatory. The conditions for fair
elections do not exist in Haiti today owing to the levels
of insecurity and gang violence we are witnessing.
It is equally unlikely that the conditions will exist in
February 2022, the new date announced by acting
Prime Minister Henry. Elections should occur when
they can be fair, not be imposed on arbitrary timelines
that are not related to the situation on the ground.
The proposed constitutional referendum should also
be abandoned. It is highly controversial and will only
divide the country further.
As Haiti faces an inevitable period of transition,
we need an inclusive consensus-based process that lays
the foundation for a stronger democracy. To seize that
opportunity, the States Members of the United Nations
and members of the Security Council should dare to
break with their traditional ways of intervening in
Haiti. For too long, the international community has
prioritized short-term stability over real democracy.
Today in Haiti we are living the consequences.
Going forward, support should be provided to
Haitian-led initiatives to create conditions for free, fair,
inclusive elections and signal a rupture with the terrible
governance habits of the past. Over the past six months,
a cross-sector of civil society has come together through
the Civil Society Commission for a Haitian Solution to
the Crisis and has forged consensus around a transition
plan. That inclusive effort, which has been joined by
over 500 civil society groups and over 50 political
parties, deserves support. The end goal is to ensure a
return to constitutional order and the rule of law.
In terms of security, Haiti needs to restore peace,
dismantle the gangs and guarantee protection for
all Haitian citizens; but the Security Council should
abstain from sending troops or peace missions to Haiti.
The international community should instead focus on
strengthening the police and its units to fulfil its role.
21-27281

04/10/2021

The question concerning Haiti

The judiciary system needs support and resources
to increase its capacity, including to prosecute financial
crimes and assassinations. The United Nations should
work with the judiciary system to send a clear signal of
an end to impunity and a real fight against corruption.
Member States to which money is illicitly transferred
should also do more to block those flows and bring
those responsible for corruption to justice.
To address our humanitarian crisis, Haiti needs
adequate international funding, not crumbs of
humanitarian aid that act only as a band-aid. Funding
needs to be directed to qualified and capable local civil
society groups. That will help ensure less waste and
more accountability on aid. We also need projects with
the potential to transform sectors, not piecemeal efforts
and new pilot projects.
Finally, BINUH must do more to work with civil
society. Unfortunately, under the current leadership,
there has been too much tension and polarization
between civil society and BINUH because the mission
is seen as picking political winners. That can only harm
the work of BINUH on the ground. BINUH should
work with civil society to promote dialogue, reforms
and accountability and reduce gang violence.
Today Haiti faces its most challenging period in
decades; but it is also a chance to break with the old
dysfunctional systems of governance, corruption and
impunity. There have been few occasions when the
opportunity to start anew and build a stronger Haiti
were as evident and as necessary as they are today. I
hope that the United Nations will work with the Haitian
people as we struggle to achieve a better future. The
changes that we want to see include changes in the
approaches of our partners, and we need their solidarity.
The President: I thank Ms. Douyon for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Let me start by congratulating Ireland for
an extraordinarily successful and productive month
during its presidency. I would like to welcome Kenya’s
assumption of the presidency. We look forward to
working with you, Mr. President, during this month.
Let me thank Special Representative La Lime for her
comprehensive briefing on the situation in Haiti. The
United States highly commends the work she and her

S/PV. 8871

team have done under such challenging circumstances.
I would also like to thank Ms. Douyon for her briefing.
The past few months have been trying ones for the
people of Haiti. Cities and towns have faced escalating
violence, including gang violence. Hundreds of
thousands of people are living in makeshift structures,
having been forced to flee their homes, as we just heard
from Special Representative La Lime. On 7 July, the
Haitian people learned that their President had been
brutally assassinated. In August, a 7.2-magnitude
earthquake hit. And then, as if that were not enough,
a tropical storm came crashing through. That is just
in a two-month period. But Haitians have suffered for
decades — the people of Haiti keep being hit while they
are down, again and again.
In the context of ongoing efforts to reach a political
accord as a first step towards restoring stability and
that of the dire humanitarian situation faced by Haitian
people, Haiti needs the support of the United Nations
and the multilateral system as much now as ever before.
As we look to renew the mandate of the United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) later this month,
we must keep the plight of the people of Haiti firmly
in mind. To that end, today I would like to address
three aspects of the situation in Haiti: the political path
forward, security threats and human rights abuses, and
addressing humanitarian needs.
First, the United States supports an inclusive,
Haitian-led process that charts a path to democracy
through free and fair elections as soon as conditions
permit. It is crucial that Haiti’s Government, political
parties, civil society, religious leaders, the private
sector and the diaspora work together in the interests of
the Haitian people to return to democratic governance.
Government authorities should move quickly to restore
the country’s democratic institutions, including an
effective, independent judiciary. We urge Prime
Minister Henry to make every effort to secure a
political accord with the broadest possible consensus
and engagement with civil society and political actors.
Accountability for the perpetrators of the assassination
of President Moïse would be an important step towards
bringing the country together.
Secondly, the human rights situation in Haiti
continues to deteriorate. Human rights defenders
faced even more attacks during the summer. Those
responsible for the Bel Air, Cité-Soleil and La Saline
massacres need to be held accountable. The perpetrators

21-272815/19

S/PV.8871

The question concerning Haiti

of the killings of political activist Antoinette Duclaire,
journalist Diego Charles and the President of Port-auPrince Bar Association, Monferrier Dorval, also need
to be brought to justice. In terms of security, the United
States supports BINUH’s efforts to help the Haitian
National Police become an accountable and reliable
force that can meet Haiti’s internal security needs,
including tackling gang violence.
Thirdly and finally, following the earthquake, the
United Nations reported that approximately 650,000
Haitians required humanitarian assistance. The United
States has provided nearly $44 million to aid those
in need. The United States Agency for International
Development, in conjunction with its partners,
continues to assess and respond to the humanitarian
needs caused by the earthquake.
We urge everyone to do their part to help the
Haitian people, who have suffered so much. Together,
let us ensure the needs and aspirations of the Haitian
people are met and that we do everything we can to help
the country become more democratic, more prosperous
and more secure for the Haitian people.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I wish to express my gratitude for the briefings
delivered by Ms. La Lime, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, and Ms. Emmanuela Douyon,
whom I thank for her candidness and clarity. I also
acknowledge the presence here among us of Haiti’s
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Claude Joseph.
I would begin by indicating that the prosperity and
sociopolitical stability of Haiti is a key issue for Latin
America and the Caribbean and a task resting on the
collective shoulders of the international community.
The reprehensible assassination of President Jovenel
Moïse, the earthquake and the passage of tropical
storm Grace all are undoubtedly challenges for
institutional consolidation in Haiti. The crisis is
political, environmental, social and economic. Mexico
deems it vital that the perpetrators of the assassination
of President Moïse be brought to justice and that the
investigation be conducted with absolute impartiality.
The humanitarian situation in Haiti, as we have
heard, is of grave concern. In response to the earthquake
of 14 August and the passage of tropical storm Grace,
my country sent more than 2,000 tons of provisions,
medicines and other medical supplies and has deployed
a medical brigade comprising more than 30 health-care
specialists to Pestel, in Grand’Anse department. The
6/19

04/10/2021

support and cooperation of Mexico with Haiti stems
from a commitment at the highest level and is fully in
line with our tradition of solidarity with the region and
our friendship with the people of Haiti.
Of course, it is painfully clear that major
humanitarian challenges remain in Haiti. We endorse
the appeal made by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs to redouble efforts to meet the
needs of the more than 650,000 people who require
assistance. Moreover, it is concerning to note that at
least 750,000 people, including women and children,
are currently suffering from acute food insecurity.
We note the fact that the response of the United
Nations system to the natural disaster scene has
implemented lessons learned from the 2010 earthquake.
However, it is necessary to further strengthen the gender
component of the humanitarian response. We take note
of the political agreement reached on 11 September that
delayed not only the elections but also, consequently,
the right of the Haitian people to elect their own
authorities. An inclusive dialogue among all political
stakeholders, including civil society, and with the
participation of women is crucial to forge ahead with
the democratic process in the country.
Faced with that situation, the United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) must spare no effort
in supporting that process, with a view to the holding
of free and transparent presidential and legislative
elections. Haiti needs a Government that has a clear
mandate from its people.
Another critical issue in Haiti that requires greater
attention is the impact of the trafficking of small
arms and light weapons. Criminal gang activity has
prompted the forced displacement of 20,000 people in
Port-au-Prince. As a result of this and of the various
crises to which I have referred, Mexico has seen the
arrival from Haiti of approximately 20,000 people, who
are currently located in Chiapas. There are more than
12,000 refugees, and it is estimated that across Colombia
and Panama there are around 60,000 Haitians, many of
whom are seeking to go to the United States.
Consequently, it is paramount to implement
policies to prevent the illicit trade in arms and
human trafficking. We urgently call for the adoption
and implementation of the national, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration strategy without
delay. We recognize the work of organizations such
as the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace,
21-27281

04/10/2021

The question concerning Haiti

Disarmament and Development in Latin America and
the Caribbean, and the United Nations Institute for
Disarmament Research.
This month marks two years since the creation of
BINUH, the first special political mission established in
the context of the peace and security reform championed
by the Secretary-General. My country acknowledges
the multidimensional challenges that face Haiti, and the
very design of BINUH seeks to tackle the underlying
factors that undermine stability and governance. It is
for that reason that Mexico supports the mandate of
BINUH as an integral component of the “One United
Nations” for Haiti plan.
However, without solid institutions in Haiti,
progress will remain elusive. Today Haiti more than
ever requires the support of the United Nations and the
international community. The time has come to renew
support for a people that has demonstrated tremendous
resilience in spite of having been beleaguered by
multiple scourges.
Ms. Jacobs (United Kingdom): I add my
congratulations to Ireland for a very successful
presidency in September and to Kenya for assuming
the presidency this month. I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for her helpful
update and all her work in this challenging time in Haiti.
The United Kingdom welcomes the activities of the
United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH),
especially in its efforts to facilitate a unified approach to
Haiti’s multifaceted challenges. I also thank Ms. Douyon
for having shared her important perspective from the
ground, and I welcome the Minister’s joining us today.
We remain deeply concerned by the political, social
and humanitarian challenges that Haiti continues to
face, and we are acutely aware of the impact that this is
having on the Haitian population. The assassination of
President Moïse was an abhorrent act, and we continue
to call for the perpetrators of that crime to be brought
to justice.
Haiti is also recovering from the far-reaching
implications of the recent earthquake, which has
only added more strain and stress on a Government
working to deliver for its people. We welcome the rapid
international response and will continue to coordinate
with partners to deliver relief efforts, including through
our $1.3 million of initial support to Haiti, which is an
addition to the United Kingdom’s contributions to the

S/PV. 8871

United Nations Central Emergency Response Fund and
the Red Cross.
The Royal Navy ship RFA Wave Night also
supported the humanitarian relief work of the United
States. We urge the international community to support
Haiti at this difficult time and encourage all sides to
work closely with the international community to
provide urgent assistance to those in need.
Political gridlock in Haiti remains persistent and
concerning. We call upon all political actors to find
common ground in order to find a way for Haiti to hold
safe and successful elections and to strive for political
advancement. The United Kingdom encourages all
actors to work constructively in support of a peaceful,
democratic solution for the Haitian people.
We share the Secretary-General’s concern regarding
the deteriorating human rights situation, particularly
the increase in kidnappings and gang-related violence.
Perpetrators of human rights abuses risk undermining
the prospects of political progress while simultaneously
putting Haitian lives at risk. Reports of aid convoys
being looted on their way to areas affected by the
earthquake are especially concerning. We welcome
the United Nations community violence reduction and
peacebuilding support to help address the security
challenges, as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General has mentioned.
Finally, we also remain troubled by the particular
vulnerabilities that women and children face. The
coronavirus disease pandemic has acutely magnified the
threats to their health and economic welfare. We thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
her recent briefing to the Informal Expert Group on
Women and Peace and Security, which provided insight
into the disproportionate impact that Haiti’s multiple
crises have had on women and girls. The United
Kingdom encourages all actors to work constructively
and cooperatively with the international community
and BINUH to find solutions to the root causes of those
crises and to support Haitian development.
Ms. Juul (Norway): Let me also start by
congratulating Ireland on its excellent presidency
during the previous month. A warm welcome goes
to Kenya, and I very much look forward to working
closely with you, Mr. President.
I would also like to thank Special Representative
La Lime for her briefing, as well as for the report of the

21-272817/19

S/PV.8871

The question concerning Haiti

Secretary-General (S/2021/828), including the concrete
recommendations therein, which we support. Thanks
also go to Ms. Emmanuela Douyon for her briefing
here today. We welcome the presence of the Foreign
Minister of Haiti.
The situation in Haiti has become even more
troubling than we could have predicted at our previous
meeting in June (see S/PV.8799). At that meeting, we
spoke about elections, a referendum, the importance
of respecting human rights and the need to build up
Haiti’s resilience to climate and environmental shocks,
all of which are issues that have now been thrown into
sharp relief.
While speaking about climate, we welcome the
inclusion in the report of the emphasis that Haiti should
“prioritize, over the long term, disaster risk reduction
and climate change adaptation” (S/2021/828, para. 60).
We look forward to more such analysis connecting
climate and security. Yet, despite that bright spot, we
gather today in an overall grim atmosphere for Haiti,
punctuated by the assassination of the President, an
earthquake and the subsequent tropical storm, massive
humanitarian needs and an increasingly fraught
political and security situation.
In the aftermath of the earthquake we, as Norway,
sent an expanded emergency clinic and a full medical
team to alleviate the urgent humanitarian needs. While
we will continue to support Haiti, we strongly call on
Haiti’s leaders to undertake concrete action to resolve
the multiple crises. Ultimately, that will mean holding
free and fair elections in an environment that ensures
the full, equal and meaningful participation of women.
We encourage all actors to engage in a substantive
dialogue and prepare for those critical elections as soon
as possible.
Norway is deeply concerned by the reports of
ongoing violations and abuses of human rights. The
recent attacks on humanitarian convoys are of great
concern. Safe and unhindered humanitarian access
must be ensured. We are particularly worried about
the situation of vulnerable people, including children,
and the critical protection needs of women, including
from sexual and gender-based violence. An increase
in harassment and reprisals against human rights
defenders and the shrinking civic space are also
troubling. Those are serious crimes that jeopardize the
possibilities for peace. There can be no impunity. We
8/19

04/10/2021

urge the authorities to ensure that perpetrators are held
to account.
We are at a breaking point. All actors in Haiti
must enter into dialogue with open minds and restore
confidence in the political and judicial system based
on the rule of law. We heard the calls from female
leaders of civil society for greater coordination and
inclusive political processes. In the face of increasing
fragmentation in Haitian society, we call on the United
Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) to work
closely with all civil society groups to bridge the
political gaps.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate that Norway
fully supports BINUH and its ongoing work. The
current crisis must be used as a turning point for Haiti
and its people. The Security Council needs to engage
constructively together and renew BINUH’s mandate
without delay. We understand the complexities and
challenges that Haiti and BINUH face, but now is not the
time for Council support to falter. The best chance for
success is through a strong and coherent international
response and support to the people of Haiti.
Mrs. Tra Phuong Nguyen (Viet Nam): Let me
begin by thanking Ireland for its excellent presidency in
the month of September. We would like to express our
full support to our Kenyan colleagues, and we believe
in their able leadership.
I would like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Helen La Lime for her insightful
briefing and all United Nations personnel in Haiti for
their hard work on the ground. I would also like to
thank Ms. Emmanuela Douyon for her information on
the latest developments in Haiti. We warmly welcome
His Excellency Mr. Claude Joseph, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Haiti, to our meeting today.
We remain concerned about the multifaceted
difficulties and instability in Haiti. The assassination of
President Moïse in July and the deadly earthquake and
tropical storm in August, combined with the continued
violence and kidnappings, have further worsened
the situation. Furthermore, the recent developments
are likely to compound the myriad challenges facing
the Haitian people. As a result, the humanitarian
and socioeconomic difficulties continue unabated.
Against that background, we would like to stress the
following points.
21-27281

04/10/2021

The question concerning Haiti

First, on the political and electoral process, we
welcome the political agreement between the Prime
Minister and more than 150 political parties and civil
society organizations to hold the legislative elections no
later than the year 2022. It is high time for a compromise
and political consensus to be reached on constitutional
and broader reforms.
We therefore urge all related parties to identify the
prioritized areas, with a focus on the modalities and
timing of the elections that are acceptable to all Haitian
stakeholders. We also urge the Government of Haiti
and related parties to create the conditions for women
to participate in political life. The 30 per cent quota
representation of women in the electoral process should
be guaranteed.
In that process, we call upon the United Nations
and the international community to urgently prioritize
resources for supporting the holding of those elections
in a peaceful environment.
Secondly, with regard to threats of violence, we are
concerned about a number of long-standing threats and
challenges, especially the recent increase in the level
of gang-related violence, sexual violence, kidnappings
and attacks targeted at local communities in parts of
Haiti, which we strongly condemn. Women, children
and other vulnerable groups remain at risk of violence
and marginalization in the political life of the country.
While their ongoing efforts to address criminality
are commendable, we urge the Haitian Government
and local authorities to strengthen law enforcement and
uphold their responsibilities to dismantle gangs and
criminal organizations.
Measures should also be taken to stop the violence
and to better protect vulnerable groups, especially
women and children, from the negative impact of both
the political impasse and the socioeconomic stagnation.
We call on international and regional partners to
maintain their support for the Haitian security forces
through training, the provision of equipment and
capacity-building.
Thirdly, on reconciliation, we once again stress
the importance of national unity for Haiti on the way
forward. We call on the Haitian authorities and all
other parties concerned to give the highest priority to
the interests of their people and demonstrate a spirit
of mutual understanding and trust to overcome the
current differences. We believe that that is the viable

S/PV. 8871

path towards finding common ground and a peaceful
way out of the political impasse in Haiti.
Before I conclude, we would like to express our
appreciation for the tireless efforts of the United
Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) and the
United Nations country team. We support the extension
of the BINUH mandate.
We call upon the United Nations, regional and
international organizations and neighbouring countries
to further their assistance so as to help Haiti to overcome
the current difficulties. We would like to reaffirm our
support for the Haitian people in their pursuit of peace,
security and sustainable development in the country.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): Let me begin by
congratulating Ireland on successfully presiding over
the Security Council in September. I extend my full
support to Kenya for its presidency in October. Let
me thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Helen La Lime, for her comprehensive
briefing on the mandate implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Office in Haiti and the recent
developments in the country. I also thank Ms. Douyon
for her briefing, and I welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Haiti, His Excellency Mr. Claude Joseph
among us.
The reporting period was marked by two watershed
events — the horrific assassination of President Moïse
in July and the devastating 7.2-magnitude earthquake
together with the hurricane in August, adversely
impacting the progress on benchmarks. Those tragic
events have compounded the challenges facing Haiti
and slowed down the efforts towards a new constitution
and the holding of long-overdue elections.
The interim Administration, led by Prime
Minister Henry, has huge tasks ahead. That includes
the restoration of functional democratic institutions,
security and the rule of law. Haiti’s regional partners,
the international community and the United Nations
need to continue supporting the Haitian authorities
in this hour of need. The interim Administration
has managed to engage political parties, opposition
groups and civil society with regard to sociopolitical
challenges. Prime Minister Henry referred to those
efforts in his address to the General Assembly at its
seventy-sixty session and reaffirmed the commitment
to hold credible, transparent and inclusive elections as
soon as possible (see A/76/PV.14).

21-272819/19

S/PV.8871

The question concerning Haiti

The political agreement on peaceful and
effective governance during the transition reached
on 11 September among political parties and civil
society organizations, including former opposition and
ruling coalition groups, with the Prime Minister is a
welcome development. We also welcome the measures
to strengthen women’s participation in the upcoming
elections. We hope that all Haitian stakeholders will
continue engaging constructively to find inclusive
solutions to the sociopolitical challenges, including the
drafting of the new constitution.
Decisions need to made by including all Haitian
stakeholders, considering the political and security
measures needed to ensure credible elections. Therefore,
we call on all parties to engage constructively and
purposefully. The improvement of the security situation
is fundamental to the restoration of institutional order
and to create enabling conditions for holding elections.
In that regard, transparent investigations and swiftly
bringing to justice those involved in the assassination
of President Moïse are of paramount importance.
The Haitian authorities also need support from their
partners, including the United Nations, in undertaking
justice reform and the capacity-building of the security
and police sector to fight the menace of gang violence.
On the socioeconomic front, we welcome the
continued progress in the implementation of the projects
of the Peacebuilding Fund involving community
violence reduction and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration, including capacity-building for the
National Commission for Disarmament, Demobilization
and Reintegration. We are also happy to note the recent
roll-out of the community violence reduction project
aimed at fostering socioeconomic development in gangaffected areas in the Port-au-Prince neighbourhood of
La Saline.
The recent earthquake and hurricane caused
immense damage to life and property. We note with
concern the funding gap of more than $150 million in
the humanitarian response plan and hope that donor
countries will respond positively. We also support the
efforts by the United Nations country team towards the
creation of a georeferenced disaster response database,
thereby providing the country with detailed multi-risk
maps and the capacities to update them.
Haiti may need support to accelerate the vaccination
of its population against the coronavirus disease, as
delays in vaccinations would lead to the expiry of the
10/19

04/10/2021

vaccine doses that have already arrived in Haiti. The
relevant United Nations bodies should coordinate with
and assist the Haitian authorities in their vaccination
drive. India has had a long association with Haiti
and its people. India was a major troop-contributing
country to United Nations peacekeeping operations in
Haiti and contributed three formed police units in the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti. India
will continue to support the people of Haiti in these
challenging times.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): It
is indeed a privilege for me to deliver this statement
on behalf of the three African members of the Security
Council — Kenya, the Niger and Tunisia — as well as
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1).
On behalf of the group, allow me to congratulate
Ireland for its outstanding presidency in September.
We also warmly welcome Kenya to the role and wish it
every success. We also thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Helen La Lime, and
Ms. Emmanuela Douyon, founder and Executive
Director of Policité, for their presentations. We further
welcome His Excellency Mr. Claude Joseph, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Worship of the Republic of Haiti.
In our previous statement on 17 June (see
S/PV.8799), the A3+1 expressed deep concern about the
multifaceted crises facing Haiti and stressed that our
sister Caribbean nation required urgent attention and
specific and sustained support from the international
community. We also emphasized that political inertia
cannot continue if Haiti is to achieve its aspirations for
peace, stability and prosperity.
Today the situation in Haiti requires the intensified
attention of the international community to restore
some semblance of normalcy. The dastardly attack on
Haiti’s democracy through the abhorrent assassination
of President Moïse has complicated an alreadyworrisome situation, especially on the political and
security fronts. That, together with the devastating
earthquake on 14 August and Tropical Storm Grace,
compel the Security Council and the international
community to deepen solidarity, enhance partnership
and strengthen cooperation with Haiti. We urge all
Haitian law enforcement authorities to spare no effort
to ensure that the perpetrators of such heinous acts are
brought to justice and extend our call for the assistance
of the international community.
21-27281

04/10/2021

The question concerning Haiti

The A3+1 also takes this opportunity to offer the
following observations.
The deteriorating political situation needs to be
arrested immediately, security needs to be restored
fully and the rule of law needs to prevail. We are
aware of ongoing political dialogue initiatives, but note
difficulties among stakeholders and political forces to
engage in a comprehensive national dialogue process.
The only solution to the existing political impasse is
through a genuine, inclusive, broad-based Haitianowned and Haitian-led national dialogue process.
That must include the full participation of women
and youth and also be accompanied by a national
reconciliation process.
The A3+1 therefore calls on all Haitian stakeholders
and contending political forces to set aside their
differences, build trust and unite in the common
interests of the Haitian people, including advancing
towards a democratic electoral process. To that end, we
echo the view of Caribbean Community (CARICOM)
on the importance of creating the enabling conditions
without which there can be no transparent, inclusive or
secure elections. We fully support CARICOM’s offer of
its good offices to facilitate a Haitian-led and Haitianowned solution to the current situation, which remains
a serious regional concern. We encourage our Haitian
brothers and sisters to maximize the use of the tools
and instruments available through CARICOM to assist
in that process.
The assassination of President Moïse has laid
bare the security deficiencies. While we acknowledge
efforts to strengthen the Haitian National Police and
bolster the State security apparatus, including through
the Peacebuilding Fund projects on community
violence reduction and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration, gang violence, sexual and
gender-based violence and kidnapping continue
unabated — exemplifying the inadequacies of existing
measures to ensure the safety of citizens. We therefore
repeat our call for international support to strengthen
the State’s security machinery.
We need to cast our net wider and extend our
support to the Haitian Government to include measures
that address corruption and illicit financial flows into
and out of the country. In that way, we may be able
to counter the ever-increasing and evolving threat to
the people of Haiti and neighbouring States posed by
armed gangs that are becoming more emboldened.

S/PV. 8871

The ever-deteriorating human rights and
humanitarian situation is extremely troubling. Impunity
cannot continue, and investigation into emblematic
cases — such as those of Grand Ravine, La Saline
and Bel-Air — must be conducted swiftly and the
perpetrators must be held accountable. It is disturbing
that high-profile cases, including the assassination of
Monferrier Dorval, Emmanuel Constant and Netty
Duclaire, remain unresolved.
We are appreciative of the immediate response by
all international partners and humanitarian agencies
to assist in the delivery of humanitarian support. We
commend the launching of the $187.3 million flash
appeal in support of the most vulnerable communities
and encourage the international donor community to
support that initiative, as well as scale-up contributions
to the humanitarian response plan, which remains only
30 per cent funded.
The A3+1 must pronounce its deep concern about
the distressing situation surrounding the inhumane
large-scale deportation of Haitians witnessed in recent
weeks. We express our fervent hope that elemental
humanity and international human rights law will be
strictly observed, even during times when countries are
securing their borders.
The challenges facing Haitian migrants and
refugees are stark reminders that addressing their root
causes is critical. That brings us to our repeated call
for reparations for Haiti. Clearly, Haiti’s legacy of
underdevelopment cannot be divorced from the historic
injustices meted out against it in standing up against
slavery and preparing the foundation for the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and inspiring many
liberation struggles.
Just a few weeks ago, during the general
debate of the seventy-sixth session of the General
Assembly, our leaders renewed their commitment to
implementing the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action — a landmark anti‑discrimination framework
adopted 20 years ago. It is time to put that Programme
of Action into operation, commencing with placing the
issue of reparations for victims of the slave trade high
on the agenda.
The current situation presents a unique opportunity
for the international community to assist in preventing
Haiti from further descending into the abyss. The
common citizen in Haiti is frustrated with the systemic
instability and the daily struggle to put food on the table.

21-2728111/19

S/PV.8871

The question concerning Haiti

The expression of fatigue in relation to the situation in
Haiti is totally unacceptable. We must show greater
solidarity and stand side by side with Haiti, while
shouldering our responsibilities as the international
community, including unity within the Council.
Having celebrated more than 200 years as an
independent nation, Haitians must also own their
existing challenges to overcome the current crises
through the indomitable spirit of their forebears, such
as Dutty Boukman, Cécile Fatiman, Jean-Jacques
Dessalines, Toussaint Louverture, Marie-Jeanne
Lamartiniére and Henri Christophe. The magnificent
and triumphant Haitian Revolution is a testimony to
us all that, no matter how difficult the challenges and
ordeals, Haiti will overcome.
Kenya, the Niger, Tunisia and Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines stand in solidarity with Haiti.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Ms. Helen La Lime for her briefing
on the very difficult situation in Haiti. We listened with
interest to the statement delivered by Ms. Douyon. We
welcome His Excellency Mr. Claude Joseph, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Haiti, to today’s meeting.
Regrettably, alarming reports continue to emerge at
every meeting of the Security Council concerning Haiti.
In the three months since we considered the previous
report (S/2021/559), Haiti has endured another major
upheaval. We are very disappointed about the fact that
the quest for a long-overdue solution to the protracted
internal political crisis has again been deferred. The
failure over the past few years to establish effective
mutually respectful dialogue among the key political
forces has spawned a situation in which the levers of
governance are concentrated in the executive branch.
Internal political tensions could have been reduced
by an effective legislature and judiciary, as well as
professional, well-equipped and well-funded law
enforcement agencies. Yet that has not transpired in
the country. The absence of adequate political will has
meant that the parliamentary elections required for the
stabilization process to begin have been postponed for
three years already. It is clear that the situation will not
be resolved in the near future.
The absence of stable governance, required to
effectively resolve day-to-day issues, has resulted in an
intensificaiton in the activities of illegal armed groups
that continue to fight for spheres of influence. As a
12/19

04/10/2021

result, a volatile mix has emerged — weak governance,
a breakdown in the rule of law and ongoing violence
by the groups I mentioned. The suffering of ordinary
Haitians is exacerbated by recurring natural disasters.
There is an urgent need to address issues common
to all States, such as combating unemployment and
improving overall standards of living. However, ordinary
citizens are most concerned about the staggering
absence of physical safety for the population. We are
concerned by information contained in a World Bank
report that in 2021, 60 per cent of Haitians will be living
below the poverty line. The Government’s paralysis has
created onerous obstacles for international cooperation
and assistance. We note the efforts made by the United
Nations system in very difficult circumstances,
including the Secretary-General’s Peacebuilding Fund,
to support the country’s authorities in advancing crucial
programmes to curb violence and achieve disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration.
It is clear that the dire situation in this coastal State
requires consolidated international support, primarily
from its neighbours in the region. In that connection, we
are puzzled by the decision to forcibly return to Haiti
those who cobbled together all they had to leave Haiti in
search of a better life for their children. Plans to return
to Haiti 14,000 individuals, in addition to the 8,000
Haitians who have already returned, are very troubling.
During discussions on the previous report in June,
we all expressed the hope that the initial glimmers of
a fragile nationwide political dialogue process would
help facilitate proper preparations for, and the holding
of, presidential and parliamentary elections. However,
all our optimistic predictions collapsed in the wake of
the abhorrent assassination of President Jovenel Moïse,
on 7 July. Regardless of who was responsible for that
crime, a blow was dealt to all Haitians. For that reason,
there is an urgent need to identify and hold accountable
the perpetrators of that grisly crime. The SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2021/828) mentions the request for
the United Nations to assist with an investigation. There
is an important need to ensure that all available means
be used to help the Haitian people in that process.
It is clear that the decision as to how the country can
extricate itself from the crisis must be made solely by
Haitians themselves, through a broad-based nationwide
dialogue. We therefore welcome efforts to seek
consensus among opposing social forces in the country
about the issue of their future. We have taken note of
21-27281

04/10/2021

The question concerning Haiti

the agreement reached on 11 September for elections to
be held by the end of 2022. We are convinced that the
imposition of any convenient solutions on the Haitian
people by external actors or experts will only further
complicate the situation.
The United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti and
its Head, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, have been called upon to facilitate an
inclusive intra-Haitian dialogue. Port-au-Prince needs
responsible international assistance, and the current
situation places particular responsibility on the United
Nations presence in the country.
Russia is prepared to continue to provide Haiti
with all the necessary assistance, both bilaterally
and multilaterally. In order to help mitigate the
consequences of natural disasters, we have delivered
medical and surgical kits as part of a joint effort with
the World Health Organization.
We intend to continue encouraging the Security
Council to play a constructive role in normalizing the
situation in Haiti, strengthening the sovereignty and
self-sufficiency of the country and improving the lives
and security of its citizens.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland) (spoke in French):
I would like to join others in thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. La Lime,
for her briefing. I thank the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti and the United Nations country team
for their continued efforts. I also thank Ms. Douyon
for clearly sharing her views this morning. At this
juncture, it is very important to hear and listen to the
perspectives of Haitian civil society.
I would also like to acknowledge the presence of
His Excellency Mr. Claude Joseph, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Haiti, at the Security Council today. He is
most welcome.
I would like to focus on three issues that are of
particular concern to my country, Ireland, at this
crucial time.
First, as we all know and as many have already
said, the pandemic and recent natural disasters have
exacerbated humanitarian needs in Haiti, which were
already considerable. Ireland welcomes the effective
Haitian response to the earthquake in August and the
subsequent storms. Those timely actions, supported by
the United Nations and non-governmental organizations,
have met the needs of over 650,000 people. However,

S/PV. 8871

humanitarian needs remain very urgent. A robust
response from the international community to that
crisis is essential. Ireland has already contributed
with funding from our humanitarian partners. We
will continue to play our part in supporting the
Haitian people.
(spoke in English)
The humanitarian and development challenges
that predated the pandemic and earthquake remain
and, sadly, grow. Those challenges include acute food
insecurity, displacement caused by gang violence,
the highest rate of maternal mortality in the Western
hemisphere and high rates of sexual and gender-based
violence. The basis for solutions to those and many
more worrisome issues exist within Haiti; however,
without structural change and institutional investment,
those profound crises in Haiti will persist.
That brings me to my second point. Solving
Haiti’s challenges requires significant progress
towards a negotiated political solution. The people
of Haiti deserve stable, predictable and functioning
democratic institutions. However, with the most recent
postponement of the electoral calendar, that basic
platform on which to build future stability and security
is further pushed away.
We welcome all efforts towards the achievement
of an inclusive and consensual political agreement in
Haiti; but in order for that to be successful, the widest
possible base of engagement is required. That can be
achieved only with the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women and the active involvement
of youth.
Any future electoral framework must preserve,
at a minimum, the commitment for 30 per cent
representation of women in the Haitian Parliament,
as highlighted last week at the first Haiti-focused
independent evaluation group on women and peace
and security. Ireland was pleased to co-chair, with
Mexico, that important discussion on women’s political
participation in Haiti. There is much work to be done.
We encourage the Haitian Government and all
political and civil society actors to guarantee the critical
contributions of women as activists, as candidates and
as citizens with full and equal rights. Throughout that
process, the safety and security of all engaged with the
political and electoral system remains vital.

21-2728113/19

S/PV.8871

The question concerning Haiti

My third point is on the deteriorating security
situation. Gang violence and kidnappings are a daily
occurrence in Haiti, with entire communities pushed to
the point of despair and, to quote Ms. La Lime, “to the
brink”. Impunity for human rights violations and sexual
and gender-based violence are of serious concern.
Change, development and progress in Haiti will be
impossible without guaranteeing the basic safety and
security of its people. We welcome efforts, including
by the Peacebuilding Fund, aimed at community
violence reduction, disarmament and electoral
violence prevention.
However, the most significant change will come
from adequate resourcing — both financial and
technical — of the Haitian National Police. The urgent
prioritization of police resourcing will build capacity,
confidence and security for the Haitian people. The
steadfast support of the international community will
be crucial to facilitating that work.
Ireland continues to believe that solutions to the
complex crises in Haiti need the engagement and support
of its own people. The responsibility of the international
community is to stand with Haiti and facilitate efforts
towards an inclusive national consensus. That offers a
clear path towards addressing the needs and ensuring
the rights of the Haitian people.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
congratulate Kenya on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of October. We
assure you, Sir, of our full support in the fulfilment
of your mandate. I also extend my congratulations to
Ireland on the successful completion of its presidency
in September, and I thank Ambassador Byrne Nason
and her team for their work.
China thanks Special Representative La Lime for
her briefing. She and her colleagues have been working
tirelessly in a difficult situation, and we wish to pay
them tribute. I also listened carefully to the statement
made by the Haitian civil society representative.
In the past four months, we have witnessed
continued political volatility in Haiti. Its security
and humanitarian crises have not improved in the
slightest — in fact, it has been going from bad to worse.
We express our deep sympathy for the tragic plight
of the Haitian people. The Haitian Government and
political leaders must act in the interests of the Haitian
people and the country by desisting from engaging in
14/19

04/10/2021

a power struggle, discharging their responsibilities in
good faith and taking measures to put the country on a
proper track towards development.
First, the political transition must be moved
forward with a sense of urgency. Although Prime
Minister Henry recently reached an agreement with
some parties on the electoral timetable and pre-election
political arrangements, some civil society groups and
political parties in Haiti have divergent views on those
issues. The two camps remain divided. The repeated
postponement of the constitutional referendum and
presidential and parliamentary elections will only add
to the uncertainty of the political situation in Haiti.
We call on all parties in Haiti to act in the country’s
best interests and in a spirit of mutual understanding
and accommodation, while showing flexibility in order
to move in the same direction and reach an agreement on
the relevant arrangements without delay through broad
political consultations so as to ensure the elections can
take place as early as possible.
Secondly, no effort can be spared when it
comes to humanitarian assistance and post-disaster
reconstruction. The earthquake and subsequent
tropical storms in Haiti led to heavy casualties and
property damage. An additional 650,000 people are
in urgent need of humanitarian assistance. China calls
upon the international community to respond actively
to the United Nations humanitarian emergency appeal,
totalling about $187 million, and urges the Haitian
Government to work closely with the United Nations
system to ensure that supplies reach those most in need
and in order to prevent waste and embezzlement.
Thirdly, we must tackle the criminal gangs head-on.
Gangs in Haiti are running amok, and they are capable
of anything. Their egregious actions have generated
chaos in society and have displaced 19,000 people since
June alone. The Haitian Government should effectively
build up the capacity of its police force and implement
the national strategy for community violence reduction
without delay in order to remove the tumour of gang
violence as soon as possible. Politicians must divest
themselves of any gang-related interests. Anyone
associated with gang activities must be banned from
politics and public office.
In the face of natural and human-made disasters,
many desperate Haitians had no choice but to flee their
homes. Their basic rights have been undermined by
their unfair treatment in foreign lands and their mass
21-27281

04/10/2021

The question concerning Haiti

repatriation. China shares the concern expressed by
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
We hope that the human rights and dignity of Haitian
migrants will be duly protected.
In his latest report (S/2021/828), the SecretaryGeneral notes that international aid efforts since 2010,
which total some $14.7 billion to date, have yet to deliver
the expected results. In previous Council deliberations,
the Chinese delegation has repeatedly stressed that
there is no external solution to the Haitian dossier and
that it is ultimately up to the Haitian people themselves
to bring the country out of its current plight. The
international community’s long-standing assistance
model, which can be compared to a blood transfusion
and oxygen supply to Haiti, has proven to be neither
markedly effective nor sustainable. The Organization’s
presence in Haiti should be improved and adjusted.
We are ready to join the rest of the members of
the Council members in addressing the systemic and
structural impediments to peace and development
in Haiti and to consider adopting a novel approach
in order to help Haiti emerge from its plight. China
is ready to hold in-depth discussions with all parties
about the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) and the renewal of
its mandate, including the mandate’s time frame and
content, the relationship between the work of BINUH
and the corresponding efforts of the United Nations
country team in Haiti, as well as the relationship
between BINUH and the Organization of American
States, in order to jointly find a way to help Haiti to
overcome the crisis and get on the right track.
Finally, I would like to stress that, regardless of what
the United Nations is doing, what matters most is for all
the political parties in Haiti to reflect on the current
problems and genuinely shoulder their responsibility to
the country and its people.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I would like to thank
Ms. Helen La Lime, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Haiti, and Ms. Emmanuela
Douyon for their informative briefings and
valuable work.
This has been a very challenging year for
Haiti — the assassination of President Moïse, the
horrific earthquake and the continuing impact of the
coronavirus disease pandemic. As a result, the political
and humanitarian crisis has only worsened. We are
concerned about the lack of progress on the political

S/PV. 8871

track. A worsening security situation will exacerbate
instability in Haiti and can also affect the stability of
the region.
It is high time for the political leaders in Haiti to take
action and put the country back on track. We take note
of the announcement by Prime Minister Ariel Henry to
hold a referendum to modify the country’s Constitution
by February and the plan to organize presidential and
legislative elections early next year. That is the key to
overcoming this long-lasting crisis.
We call on the authorities of Haiti to organize free,
fair and transparent elections. It is crucial to build
trust and create conditions for credible elections. We
urge all political actors and stakeholders to set aside
their differences in order to achieve a positive outcome
and find a solution to the crisis. Inclusive dialogue is
needed to move the political process forward and reach
a national consensus.
Another important element in regaining trust is
enhancing accountability and ensuring that all cases
of violence are properly investigated, including the
assassination of President Moïse. In that connection,
the security situation remains worrisome. This is a
consequence of the armed gangs’ criminal activities,
which need to be dealt with. We call on the authorities
to address the violence and put more effort into stopping
gang-related criminal activities. Measures need to be
taken to protect the lives of human rights defenders,
journalists and activists. Police forces need to be
strengthened so that they can respond more effectively
and offer greater protection to the Haitian people.
Any further displacement of the population must be
prevented.
We encourage the authorities to support establishing
an Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights in Haiti to safeguard continued
collaboration with State authorities on human rights
issues. It is important to maintain what has already
been achieved.
Haiti benefits from the presence of the United
Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH). I would
like to express Estonia’s strong support for BINUH’s
activities and the work of the Special Representative. We
believe that joint efforts by all stakeholders can bring
stability and sustainable development to the country.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I would like to echo others in

21-2728115/19

S/PV.8871

The question concerning Haiti

thanking Ireland for its extremely successful presidency
during the month of September and to extend my best
wishes to you, Mr. President, for a successful presidency
in October.
I would also like to thank Special Representative
La Lime and Ms. Douyon for their briefings, and I
welcome Mr. Claude Joseph, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Haiti, to today’s meeting.
The transition period that is now beginning,
following the assassination of President Jovenel Moïse,
is extremely perilous. Parliament has not been in
session for over a year and a half. State institutions are
in shambles. And only dialogue can help Haiti emerge
from this crisis.
I therefore call on all political actors to build
the necessary consensus to put in place an inclusive
Government that is able to organize electoral polls
in a peaceful climate. The 11 September agreement
between the executive and certain opposition parties is
a first step in reaching the goal of restoring the normal
functioning of State institutions.
The resurgence of gang violence threatens all
Haitians. Kidnappings and human rights violations
are on the rise. These gangs are acting with total
impunity. The Government must therefore devote more
resources to the Haitian National Police, which must
be irreproachable.
The investigation into the assassination of President
Jovenel Moïse must be completed. Its perpetrators must
be found and brought to justice. Haitians expect justice
to be done. The same holds true for the murder of
Monferrier Dorval and the massacres at Grand Ravine,
La Saline and Bel Air.
Corruption undermines institutions and destroys
the confidence of the population. There are 4 million
Haitians living in extreme poverty. The coronavirus
disease pandemic has ravaged the country. There have
been 400,000 doses of vaccine distributed; they must
now be used.
Faced with all those challenges, restoring security
must be a priority. In addition to providing essential
humanitarian assistance, the United Nations must
support reform of the police and the justice system in
the upcoming transition period.
Allow me to express once again France’s deep
sorrow at the toll of the earthquake that struck Haiti on
16/19

04/10/2021

14 August. We have mobilized to provide assistance to the
Haitian people by transporting 72 tons of humanitarian
cargo, and we will maintain our commitment.
Finally, I would like to commend the outstanding
work being done by the United Nations in Haiti under
extremely difficult circumstances. I reiterate our full
support for the United Nations Integrated Office in
Haiti, its mandate and the renewal thereof. France,
along with the European Union and the International
Organization of the Francophonie, stands alongside
Haiti to ensure a much-needed end to the crisis.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Haiti.
Mr. Joseph (Haiti) (spoke in French): First of all, I
would like to thank the Security Council for inviting me
to take part in this briefing on the question concerning
Haiti and, in doing so, giving me an opportunity to
share the views and observations of the Government
of Haiti with regard to the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Integrated Office in
Haiti (BINUH) (S/2021/828), which was just presented
by the Special Representative.
I would like to convey the deep appreciation and
gratitude of the Government of Haiti to the SecretaryGeneral for his commitment to Haiti and the Haitian
people, as evidenced by his most recent report, which
provides an objective and impartial account of the recent
events in the country. The report’s observations and
recommendations have been noted and meticulously
considered by the Government of the Republic of Haiti.
Allow me to take this opportunity to reiterate to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General my
warmest congratulations for her sense of responsibility,
her unfailing determination and the outstanding work
she is doing as the Head of BINUH.
The 7.2 magnitude earthquake killed more than
2,240 people in the southern region of Haiti, including
Dr. Ousmane Touré from the Republic of Guinea,
whose memory we pay tribute to. The earthquake also
injured 12,700 people, not to mention innumerable
material damage and the destruction of public and
private infrastructure. Only two days later, the equally
devastating consequences of Tropical Storm Grace
were seen in the same region of the country.
All those very complex problems added to the
devastating consequences of the coronavirus disease
pandemic on Haiti’s economic, social and health-care
21-27281

04/10/2021

The question concerning Haiti

structures. In the face of such adversity, the Haitian
people have shown great courage and resilience. I
would like to express my deep respect for them and for
the country’s Government.
The unfortunate events that I have just listed
have only exacerbated the sociopolitical crisis that
the Republic of Haiti has been experiencing for more
than three years, increasing its vulnerability and
jeopardizing its sustainable development, as outlined in
the Secretary-General in his report. The Government
that I have the honour to represent before the Security
Council is fully aware of that and is fully committed to
implementing, as far as possible, the recommendations
of the report — with, of course, the sustained support of
its friends and partners in the international community.
The Government is also aware of the importance
of all the challenges to be met and the magnitude of
the obstacles that hinder the economic and social
development of the nation. We are determined to forge
ahead and make progress on the structural reforms that
are necessary to improve democratic governance, to
fight against impunity and to strengthen the rule of law.
To achieve those goals, it is imperative that we
seek, in a proactive manner, to unite the Haitian family.
The decades of infighting, unproductive divisions,
hatred and rancour that followed the end of the Duvalier
dictatorship have had many harmful consequences,
including the fragmentation of the social fabric of the
country, chronic political instability, the fragmentation
of economic structures, the impoverishment of the
majority of the population, the decapitalization of
companies and capital flight and brain drain and the
worsening of inequalities. In the wake of this, the
unacceptable and irreparable happened on the night
of 6-7 July: the murder, in his private residence, of a
democratically elected President who was in office.
It is undoubtedly with the imperative of ensuring
national unity in mind that, since entering office as the
Prime Minister, Mr. Ariel Henry has devoted himself
to the search for the broadest possible consensus in
order to contribute to the normalization of political
life in Haiti and the regular functioning of democratic
institutions. That is how, following broad consultations
with stakeholders in the political class and civil society,
Mr. Henry concluded a political agreement in order
to put an end to those fratricidal divisions, which
fuel instability and violence. His efforts have begun
to produce results, with the signing on 11 September
of the political agreement for peaceful and effective

S/PV. 8871

governance during the interim period, involving more
than 200 political and civil society organizations.
We must capitalize on that agreement to make it
the basis for the broadest possible consensus in order
to create an environment conducive to the calming
of the sociopolitical climate in order to hold credible,
transparent and inclusive elections as soon as possible.
To that end, it is vital to ensure the spirit of selfsacrifice and go above and beyond the triumphs in
order to ensure that the higher interests of the nation
are at the forefront of our concerns and motivations.
I am proud to have given the example of going
above and beyond, at a crucial moment in national
life, by stepping down, without any coercion, from the
office of interim Prime Minister, after having made
a dignified contribution to the stabilization of the
State and the society following the heinous murder of
President Moïse, to make way for Prime Minister Ariel
Henry, in accordance with the last wishes of the late
President Moïse.
It is in that spirit of selflessness that I call on all those
who, like me, were close to the late President Moïse, to
facilitate the work of my Government, with the support
of our international partners, civil society actors and
even staunch opponents of President Moïse, within the
framework of a broad inter-Haitian agreement as the
only way to save our common homeland.
In parallel with that political track, which is a
high priority for Haiti, my Government attaches great
importance to the strengthening of the judicial system,
which must absolutely lead to the completion of the
investigation into the murder of President Moïse so that
justice can be served in accordance with the wishes
of his family, his allies and the vast majority of the
Haitian people.
The days and weeks that followed his death have
shown, and history will show in turn, that President
Moïse was assassinated for his ideas, for his dreams for
the Haitian people, for his commitment to a future that
celebrates all Haiti’s children.
The report gave clear focus to the assassination
of President Jovenel Moïse, a tragic political event
that, in conjunction with so many others, exacerbated
the multidimensional Haitian crisis and increased
uncertainty regarding the political future and the
crucial stabilization of the country.

21-2728117/19

S/PV.8871

The question concerning Haiti

The Secretary-General emphasized the security
measures taken by the then Government, which had the
lofty responsibility of ensuring the State’s continuity
in order to avert the chaos that certain prophets of
doom saw looming on the horizon or wished to see. It
must be acknowledged that countless efforts have been
undertaken on the ground in order to ensure progress
in the inquiry into the assassination of President Moïse.
However, the weaknesses of the Haitian judiciary
system, combined with the clearly transnational nature
of the crime, have not in any way helped the process and
conclusion of the inquiry, not to mention ensuring that
justice is done for that crime. With that in mind, judicial
cooperation is required to complete the investigation
and identify and punish the perpetrators. That request
was made once again by Haiti during the general debate
of the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session
(see A/76/PV.14). We would like that request to be duly
taken into account in order to send a clear message that
such acts are not tolerated by our international system.
In that same vein, the Haitian Government noted
the concerns expressed regarding the human rights
situation, which, according the Secretary-General, has
continued to worsen, including as a result of the clashes
between armed gangs and the attacks perpetrated
against the civilian population. In more general terms,
the Government wishes to reiterate its commitment to
guaranteeing the respect, protection and promotion
of human rights, without any discrimination, in
accordance with its commitments and obligations
under the relevant international and regional treaties on
human rights to which the Republic of Haiti is a party.
As the Secretary-General states in his report, the
efforts undertaken to reform the Haitian justice system
have continued in spite of the problems beleaguering
the judiciary as a result of the tragic events that have
befallen the country. Positive steps have been taken such
as the fact that the members of the Superior Council of
the Judiciary were recently sworn in and took up the
bench. Efforts are under way to improve conditions of
detention in penitentiaries, reduce prolonged pretrial
detention and, as a result, ease prison overcrowding.
Allow me to refer to the troubling and shocking
situation of the tens of thousands of Haitian compatriots
who regularly, to escape the harsh realities of their
situation, continue to flee Haitian shores to seek a better
life elsewhere. All present have likely seen in recent
weeks the horrific images of the atrocities that those
18/19

04/10/2021

Haitian men and women have experienced at the United
States-Mexican border. I must say that no one takes
the decision to leave this beautiful Caribbean country
lightly to seek a better life elsewhere, imperilling their
lives and often those of their children. All that we ask is
that they be treated with dignity and humanity.
Here I welcome the demonstrations of active
solidarity shown by American society towards Haitian
migrants at the United States-Mexico border. The
Haitian Government takes note of the repeated excuses
offered by the American authorities for the ill-treatment
inflicted on Haitian migrants at the border, and it
warmly congratulates the American Administration, in
particular President Biden, for the corrective measures
that have been taken.
In the same vein, we convey deep and sincere
thanks to the sister nation of Mexico for its efforts
towards and support for a regional solution to the issues
of migration through dialogue. The situation requires
not only a humanitarian solution but also calls for
cooperation to resolve those issues, which transcend by
far our respective borders.
The quest for a solution to the serious shortcomings
that for a long time have compromised the social,
political and economic stability of Haiti requires
the commitment and involvement of all national
stakeholders. The Government of the Republic is
committed to ensuring the participation of all. We also
have a dire need for a sustained, long-term commitment
on the part of the international community at all levels.
Haiti also requires the mobilization of technical
and financial resources in the long term to guarantee
the financial stability of the physical, social and
economic infrastructure that is vital to its sustainable
development. Hence the urgent need to create, in an
irreversible manner, the conditions necessary for the
long-term political and institutional stability of the
country that the Haitian people desperately want, and
that the international community earnestly desires.
At a time when the Council is preparing to renew
the mandate of BINUH, it must take account of the
new realities that the country is facing and of the
fact that the mandate must be adapted accordingly.
Consequently, the strengthening of the operational
capacities of security and law-enforcement institutions,
in particular the Haitian National Police, requires the
utmost attention.
21-27281

04/10/2021

The question concerning Haiti

In that respect, we express our wish that the
new BINUH mandate be focused essentially on the
strengthening of security in the fight against violence
by supporting the Government’s efforts in the spheres
of security, stabilization and the protection of civilians.
Those are all legitimate expectations on the part of
a people that has suffered enough as a result of gang
violence, kidnapping and widespread crime.
While acknowledging the limits of BINUH in
Haiti given its essentially advisory nature, we sincerely
hope that the Security Council will make the necessary

S/PV. 8871

adjustments to its mandate to help the Haitian authorities
to effectively tackle the grave situation of insecurity,
which is worsening day by day.
Allow me to conclude by launching a fervent
appeal to the international community in general and to
the United Nations system in particular to continue to
strengthen its support, in a spirit of solidarity, to Haiti
in order to help it to finally once again return to the
path of peace, security, political stability, progress and
economic and social development.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

21-2728119/19
