S/PV.8588

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8588th meeting

Monday, 29 July 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Meza-Cuadra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Peru)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Moriko
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Schulz/Ms. Nehring
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alotaibi
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Matjila
Ms. Pierce
Ms. Norman-Chalet

Agenda
The situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-23359 (E)
*1923359*

S/PV.8588

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

directly affected by clashes. The war has worsened
humanitarian conditions and hindered access to food,
health and other life-saving services.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Libya to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ghassan
Salamé, Special Representative and Head of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya.
Mr. Salamé is joining the meeting via videoteleconference from Tripoli.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Salamé and Ambassador Juergen
Schulz, Deputy Permanent Representative of Germany,
in his capacity as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya.
I now give the floor to Mr. Salamé.
Mr. Salamé: Allow also me to congratulate Peru
on its presidency of the Security Council this month.
Before beginning my briefing, I would like to pay
tribute to the late President of Tunisia, Mr. Béji Caïd
Essebsi. President Essebsi was a great supporter of
the United Nations and was an active and committed
partner to the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL) in its efforts to end the Libyan crisis
through Tunisia’s generous hosting of the Mission. I will
personally miss his wisdom, frankness and friendship.
He will be greatly missed. May he rest in peace.
The armed conflict in Libya shows no signs of
abating. The war around Tripoli has already left nearly
1,100 dead, including 106 civilians. Hundreds of
thousands of people have fled their homes in the capital
and neighbouring districts as a result of the fighting.
Tens of thousands have crossed the border to Tunisia,
seeking safety for their families. More than 100,000
men, women and children are immediately exposed to
the front lines, and there are over 400,000 more in areas
2/20

29/07/2019

Ignoring calls for de-escalation, the parties have
intensified air campaigns with precision air strikes
by aircraft and armed drones. The geographical scope
of the violence has also spread. For the first time, on
26 July, Government of National Accord (GNA) forces
launched an air attack on the main rear base of the
Libyan National Army (LNA) in the Jufra region. On
27 July, General Haftar’s forces launched air strikes
on a GNA airbase in Misrata. There is increased
recruitment and use of foreign mercenaries, alongside
the use of heavy weapons and ground attacks. Forces on
both sides have failed to observe their obligations under
international humanitarian law.
The most tragic example of indiscriminate attacks
was the air strike that hit a migrant detention centre in
Tajoura on 2 and 3 July, killing 53 and injuring at least
87, including children. What is even more appalling is
that the precise coordinates of the Tajoura detention
centre, and other such centres, were shared by the United
Nations with the parties following a previous incident
in May. While the vast majority of the fatalities were
due to the air strike, several victims were cruelly struck
down by those guarding the centre as they attempted to
flee. To make matters worse, following United Nationssupported efforts to move the migrants to more secure
locations, authorities have in recent days returned more
than 200 migrants to the bombed facility.
The tragedy of up to 150 migrant deaths at sea on
25 July again underlines the urgent need to address
the root causes of the migrant issue and migrants’
immediate suffering. The United Nations humanitarian
agencies have worked hard to mitigate the terrible
conditions in these detention centres. Over 5,000
refugees and migrants are currently being held at
detention centres run by a Government agency; some
3,800 of these persons are exposed to the fighting.
What is required is that these facilities be shuttered.
Towards this end, I urge the Council now to call upon
the authorities in Tripoli to take the long-delayed but
much-needed strategic decision to free those who are
detained in these centres. UNSMIL has devised a plan
for an organized and gradual closure of all detention
centres and seeks the Security Council’s support for
its implementation.
19-23359

29/07/2019

The situation in Libya

So far in 2019, nearly 4,500 refugees and migrants
have disembarked in Libya and faced serious risks of
detention, arbitrary arrest and being trapped by the
fighting. The international community can prevent
another tragedy. I urge European countries to respond to
the Secretary-General’s repeated pleas, revisit policies
and move migrants and refugees to safety.
I note with alarm the increasing frequency of attacks
on Mitiga airport, which serves as the only functioning
airport in the greater Tripoli area. Several of these
attacks have come perilously close to hitting civilian
aircraft with passengers on board. I am afraid that with
the almost daily bombardment, luck will run out. I call
upon the authorities in Tripoli to cease using the airport
for military purposes, and for the attacking forces to
immediately stop targeting it.
Pro-GNA forces retook the city of Gheryan on
26 June, located approximately 80 kilometres south
of Tripoli. It was a notable development, as Gheryan
was the first city that the LNA forces entered during
their march to Tripoli in April. There are unconfirmed
allegations that human rights abuses might have taken
place there, which we are now investigating. The recent
uptick in violence may worryingly presage a new
phase in the military campaign, but I do not believe
that will fundamentally alter the strategic stalemate.
The parties still believe that they can achieve their
objectives through military means. Prime Minister
Serraj and General Haftar have publicly reaffirmed
their commitment to a future political and electoral
process, but have yet to take practical steps to stop
the fighting. The LNA maintains that it will not stop
its attacks until Tripoli is conquered, while the GNA
forces insist that they can push General Haftar’s forces
back to eastern Libya.
Libya’s present and future need not be taken
hostage by the warring parties. While engaging with
political leaders and armed groups, UNSMIL is also
actively engaging a wide range of constituencies and
hosting second-track dialogues.
From 13 to 15 July, under the auspices of the
Egyptian Parliament, a meeting that brought together
72 members of the House of Representatives affirmed
the role of the House in a political solution to the Libyan
crisis and called for the formation of a Government of
national, unity without any mention of the need to cease
all hostilities. While I commend the efforts of those
who met in Cairo to seek an end to the conflict and

S/PV. 8588

form a unified Government, I urge them to reach out
to their fellow members of Parliament to forge a truly
national project. I discourage the trend of establishing
a parallel parliament in Tripoli.
In the same vein, I am troubled by the insistence
of authorities in eastern Libya to press forward with
the establishment of a municipal elections committee
parallel to the national body for municipal elections that
already exists. Efforts to delegitimize the work of the
national body short-change Libyan voters themselves,
given the paucity of expertise and resources available
to the parallel institutions, cause confusion at the local
level and, ultimately, impede the country’s fragile
transition to democracy.
The hatred and invective on social media and
satellite television stations is fuelling the violence on
the ground. I note that the owners and editors-in-chief
of those publications and television stations have invited
individuals who use despicable language of incitement,
aired and published calls to violence and assassinations,
spread intentionally false news and allowed ad hominem
attacks. I urge those who dwell in their self-contained
silos of enmity to cease spewing hatred and start talking
face-to-face with their compatriots.
Libya has become a terrain for experimentation
with new military technologies and recycling of old
weapons. Armed drones, armoured vehicles and pickup trucks fitted with heavy armaments, machine guns,
recoilless rifles and mortar and rocket launchers have
been recently transferred to Libya with the complicity,
and indeed outright support, of foreign Governments.
The weapons discovered after the retaking of Gheryan
illustrate the advanced systems that are provided. There
is no doubt that external support has been instrumental
in the intensification of air strikes.
I also note with concern that the imported weaponry
is being accompanied by foreign personnel working
as pilots, trainers and technicians. This reliance on
external support is a conflict driver. More than ever,
Libyans are now fighting the wars of other countries
that appear content to fight to the last Libyan and to
see the country entirely destroyed in order to settle
their own scores. Without the full cooperation of all
Member States regarding the implementation of the
measures related to the arms embargo in accordance
with resolution 2473 (2019), the flow of weapons to
Libya will continue to fuel this needless conflict.

19-233593/20

S/PV.8588

The situation in Libya

The security vacuum created by the conflict in
and around Tripoli continues to be exploited by Da’esh
in remote areas in the country’s southern and central
regions. Among other incidents, Da’esh claimed
responsibility on 2 June for a car-bomb attack in Derna
that resulted in 11 wounded.
Even more worrisome are the indications that the
arsenal of weapons being delivered by foreign supporters
to one side or the other is either falling into the hands of
terrorist groups or being sold to them. Some extremist
elements have sought legitimacy by joining the battle.
This is nothing short of a recipe for disaster, not only
for the safety and security of Libyans themselves but
also for that of Libya’s neighbours and for international
peace and security. It is high time the warring parties
cease all hostilities, redeploy their forces and focus on
the common threat before Libya becomes more of a safe
haven for terrorist organizations. While I can report that
recently our warnings have been heeded, the parties
must be urged to decisively dissociate themselves from
all violent extremist elements and actively prevent them
from joining the conflict.
While UNSMIL had to reduce its footprint in Libya
due to the security situation, I have decided that the
Mission should not leave Libya. That allows the United
Nations to respond to growing humanitarian needs and
human rights concerns and remain fully engaged with
all interlocutors regarding de-escalation of the fighting
and the resumption of the political process. Since the
start of the conflict in and around Tripoli, the United
Nations, in support of local efforts, has provided
humanitarian assistance to over 75,000 people.
However, I regret to report that only 30 per cent of the
$200 million requested under the 2019 humanitarian
response plan has been received to date.
The humanitarian community will be unable to
respond to increased needs and assist about 100,000
highly vulnerable people impacted by the conflict if no
additional funding is received. Critical infrastructure
and vital installations that provide water, electricity
and other essential services to the population have been
damaged by the war. With Libya already in peak demand
during the hot summer, deficits in water and electricity
supplies have been aggravated by the fighting and
deliberate attacks targeting the Great Man-Made River
facilities. While Libya’s oil continues to flow, the risks
to its continued production are as grave as those that
imperil the supply of water and electricity.
4/20

29/07/2019

Earlier this month, the National Oil Corporation
declared force majeure after valves in the Hamada
area were closed by an armed group. The Mission
used its good offices to facilitate a quick resolution
to the dispute; force majeure was lifted several days
later. The parallel eastern National Oil Corporation
continues its efforts to sell oil, in violation of Security
Council resolutions. There is a serious danger of the
weaponization of oil in this conflict, the consequences
of which would be disastrous to the Libyan economy.
The conflict situation has limited the ability of
Libyan authorities to meet the basic needs of the
population. International and national humanitarian
partners are providing emergency relief, including
in response to floods in Ghat in early June. I led an
exceptional humanitarian visit to Ghat on 13 June,
where United Nations agencies delivered emergency
food, water, sanitation supplies and other provisions
needed in the town.
The situation in the south of the country is dire,
with a rise in communal violence, particularly in the
city of Murzuq. Southern communities face terrible
fuel and electricity shortages and an absence of bank
notes, in addition to a renewed security vacuum and an
increase in terrorist attacks.
UNSMIL has re-established an operational
presence in the east, with the reopened United Nations
hub in Benghazi. My Deputy for political affairs
conducted an eight-day mission to the east, covering
1,000 kilometers and visiting five cities to demonstrate
UNSMIL’s commitment to serving all Libyans. We are
working hard to open a similar hub in Sebha, the capital
of the south.
In the course of the current fighting, serious
violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law have been committed by all parties.
Residential areas have been hit by indiscriminate
shelling and targeted air strikes. I am particularly
worried to see that health workers and facilities have
been repeatedly targeted, with 19 ambulances and four
health facilities struck, many medical doctors and health
workers killed, including five yesterday, and others
wounded. Impunity should not prevail, especially for
those who attack hospitals and ambulances. Protecting
civilians and humanitarian workers requires sanctions
against those committing crimes.
There has been an unacceptable spike in enforced
disappearances and arbitrary detentions since the
19-23359

29/07/2019

The situation in Libya

outset of hostilities. On 17 July, elected House of
Representatives member Siham Sergewa was violently
abducted from her home in Benghazi by an unknown
group. I have raised Ms. Sergewa’s case with the
authorities in the east, including yesterday with General
Haftar. Ms. Sergewa must be released immediately
and those responsible for her abduction must be held
accountable. Abductions have also risen at an alarming
rate in Tripoli, with numerous Government officials,
including the Deputy Director of the Food and Drug
Administration, being kidnapped by armed groups to
settle scores and extort ransoms.
Nearly four months into third war since 2011,
it should be abundantly clear to all that the risks of
either an open-ended low- intensity conflict or a full
escalation to outright war on the shores of the southern
Mediterranean are equally unacceptable. The decision
to stop the war cannot be postponed indefinitely. I
therefore submit the following three-part immediate
action to stop the conflict.
First, I call for a truce to be declared for Eid
Al-Adha, which will fall on or about 10 August. The
truce should be accompanied by confidence-building
measures between the parties, to include the exchange
of prisoners, the release of those arbitrarily detained or
abducted, and the exchange of mortal remains.
Secondly, following the truce, I request a highlevel meeting of concerned countries to cement the
cessation of hostilities, work together to enforce the
strict implementation of the arms embargo to prevent
the further flow of weapons to the Libyan theatre, and
promote strict adherence to international humanitarian
and human rights law by the Libyan parties.
Thirdly, the international meeting should be
followed by a Libyan meeting of leading and influential
personalities from all over the country to agree on
comprehensive elements for the way forward. Such a
consensus was on the verge of being built in the run-up
to the national conference in April. It is past time for
Libyans to end this long season of mutual suspicion, fear
and division. This triple action will require consensus
in the Council and among the Member States that exert
influence on the ground.
As for the Libyans, they need to listen to their
better angels. They are now fighting the wars of others
and in so doing destroying their country. Proposals
to revive political talks should be the basis for the
reunification of Libyan national institutions. I believe

S/PV. 8588

that a comprehensive solution to the Libyan conflict
will require tackling the underlying drivers of what is
ultimately, though not exclusively, a war over resources.
The solution, therefore, will need to factor in muchneeded structural economic reform and an equitable
method to distribute the country’s vast wealth.
We have taken a step forward in reinvigorating
the audit of the Central Bank and its parallel eastern
branch, which will be vital in promoting the unification
of the bank and increasing transparency on how
national funds are being spent. We have also devised
concrete proposals to allow the largest number of
Libyans to benefit from oil income, replacing predation
with fairness and self-interested disbursement with
welfare for all. Robust efforts will also be required to
combat the smuggling of people, fuel, weapons and
drugs — sources of wealth for the armed groups and
associated criminal elements.
Measures must also be taken to combat the rampant
corruption that has infested almost all elements of
the State. Economic reform should be coupled with
comprehensive reform of the security sector that
would allow the Libyan authorities to fight terrorism
and secure the country’s borders. Structural security
issues, namely, the fragmentation of armed groups
and the proliferation of small arms, combined with
the absence of a unified and professional army, have
not been addressed since the fall of the former regime.
The Libyan State cannot be effective without having
an undisputed monopoly over force of arms. That will
require collection of weapons outside of the control
of the State and clear civilian oversight over the
security structures.
Much of the groundwork for these efforts was laid
during the military unification talks sponsored by the
Egyptian Government, in addition to the UNSMIL
supported steps taken, following last September’s
violence in Tripoli, to reinforce and reform the Interior
Ministry. We urgently need to revive that momentum.
Stopping the war will require the will of the
parties and the support of the international community.
Should the parties agree to silence the guns, the United
Nations and international partners should stand ready
to provide material and technical support, enabling
the parties to negotiate a comprehensive agreement on
cessation of hostilities and appropriate mechanisms for
its implementation and monitoring.

19-233595/20

S/PV.8588

The situation in Libya

Since the outbreak of the conflict, national
Governments and regional organizations have called
on the Libyan parties to stop the fighting and resume
the political process. For that, I am deeply appreciative
of the efforts of the African Union, the European Union
and the League of Arab States. People in Libyan cities
stop me to convey a clear message. The majority of
Libyans believe that it is now time for the Security
Council to join this chorus and decisively call for an
end to this needless war before it grows into a fullblown civil war with serious, potentially existential
consequences for Libya and its neighbours.
Almost 70 years ago, the United Nations decided
to create an independent Libya. This organ bears a
particular responsibility to ensure that Libya does not
fracture into weak and unstable pieces but remains
the collected strength of the Libya that united in 1951.
Only with the imprimatur of the Security Council can
we, together, help the Libyans move past this dark
and violent episode and towards a more hopeful and
promising future.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Salamé for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Schulz.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): In accordance with
paragraph 24 (e) of resolution 1970 (2011), of 26 February
2011, I have the honour to report to the Security Council
on the work of the Committee established by the same
resolution. The report covers the period from 22 May
to 29 July, during which time the Committee held two
informal consultations.
In informal consultations on 31 May, the
Committee received a briefing from the Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Political
Affairs in Libya, United Nations Support Mission in
Libya, on issues relevant to the work of the Committee,
particularly relating to the arms embargo. That was
followed by an exchange of views. Thereafter, the
Committee heard a presentation by the Coordinator
of the Panel of Experts on the Panel’s interim report,
as well as information gathered by the Panel since the
submission of that report to the Committee on 2 May.
The members of the Committee also discussed the
recommendations contained in the interim report. Of
the six recommendations addressed to the Committee,
they subsequently agreed to take action on four.
Three of the four agreed follow-up actions aim at
more effective sanctions implementation, whereas one
6/20

29/07/2019

focuses specifically on more effective implementation
of the measures aimed at preventing illicit exports of
petroleum, including crude oil and refined petroleum
products, from Libya.
I will not summarize the findings of the
recommendations of the Panel, as the interim report
was submitted to the Security Council on 12 June. As
an agreed follow-up action, on 17 July the Committee
dispatched a note verbale to all Member States,
reminding them of their obligation to implement all
sanctions measures of the sanctions regime established
by the Security Council in relation to Libya.
Since the submission of its interim report, the Panel
of Experts has also submitted updates to the Committee
on its investigations concerning reported violations of
the arms embargo, the most recent of which contained
a preliminary case study on the air strike in Tajoura on
2 and 3 July. One communication from the Panel drew
the Committee’s attention to the future possibility of
non-compliance with the measures aimed at preventing
illicit exports of petroleum.
On 21 June the Committee held joint informal
consultations with the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan and
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015) concerning South Sudan to discuss the presence
of Darfuri armed groups in Libya and South Sudan, as
well as a common approach to address the issue. That
was the second such meeting, the first having been held
in November 2017. The three relevant Panels of Experts
also participated in the discussion.
The Committee has been dealing with guidance
requests from Member States — one on the scope of
the arms embargo, which is still under consideration,
and another on the applicability of the assets freeze
measures in relation to a particular entity.
With respect to the travel ban, the Committee
is considering an exemption request, pursuant to
paragraph 16 (a) of resolution 1970 (2011), for Ms. Aisha
Qadhafi. Furthermore, the Committee determined that
the continued presence, beyond 23 May, of Mr. Qadhaf
Al-Dam in Egypt, in the absence of an approved
extension of the exemption by the Committee, was
in non-compliance with the travel ban measure.
Previously, Libya, as the country of nationality, had
sought such extensions from the Committee. The
Committee would like to highlight that for individuals
also subject to an assets freeze who seek to travel, the
19-23359

29/07/2019

The situation in Libya

Council has provided for exemptions in paragraph 19
of resolution 1970 (2011) and that the Committee has
elaborated corresponding exemption procedures in
its guidelines.
In connection with the sanctions list, I would like
to note that, as of 3 July, the Committee is considering
proposals, submitted by a Member State, for the
designation of three individuals involved in a criminal
network that illicitly exploits crude oil and other natural
resources in Libya.
Finally, in my previous report to the Security
Council (see S/PV. 8530), I had referred to the arrest
and detention in Tunisia of a member of the Panel of
Experts, Mr. Moncef Kartas, on 26 March. I am pleased
to note that, via an update of 22 May, the Secretariat
informed the Committee that a Tunisian appeals court
had decided to release Mr. Kartas from detention. The
Committee continues to follow the case, which has
legally not been concluded, and looks forward to a
further update from the Secretariat in due course on
the status of the legal proceedings in Tunisia against
Mr. Kartas, while recalling resolution 2441 (2018),
paragraph 16, which “urges all States ... to cooperate
fully with the Committee and the Panel”, as well as the
1946 Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of
the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ambassador Schulz for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Once again I thank
the Special Representative for his briefing and for the
continued determination of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya to help de-escalate the situation in
Libya and facilitate a return to the United Nationsled process.
This morning we heard a grave and alarming
analysis of a descent into violent chaos and the risk
of the disintegration of a country, as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General alluded to. I
think that we all recognize that the coming weeks will
be vital for Libya. For our part, we stand steadfast in
support of United Nations leadership and Mr. Salamé’s
efforts to bring about a transition from violence to a
renewed political process.
I will keep my remarks brief because we have
consultations after this meeting. I just wanted to draw

S/PV. 8588

attention to a few areas before getting on to what the
Special Representative said about a truce.
We again call on all United Nations Member
States to fully respect their obligations to contribute
to Libya’s peace and stability, to prevent destabilizing
arms shipments and to safeguard Libya’s oil resources,
all in accordance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions. As was said, it is obvious that the parties
continue to receive external support and arms
shipments, which further fuels the conflict. Once more
the United Kingdom calls on all Member States to
respect international law and on the Security Council
to take reports of violations very seriously. I thank
the German Ambassador for his report as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya.
The humanitarian cost continues to be of
enormous concern. I will not repeat what the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General said, but
I think that we really need to find a way to protect
migrants and refugees travelling along the central
Mediterranean route. We need to find a way to protect
those in detention centres within Libya itself. We have
discussed before in the Council the 2-3 July attack on
the Tajoura detention centre.
I want to reiterate what the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General said about
the parties disassociating themselves from violent
extremist elements and about hatred and invective
fuelling violence.
Turning to his three-part proposal for an Eid
al-Adha truce, accompanied by confidence-building
measures, and for a high-level meeting of concerned
countries, to be followed by an internal Libya meeting.
Those are obviously very important elements that come
at a very critical time. I think that the Council will want
to discuss them in some detail and work out how best
the Council can enhance the United Nations efforts. So
I will leave it there but look forward to picking up these
important points in consultations.
Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America):
My remarks will also be brief as we look forward to
discussing these issues in consultations. But I wanted
to thank Special Representative Salamé for his briefing
to the Security Council today and for the serious and
pressing issues that he has raised. We continue to support
his leadership as he works to create the conditions for
a resumption of the United Nations political process.

19-233597/20

S/PV.8588

The situation in Libya

As he highlighted, continued fighting in Tripoli,
now in its fourth month, is creating opportunities for
terrorists to regroup, threatening the stability of Libya’s
oil production and fuelling a worsening humanitarian
situation. We have called for a ceasefire and urged for
the prompt return to a United Nations-mediated political
process, and we call on all sides to work constructively
with the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and UNSMIL to achieve a long-overdue
political solution to the conflict. As we have said
repeatedly in this Chamber, lasting peace and stability
in Libya will come only through a political solution.
Finally, we want to express our once thanks once
again for the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Salamé, Deputy Special Representative
Williams, who is joining us in New York today, and the
entire UNSMIL and country team on the ground for
their work.
Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ghassan Salamé for his briefing and the Deputy
Permanent Representative of Germany for his briefing
on the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
Let me first reiterate France’s full support for
the Special Representative and the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, which are working tirelessly
to find a political solution to the Libyan conflict. In
particular, I echo the Special Representative’s call for
a humanitarian truce coinciding with the Eid Al-Adha
holiday and the resumption of political dialogue.
First, I note the stalemate of the situation on the
ground and the risk of escalation, which remind us
of the urgent need for a lasting and unconditional
ceasefire. The latest developments are worrisome. As
the fighting enters its fifth month, it is ramping up and,
as of now, is posing the threat of a major escalation. As
President Macron recalled, the situation in Libya is a
humanitarian priority.
Since the beginning of April, the fighting has
killed more than 1,000 people and displaced more than
120,000. The 2-3 July bombing of Tajoura detention
centre, which killed more than 50 people and wounded
130, which the Council unanimously condemned,
once again highlighted the particular vulnerability
of migrants and refugees. In such circumstances, it is
urgent that the Libyan authorities end their systematic
detention and comply with international humanitarian
8/20

29/07/2019

law. It is imperative that civilian infrastructure not be
used for military purposes and that civilians, including
migrants, not be used as human shields, in violation of
the principle of distinction. All of that jeopardizes the
political and diplomatic efforts led by Ghassan Salamé
and erodes the prospect of exiting the political crisis.
The only ones who benefit from the continued
fighting are terrorist and criminal groups, as evidenced
by the presence of radical elements in several areas of
fighting, including individuals who have been listed by
the Council. The recent attacks claimed by Da’esh in
the south and the centre of the country are yet another
illustration of that phenomenon. It is imperative that
Libyan actors disassociate themselves in no uncertain
terms from terrorist groups, both in their public
statements and through their actions on the ground. It
is equally important to initiate serious efforts, under
the auspices of the United Nations, with regard to the
economic, financial and monetary governance of Libya.
Finally, violations of the arms embargo to the
benefit of the parties are fuelling the escalation under
way. They must stop. In order to prevent the situation
from further deteriorating, the parties must respond to
the call of Special Representative Salamé and accept
a humanitarian truce, with no preconditions or time
limits, to coincide with the Eid Al-Adha holiday on
10 August. Such a truce could pave the way towards
achieving a lasting ceasefire with credible guarantees
and international supervision.
In that context, it is urgent to act to foster the
resumption of political dialogue and to being working
immediately on confidence-building measures. The
parties must agree on the parameters for ending the
crisis. This past February, in Abu Dhabi, they agreed on
the principles of institutional unification, necessarily
leading to the formation of a transitional Government
with a view towards the holding of elections. The Abu
Dhabi parameters remain valid. They must be matched
with economic and financial reforms, the prioritized,
swift implementation of the transparent governance of
the Central Bank of Libya, reform of the management
of oil revenue and the consolidation of financial
institutions to the benefit of all Libyans. France calls on
the Libyan parties to resume discussions on that basis,
under the auspices of the Special Representative.
In conclusion, I recall the central role of the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative in
reaching a settlement to the conflict, with the support
19-23359

29/07/2019

The situation in Libya

of the Security Council. There is no military solution
to the Libyan crisis. The implementation of a ceasefire
and the relaunching of the political process are the
only way forward. That assessment is shared by the
members of the Council and we must unite our efforts
to achieve those goals. That is why we are in favour of
the Council expressing its support for the efforts of the
Special Representative to see the parties reach a lasting
ceasefire, comply fully with the arms embargo and
relaunch the political process.
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
At the outset, let me thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Salamé for his briefing. I
commend his work and that of the entire staff of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya, operating
in a particularly difficult environment. I also thank
Ambassador Schulz for his briefing.
As the Special Representative just underlined,
the situation in Tripoli remains of great concern.
Libyan civilians, migrants and, more generally, the
most vulnerable persons are suffering on a daily basis
as a result of the fighting. The ongoing tragedy of
migrants off the Libyan coast must call us to address
that challenge. It is high time that the protection of
civilians became a genuine concern of the warring
parties. Belgium calls in particular on the parties to
refrain from committing grave violations involving
children, including through their recruitment and use
in armed conflict.
Belgium also commends the courage of medical
and humanitarian personnel who are paying a high price
for their commitment. Attacks on medical facilities,
such as that reported yesterday to the south of Tripoli,
constitute clear violations not only of international
law but also of resolution 2286 (2016). In that regard,
Belgium reiterates once again that those guilty of serious
violations of international humanitarian law and, more
generally, those who threaten achieving peace in Libya
must be held accountable for their actions. All military
and civilian leaders exercising effective control,
authority and command over their subordinates could
be held criminally responsible for crimes committed
by their subordinates and prosecuted before national
courts or the International Criminal Court.
The security vacuum that has been created, in
particular in the southern part of Libya, has been
exploited by terrorist groups. The pursuit of the military
option will only lead to further chaos and the lasting

S/PV. 8588

destabilization of the country. It is already threatening
to completely undo the political progress made over the
past two years. Belgium calls on the parties to return
unconditionally to the negotiating table. I urge them to
engage in good faith and constructively on the proposals
and ideas put forward by the Special Representative.
The urgent need for a ceasefire remains as relevant as
ever and rumours of a new offensive around Tripoli
are alarming. In that regard, Belgium stresses the
importance of the meaningful and equal participation
of women to achieve an inclusive and lasting solution.
Finally, Belgium calls for strict compliance by
all with the arms embargo adopted by the Council.
Violations of the embargo have the effect of prolonging
the conflict and the suffering of the Libyan people.
Accordingly, it is worth highlighting the essential work
carried out by the Panel of Experts on Libya established
pursuant to resolution 1973 (2011), with which the
Council has urged all States to cooperate fully.
The main Libyan actors continue to opt for the
military solution. Warlike rhetoric is not abating,
fighting and violations of the arms embargo continue,
international humanitarian law is being violated and the
use by both sides of Security Council-listed terror and
criminal elements is not being taken seriously. It appears
as though no one is genuinely interested in establishing
a ceasefire and returning to political dialogue. In part,
that is also due to the Council remaining silent for
too long. I therefore hope that we will soon be able to
express our opinion by adopting a resolution to ensure
that no one in Libya doubts the will and determination
of the Security Council.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank and support Mr. Salamé
and his team. We also thank Ambassador Schulz for
his briefing.
The Dominican Republic demands an immediate
ceasefire and a return to political dialogue. For us, it is
essential that the violence and abuses against civilians
stop. Over the past four months, more than 1,100 people
have died. The Council must listen when we say that it
must stop. Enough is enough.
We are appalled by the reckless and indiscriminate
attacks on hospitals, airports, residential areas, relief
vehicles and migrant centres. The cowardly attack on
a hospital two days ago killed doctors and seriously
injured rescue personnel and civilians. We call on the
aggressor forces to commit to protecting civilians and

19-233599/20

S/PV.8588

The situation in Libya

civilian infrastructure and to allowing humanitarian
access to the areas affected by the conflict, without
discrimination. We demand respect for international
humanitarian law and human rights.
The plight of migrants and refugees is equally
discouraging. The recent and regrettable shipwreck
in the Mediterranean that claimed the lives of dozens
of people and the most recent bombardment of the
Tajoura detention centre underscore the vulnerability
of those groups and the need for dignified responses
to them. We welcome the promising solidarity plan put
forward in Europe by France and Germany to relocate
arbitrarily detained migrants and refugees. We hope
that a greater number of European countries will be
committed to the cause, in particular those close to the
crisis. We also hope for the definitive closure in Libya
of all centres where thousands of migrants still live. In
addition, we urge the Libyan authorities to cooperate
with the International Criminal Court and the Office of
the Prosecutor, Ms. Bensouda, so as to bring to justice
those involved in atrocity crimes committed against the
Libyan people in the recent past.
The shameless transgression of the provisions of
the arms embargo established by the Security Council
is a matter that we will not allow to go unnoticed. It
continues to fuel tensions and perpetuate conflict.
Despite the limited resources available to the parties
only a few months ago, we have recently seen a
considerable increase in their capabilities, in particular
those that allow them to conduct air strikes. The flagrant
involvement of third parties in Libya is blatant. The
use of increasingly sophisticated and lethal weaponry
is boldly promoted. Artillery drones, precision-guided
missiles, portable anti-attack weapons, armoured
personnel carriers, war tanks, helicopters and rocket
launchers are flaunted in the media and on social
networks. It is clear that the only outcome for those who
are determined to follow a perverse path of destruction
and death will be to make fools of themselves and,
subsequently, be tried for war crimes.
Lastly, the past has left wounds that shape the
way in which the Council views and approaches the
situation in Libya. However, it appears that the time
has come for us to reconsider some of the provisions of
resolution 1973 (2011) in order to protect civilians and
areas inhabited by civilians, reduce the war-making
capabilities of the parties and bring them back to the
negotiating table, maintain Libya’s unity and ensure
genuine reconciliation.
10/20

29/07/2019

I would like to conclude by reminding the Libyan
people of Mr. Salamé’s words:
(spoke in English)
Libyans are now fighting the wars of others.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ghassan Salamé for his briefing on recent developments
in Libya.
I also thank Ambassador Juergen Schulz for
his briefing on the ongoing work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011)
concerning Libya.
We are deeply saddened by the tragic news of a
shipwreck off the coast of Libya last week, where 150
people may have lost their lives. Together with the attack
on the Tajoura detention centre on 2 and 3 July, which
resulted in the killing of 53 refugees and migrants, those
events have again exposed the weaknesses of Libya’s
system of managing irregular migration. Therefore,
we call on the international community to support the
Libyan authorities in developing solutions to create
safe and dignified alternatives to detention, in full
compliance with international humanitarian standards
and with respect for human rights.
The delivery of humanitarian services to people
in need in Libya remains a significant challenge in
the current complex political and security situation.
Security restrictions and the denial of humanitarian
access by parties to the conflict to people in need are
major challenges. In that regard, we call on all parties to
the conflict to allow safe and unimpeded humanitarian
access to people in need in Libya, including to prisons
and detention centres, for the delivery of basic services.
Attacks on schools and hospitals have a significant
impact on children, hampering their chances to
continue their education, as well as their access to
life-saving health care. Therefore, we urge all parties
to the conflict to protect schools and hospitals from
attacks during hostilities, in line with their obligations
under international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.
We are gravely concerned about the continued
violation of the arms embargo. In that regard, the strict
implementation of the embargo should be maintained.
In conclusion, let me confirm Poland’s position that
the conflict in Libya should be resolved by peaceful
19-23359

29/07/2019

The situation in Libya

means. I would also like to fully support all efforts
taken by Special Representative Ghassan Salamé
and the United Nations Support Mission in Libya,
under challenging circumstances, aimed at finding a
comprehensive political solution to the current crisis.
We are also looking forward to our discussion during
consultations concerning Mr. Salamé’s suggestion.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We deeply thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Ghassan Salamé for his
detailed and worrisome briefing about the military and
political situation in Libya.
We thank Ambassador Schulz for his update on
the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya. We appreciate
the work of the delegation of Germany as Chair of
that Committee.
Mr. Salamé’s briefing clearly revealed that the
military and political continues to deteriorate. The
number of dead, wounded and internally displaced
persons is on the rise. Urban infrastructure is collapsing.
Terrorists are rearing their heads, not to mention the
worsening problem of migration. New dividing lines
are being created and there is an emerging risk of the
country disintegrating altogether.
Let us state frankly that what is taking place is
the destruction of Libyan statehood as a result of
the well-known events that occurred in 2011. Libya
should serve as a reminder of the inadmissibility of
continuing geopolitical experiments. From the very
beginning of the conflict, we have called for regional
and international efforts to focus on the unification of
Libya, including with the aim of consolidating the fight
against terrorism.
Today, the situation in this area is much worse. The
transferral process of jihadists from Iraq and Syria has
begun, which could turn Libya into one of the major
bases of terrorism in North Africa. Russia has never
had and will never have a hidden agenda with regard to
the Libyan conflict. We support and value our contacts
with all parties, explaining to them our position in
favour of a political settlement. To all our Libyan
interlocutors, we have stressed the fact that only the
United Nations and the Special Representative can play
a central role in this process.
We highly appreciate the efforts of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya and the courageous

S/PV. 8588

and selfless work of the Special Representative,
Mr. Salamé. We support his programme for resolving
the crisis, especially since it includes a key element
that we have supported for many years: the urgent
consolidation of the positions of external players.
The Special Representative’s briefing today, as
well as the statement delivered in recent Council
consultations by the High Commissioner for Refugees,
Mr. Filippo Grandi, confirms that the migrants are in
a terrible situation, to say the least. We have said many
times that, in order to solve the problem of migration,
we must not fight the migrants themselves but rather
spare no effort in the rehabilitation and recovery of
problematic regions. People will then be able to return
home themselves.
A comprehensive approach is required to solve the
issue of the illegal proliferation of weapons in Libya,
taking into account the fact that the current situation in
this area arises from a flagrant violation of the relevant
provisions of resolution 1973 (2011). We call on all
parties to abandon any unilateral agenda in order to
come together under the auspices of the United Nations
to launch political negotiations that will unite the
country and enable Libyans to develop their own State
and independently manage the wealth of their country.
Once again, we look favourably upon Mr. Salamé’s
programme for overcoming the crisis. We understand
that it can be implemented only if the key external
actors all play according to the same rules.
Mr. Moriko (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation thanks Mr. Ghassan Salamé, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL),
for his briefing, enlightening the Council about the
security, humanitarian and political challenges the
country faces. We also thank Ambassador Juergen
Schulz, Chair of the Committee established in 1970
(2011), concerning Libya, for presenting its thirty-fifth
periodic report.
On 21 May, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General drew the Council’s attention to
the consequences of the clashes between the troops
of General Khalifa Haftar and the forces of the
Government of National Accord, led by Prime Minister
Faiez Serraj (see S/PV.8530). More than two months
after the beginning of hostilities for control of the
capital, Tripoli, the Libyan crisis is more than ever at

19-2335911/20

S/PV.8588

The situation in Libya

an impasse and does not appear to offer any prospects
for a settlement in the short term.
Like other members of the Security Council, Côte
d’Ivoire has always expressed its deep concern about
the consequences of the fighting on the security and
humanitarian fronts, as well as on the political process
to resolve the crisis in Libya. Indeed, the military
escalation centred around Tripoli has left more than
1,000 dead and 5,000 wounded, including nearly
400 civilians.
My delegation calls on all Member States to strongly
protest against the plight of sub-Saharan migrants, who
are victims of all kinds of abuses and violations of their
rights in detention centres. Fifty-three of them died on
2and 3 July in the bombing of the Tajoura detention
centre. Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its strong condemnation
of that attack and calls for a credible and independent
investigation in order to bring the perpetrators of these
acts before the appropriate courts, in accordance with
international law. My country also earnestly hopes that
migrants rescued from Libya’s coastline will be treated
with dignity and that their repatriation to their countries
of origin, with their consent, will be conducted in close
collaboration with specialized United Nations agencies
in accordance with international norms.
The proven deliveries of arms to parties to the
conflict, in flagrant violation of the arms embargo,
remain a source of deep concern for my country,
especially as they are fuelling a conflict whose
stalemate is preventing a ceasefire and the immediate
resumption of inter-Libyan dialogue. In this regard,
Côte d’Ivoire calls for the effective implementation
of resolution 2473 (2019), adopted unanimously on
10 June, which prescribes the strict implementation
of the arms embargo on the high seas off the coast of
Libya. We also call for a rapid political settlement to
the current crisis in order to allow State authority to
extend throughout national territory so as to prevent the
dangerous and unremitting sanctuarization of areas for
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in some parts
of the country.
While recalling the primary responsibility of the
Security Council to maintain of international peace
and security, Côte d’Ivoire encourages Mr. Ghassan
Salamé to further cooperate with the African Union,
in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations and the strategic framework for
conflict resolution that was signed on 19 April 2017.
12/20

29/07/2019

In this respect, my delegation recalls the communiqué
issued by the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union following its meeting on 5 July, underlining the
central role played by that continental organization
and its readiness to work in close collaboration with
the countries of the region to find lasting solutions
to the crisis in Libya. I also take this opportunity to
echo the concerns expressed by the African Union
High-Level Committee on Libya regarding persistent
external interference that undermines efforts to achieve
a ceasefire and launch a fruitful dialogue, which are the
conditions for restoring peace and stability.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reaffirms its support
for the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Ghassan Salamé, as well as all UNSMIL
personnel, for their commitment to finding solutions
to the multiple challenges Libya is facing. My country
remains convinced that, however complex they may be,
the challenges that stand in the way of peace and stability
in Libya can be overcome through strong national
ownership of the political process to end the crisis and
resolute support from the international community.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I will be
brief in my statement, given that we will be continuing
our discussion in consultations after the meeting.
I would like to begin by thanking Special
Representative Ghassan Salamé, as well as Ambassador
Juergen Schulz, Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya,
for their briefings.
Mr. Salamé outlined for us the tragedy following
the unprecedented confrontations in Tripoli, as well as
the damage caused to civilian buildings. That shows
that the situation is clearly out of control. It is important
to respect the arms embargo on Libya pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011). The raging war among those
who are linked by land, brotherhood and religion
reflects one of the chronic fractures in Libya arising
from the violation of so many agreements.
One of the most serious points raised is the
proliferation of hate speech and its echo on social
networks. That is a mushrooming danger, deeply rooted
in the soil of war. Words are distorted. The sons of the
same country turn against one another. Good offices
are subverted. As the Arab proverb goes, one must
watch one’s words in order to avoid such confrontation.
19-23359

29/07/2019

The situation in Libya

Upholding the mechanisms to monitor hate speech
on the Internet is part of the work of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), which is operating
in very difficult and critical conditions. Mr. Salamé
mentioned the humanitarian suffering caused by the
intensity of the recent armed confrontations. The most
severely affected are the most vulnerable, namely,
the illegal migrants in detention centres. We recall
the attack on the Tajoura detention centre, which was
condemned by the Security Council on 5 July. We
call on all concerned to ensure the safe provision of
humanitarian assistance to those in need of it, free from
any obstacles.
Once again, we reiterate that there is no military
solution. As the Eid Al-Adha festival draws near, we
call on all parties to respect international humanitarian
law and international human rights law and to not
attack civilians or civilian infrastructure. Peaceful
solutions must be underscored; violence must be
rejected. UNSMIL’s appeals must be heard. We support
what Mr. Salamé said and the ideas that he explained
earlier this morning.
We also note the increase in the activities of
terrorist groups, which are making the most of current
terrorist activities and striking civilian installations.
Such terrorist activities call for the Security Council
to condemn them and provide the necessary support to
Libyan authorities to respond to such challenges, which
undermine regional stability and international security.
Lastly, with a view to reaching a comprehensive
political solution, we commend the efforts of
Mr. Salamé and call on the Libyan parties to work
together to reach a peaceful political settlement of
their differences and to work in earnest to achieve
the necessary political and security conditions of the
agreements reached in Paris, Palermo and Abu Dhabi
to hold transparent, comprehensive and peaceful
presidential and parliamentary elections with a view to
achieving a unified and stable Libya.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): Our delegation joins others in expressing
our appreciation to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), Mr. Ghassan
Salamé, for his comprehensive briefing, and offers
him our complete and unwavering support for his
work, especially during this very difficult time in the
situation in Libya. We also thank Ambassador Schulz,

S/PV. 8588

in his capacity as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya,
for his briefing.
Allow me to express Equatorial Guinea’s solidarity
with the Libyan people. We are troubled by the situation
in our brotherly country, and we reiterate the call made
by President Obiang Nguema Mbasogo of the Republic
for unity among Libyans themselves. They must put
national interests before their own in order to end to
the crisis, which is impeding the development of that
great country.
We are steadfast in our conviction that there is no
military solution in Libya; dialogue is the only option for
resuming the national conference, which was supposed
to be held from 14 to 16 April, under the auspices of
UNSMIL, and would have led to the holding of credible
and transparent elections to restore the mechanisms for
peace and national reconciliation.
In line with the communiqué of the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union issued on 5 July,
as well as the African Union High-Level Committee
on Libya held on 7 July, we would like to express our
concern over the humanitarian situation in the country,
particularly the situation of migrants and refugees
being held in detention centres in inhumane and
appalling conditions. In that regard, we again condemn
the 2-3 July attack on the Tajoura detention centre,
which claimed the lives of 53 people and wounded
another 130. In that regard, we hope that the relevant
investigations will be conducted and the perpetrators
brought to account.
We are deeply concerned over the number of
internally displaced persons and the hundreds of
migrants who have lost their lives off the coast of Libya.
Just a few days ago, we learned that dozens of people
perished when they tried to cross the Mediterranean,
which constituted one of the deadliest tragedies of the
year. Such facts call for the international community’s
utmost attention to find a solution to save the innocent
lives of those seeking a better future. Migrants seeking
a safe place to live and a better future for themselves
and their families are not criminals or terrorists; they
are people who deserve decent and respectful treatment.
We understand that at this stage, and given that the
situation is deteriorating, it is important to consider
the role played by the Security Council and the
necessary, real and transparent international support
that the Libyan people deserve. In that regard, we again

19-2335913/20

S/PV.8588

The situation in Libya

emphasize the need for close cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union in addressing
the conflict by promoting dialogue and reconciliation,
taking into account the importance of the work of
neighbouring countries, which is crucial.
We reiterate the call to uphold the unity, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Libya and condemn all
external interference in the internal affairs of Libya,
as such interference only undermines any progress in
attempts to reach a ceasefire and restore a solid and
lasting peace.
A Security Council with hands folded and bound
together does not contribute to solving the problem,
but instead indicates permissiveness. From our point
of view, that is not the message that we should be
sending to the world, much less to the thousands of
families who are suffering in the barbaric conflict
that is claiming hundreds of lives. It erodes credibility
and effectiveness of this decision-making body of the
United Nations, despite the repeated calls made by the
Secretary-General.
To conclude our statement, we therefore call for an
immediate ceasefire and a return to the political process
of peaceful negotiations. The implications of the Libyan
conflict go beyond Libyan territory, wreaking havoc
in several countries in the region. We are thinking of
the consequences that this conflict — with the massive
influx of weapons used — will have in the short and
medium term in the regions of West Africa, East Africa,
Central Africa and Southern Africa.
On the other hand, the recent deterioration of the
situation and the increase in violence in Libya, causing
the alarming numbers of deaths that Mr. Salamé has just
cited for us, demonstrates once again the urgent need
for the arms embargo imposed on Libya to be respected.
States must fully respect and comply with the embargo
adopted by the Security Council in order to fully curb
the influx of weapons of all kinds — sophisticated,
recycled and cutting-edge — as Mr. Salamé also just
clearly described to us, which are being used against
civilian centres and the civilian population. That is why
we welcome the recent resolution 2473 (2019), in the
hope that this time it can have a real and enforceable
deterrent effect.
We offer our deepest condolences to the Libyan
people and to the families of all the victims of
this conflict.
14/20

29/07/2019

Mr. Matjila (South Africa): Needless to say,
South Africa shares the sentiments expressed by the
representatives of Côte d’Ivoire and Equatorial Guinea
on the situation in Libya. In addition, I would like
to welcome and thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Ghassan Salamé, for his
enlightening briefing, and I also thank the Deputy
Permanent Representative of Germany, Ambassador
Schulz, for his comprehensive update on the work of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya.
At the outset, I wish to express my delegation’s
concern with the continued air strikes and
indiscriminate artillery use in densely populated areas
in Libya, which has resulted in the loss of lives and
further exacerbated the already dire situation in the
affected areas. We therefore urge the parties to agree to
an immediate cessation of hostilities in order to end the
military confrontation.
Following the unfortunate attacks on the Tajoura
migration detention centre earlier this month, the
African Union (AU) Peace and Security Council called
for an independent investigation into the attacks, which
South Africa firmly supports. In that regard, we look
forward to the outcome of the investigation with a view
to bringing the perpetrators of those atrocious acts
to justice.
The worsening humanitarian situation remains
the central concern for South Africa. In that regard,
we urge the international community to continue to
contribute towards the United Nations humanitarian
response plan to assist those in desperate need of
humanitarian assistance.
South Africa wishes to express its concern that the
longer the crisis continues the greater the humanitarian
and development challenges that are faced by the Libyan
people and the region as a whole. Those consequences
include the proliferation of terrorist groups, which are
gaining ground, the illegal smuggling and use of arms,
trafficking and transnational organized crime.
On the political process, I extend my delegation’s
gratitude to Special Representative Salamé and express
full support for his continued efforts aimed at taking
forward the two-track mediation process in order to
engage with the stakeholders in Libya, as we were
informed would be the case in Mr. Salamé’s previous
briefing to the Security Council (see S/PV.8530).
However, we deeply regret the political stalemate
19-23359

29/07/2019

The situation in Libya

highlighted in his briefing today. South Africa is of the
firm belief that the peaceful resolution of the conflict
should remain the Council’s highest priority in terms
of the efforts it is undertaking in Libya. For close to
a decade now, we have been witnessing the effects of
armed conflict and military interventionist policies.
The Council should draw a lesson from this situation.
Military solutions might appear to have short-term
benefits, but they often do not lead to the long-lasting
peace that is needed.
It is of concern that both sides have not agreed
to resume the political process. It is South Africa’s
belief that compromise from both sides is critical for
the de-escalation of tensions, to pave the way for the
political process to resume as soon as possible.
It will also be crucial for Libya to decide on a
new date for the national conference, as its indefinite
postponement does not inspire trust and confidence
in the process. In that regard, we urge the parties to
resume the political process and create an environment
conducive for the national conference to take place.
We wish to take this opportunity to remind the parties
that the national conference must be led by the Libyans
themselves, with the support of the United Nations, the
African Union, neighbouring countries and the broader
international community, which we believe will lead
Libya on a positive trajectory.
We would like to emphasize the central role of
the African Union, pursuant to Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations, in working closely with
countries of the region to find a durable solution to the
political stalemate in Libya. In that context, we echo
the views of the African Union Peace and Security
Council at its 857th meeting, held this month, that all
partners involved in the political process of finding
a sustainable settlement to the crisis in Libya should
endeavour to complement the efforts of the AU.
With respect to sanctions, South Africa wishes to
reiterate its position on the importance of sanctions as a
useful tool for advancing a political process. Sanctions
are not an end in themselves and should not be politicized
in any way to advance a particular agenda. The renewal
of the Libya sanctions regime in June this year in
resolution 2473 (2019) demonstrates the Council’s
recognition of the importance of the sanctions regime
and the positive impact it will have on the political
process in Libya. However, we are concerned about the
reports received from the Panel of Experts with respect

S/PV. 8588

to the lack of effective implementation of the Libya
sanctions measures, which is indicative of the continued
involvement of external actors in Libya and will serve
only to prolong the armed conflict and hostilities. It is
imperative for Member States to meet their obligations
in that regard, especially those represented at this table.
We are also particularly concerned about the
continued violations of the arms embargo, which are
counterproductive to the political process and also
fuel the conflict in Libya. Accordingly, we urge the
perpetrators to refrain from such practices, which
continue to undermine any prospects for progress in
finding a solution to the conflict.
In conclusion, we wish to emphasize the importance
of both sides to the conflict committing to a ceasefire
and resuming the political process, which in our view
will pave the way for the national conference led by the
Libyans themselves. It is crucial for that process to be
inclusive of all members of society, including women
and youth, to ensure that no one is left behind in the
implementation of the collective decisions taken at the
national conference.
South Africa and the three African States members
of the Security Council will propose that the Libyan
crisis be discussed in October by both the Security
Council and the AU Peace and Security Council during
the former’s visit to Addis Ababa under the South
African presidency of the Council.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Special Representative Salamé and Ambassador
Schulz for their briefings.
At present, international attention is focused on
the Libyan situation. The Libyan crisis has undermined
the country’s stability and development in political,
security, economic, social and other dimensions. Its
negative impact has spilled over into the Sahel, areas
along the Mediterranean coast and other places, thereby
threatening the security and humanitarian situation
in the surrounding region. The military clashes that
erupted around Tripoli in early April this year are
continuing today, resulting in increasing casualties,
including of civilians. The international community
should step up concerted efforts towards an early
settlement of relevant issues.
First, all Libyan parties should stay committed
to the overarching objective of a political settlement.
The Libyan issue must be resolved through political

19-2335915/20

S/PV.8588

The situation in Libya

means. Parties to the Libyan conflict should focus on
the interests of their country and people and respond
to the calls of the international community by way
of an immediate cessation of hostilities in order to
ease tensions and return to the track of peace talks
and consultations.
Secondly, the international community should
play a constructive role in the settlement of the Libyan
issue. The future of Libya should be determined by its
people. Its political process should be a Libyan-led and
-owned. The international community should respect
Libya’s sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity. Countries that have influence on the ground
should push the Libyan parties to seek consensus and
provide constructive assistance for the parties to reach
a ceasefire and resume political dialogue.
Thirdly, the various mediation mechanisms should
be better coordinated and mutually reinforcing. The
international community should support the good
offices of Secretary-General Guterres and Special
Representative Salamé, the United Nations-facilitated
Libyan political settlement process and the continued
implementation of the mandate of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya. At the same time, we hope
that the African Union, the League of Arab States and
other regional organizations will leverage their unique
advantages in order to play an active role. All the
relevant mechanisms should enhance their coordination
so as to create synergies.
Fourthly, the issue of sanctions should be properly
handled. Sanctions must always serve the political
settlement of relevant issues. Under the current
circumstances, the arms embargo on Libya should be
strictly enforced. Caution should be taken to prevent
other sanctions from negatively impacting Libyan
civilians or any third countries. Nor should sanctions
compromise the overall national interests of Libya or
the normal lives of Libyans and their humanitarian
needs. The Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya,
its secretariat and the Panel of Experts should all carry
out their work in strict accordance with the relevant
Council resolutions. China always takes an impartial
stance on the Libyan question and will continue to play
a constructive role in promoting a political settlement
of the Libyan issue.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, Indonesia
would like to thank Special Representative Ghassan
16/20

29/07/2019

Salamé, Head of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL), and Ambassador Juergen Schulz,
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya.
We were deeply concerned upon learning this
morning from the Special Representative that both
conflicting parties in Libya seem to believe they
can achieve their purpose through military means.
Therefore, as we have repeatedly highlighted on various
occasions, Council members — both collectively and
individually — must spare no effort to bring about
peace to Libya, including by urging all parties to halt
military actions and by using its influence to pressure
parties to de-escalate tensions on the ground.
It is indeed upsetting that since April, and after
numerous meetings of the Security Council, the
situation in Tripoli remains grim. We keep hearing
reports about sanctions violations on the ground,
including the presence of new weapons that further
fuel the conflict in Libya. To that end, we reiterate our
call, in line with the Council’s press statement of 5 July
(SC/13873), for all States to not intervene in the conflict
or take measures that will exacerbate it.
The situation in Libya remains a deep concern
for Indonesia. We convey our deep condolences for
the recent shipwreck in the central Mediterranean,
which claimed over 100 lives. We are saddened that the
situation in Libya and the lack of rescue capacity in
the area are contributing factors. We also condemn the
recent shelling on Al-Alamain school and Az Zawiyah
Field Hospital in the south of Tripoli. We call for all
parties to restrain from attacking civilian and medical
facilities. Allow me to focus on three points.
First, Indonesia calls for the immediate cessation
of hostilities in Libya. We reiterate the persistent calls
of the Council for all parties to commit to a ceasefire
and de-escalation and to return to the United Nationsfacilitated political mediation. We also reiterate that
lasting peace and stability in Libya can come about
only through a political solution. Military solutions will
never help. We welcome the efforts made by Special
Representative Salamé to restore a unified international
position on Libya in order to end its current crisis. In
that regard, Indonesia fully supports the three actions
recommended by Mr. Salamé earlier with a view to
achieving lasting peace. We also reaffirm our continued
support for the work of the Special Representative
and UNSMIL. We call on all partners — the United
19-23359

29/07/2019

The situation in Libya

Nations and regional organizations, such as the African
Union — to continue their support and work in pursuing
peace in Libya.
Secondly, Indonesia supports the convening of the
national conference as soon as possible for Libyans to
peacefully discuss the future of Libya. Although the
scheduled time for the national conference in April has
come and gone, we should not forget that we were once
almost there. We should find our path back to where we
were, where peace was almost within reach. Let us start
with a ceasefire.
Thirdly, Indonesia would also like to reiterate its
call for the protection of civilians and the need for a
humanitarian pause in order to prevent further loss of
lives. A recent report shows that 4,178 civilians have
been killed and more than 250.000 people have been
internally displaced by ongoing hostilities, most of
whom are children, with more trapped in the front line.
Basic needs such as water and electricity have been cut
and food is limited. The conditions now are dreadful
and are getting worse by the day. It must stop.
We are saddened by attacks on civilian facilities
and the increasing number of civilian casualties in
this crisis. It is important for all parties to respect
international humanitarian law and human rights
and not target civilians or humanitarian workers.
The Council must step up and do what we are here to
do — save lives.
Ms. Nehring (Germany): It is high time to send a
strong signal to all parties involved that the fighting has
to stop. That is what we heard today from many members
of the Security Council. It has to stop immediately. All
the parties and their international supporters must hear
it loud and clear from the Council: the only solution to
this conflict is political, not military.
The conflict in Libya has caused a humanitarian
disaster. We strongly condemn all attacks against
civilians, civilian infrastructure and humanitarian and
health workers. We urge all parties to the conflict to
comply with international humanitarian law to avoid
further casualties and protect the lives of civilians in
Libya. In particular, the most vulnerable people in
conflict-affected areas need immediate protection. A
tragedy like the one in Tajoura has to be prevented by
any means necessary.
Germany calls for the immediate closure of all
detention centres. We call upon all parties to return

S/PV. 8588

to the negotiating table and commit to an immediate
ceasefire. We strongly support the call by Special
Representative Salamé to institute an immediate
ceasefire and revive an inclusive political process under
United Nations auspices.
We are very concerned about ongoing violations
of the sanctions regime. We urge all States to
immediately take the necessary measures to ensure
the implementation of the arms embargo. The Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011), concerning Libya, made that very clear in
its letter of 17 July, reminding Member States of their
obligations to uphold the embargo. We need to take
more action in the Council. It is a question of credibility,
a question of whether we stand up for international law
and the decisions of the Council.
Let me conclude with some words on the release
of Mr. Moncef Kartas. We are very relieved about
the release of Mr. Kartas, one of the members on the
Committee’s Panel of Experts. However, we reiterate
that Tunisia must abide by its obligations under the
Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the
United Nations, and close all legal proceedings against
Mr. Kartas or ask for authorization to continue the
proceedings in line with the Convention.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Peru.
We thank Special Representative Ghassan Salamé
and Ambassador Juergen Schulz, in his capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya, for their
informative briefings. We reiterate our recognition of
the unstinting work done by the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya.
We would like to start by recalling the tragedy at the
Tajoura detention centre at the beginning of July, which
caused the deaths of many migrants and refugees, who
were victims of an indiscriminate aerial bombardment,
which was condemned by the Council at the time. We
regret that, following that, another tragedy occurred
with boats carrying migrants and refugees off the coast
of Libya. We express our alarm at the humanitarian
situation in the country, which is exacerbated by attacks
on civilians and health centres and numerous violations
of international humanitarian law.

19-2335917/20

S/PV.8588

The situation in Libya

What is unacceptable is that we are becoming
accustomed to simply reporting the death of innocent
civilians, without further action to prevent or mitigate
its cause. We believe that it is an unfortunate vicious
circle of suffering, destruction and humanitarian
disaster, fuelled by flagrant violations of the arms
embargo imposed by the Council, which serve to
perpetuate the situation of conflict, violence and deaths
and to create space for terrorist groups to act.
At the same time, it is crucial to promote
accountability for those responsible for the atrocity
crimes that have been increasing throughout the
conflict, which is approaching its fifth month. The
fight against impunity must also be extended to those
who continue to supply weapons to the parties to
the conflict.
Peru reiterates the need for an immediate and
unconditional ceasefire and a return to the negotiating
table through renewed mediation efforts that will allow
for a peaceful solution to be found in a context in which
the military solution is meaningless. We therefore
highlight the importance of the three-part proposal of
the Special Representative, which we hope to discuss in
greater detail in the consultations.
We again urge countries with the ability to influence
the parties to act immediately and effectively in order
to bring the parties closer and to finally overcome any
strategic or economic considerations, while ensuring
full respect for international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset I congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month
and I wish you every success. I also thank Mr. Ghassan
Salamé, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, for his briefing on the latest developments
in my country. I also thank Ambassador Juergen
Schulz, Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya.
In the run-up to 4 April, we were waiting for the
inclusive national conference, on which Libyans pinned
great hopes to end the difficult transition in our country
and move ahead towards fair and transparent elections
that would bring about a democratic Government that
18/20

29/07/2019

respects democracy and the peaceful transfer of power,
protects human rights and promotes the rule of law.
However, such hopes diminished with the
commencement of the attack on Tripoli, which
continues to seeks to return the country back to
despotic military rule. In view of that, the Government
of National Accord (GNA) had no choice but to stand
up against that aggression and defend the capital, its
neighbourhoods and its people. Now, four months
after this attack, Libyans have lost about 2,000 of
their children, thousands have been injured and more
than 500,000 people displaced, in addition to damage
to infrastructure, public facilities, field hospitals,
ambulances and medical personnel. The latest of such
incidents was the attack against the field hospital in one
of the capital’s neighbourhoods two days ago, killing
three doctors and wounding many others.
That humanitarian tragedy has been recently
exacerbated by the deliberate aerial bombardment on
a migrant detention centre in Tajoura on 2 and 3 July,
which caused dozens of casualties. The GNA condemned
the bombardment and considered it a war crime that
should be investigated and those responsible should be
held to account. It requested the Security Council to set
up a fact-finding mission to determine the perpetrators
of that crime, hold them to account and punish them.
However, the Council did not take a decisive measure to
that end, which could lead to similar tragedies.
Benghazi also witnessed an unprecedented
incident, on 17 July. An armed militia attacked the
house of member of Parliament Siham Sergewa,
shot her husband and kidnapped her. Her fate is still
unknown. That comes at a time when Haftar claims that
he is maintaining security and providing safety, but in
fact he is silencing voices and attacking what should
be inviolable. That blatant violation against the rights
and freedom of women in particular calls for a firm
stance to bring pressure to bear on the kidnappers and
determine her fate. Regrettably, the Security Council
stands idle in the face of the serious situation in my
country. We wonder why the Council has not taken an
unambiguous position or called things by their names.
Why has it not taken a decision to stop the aggression,
condemn the attack and end the negative interventions
by some countries? In addition to the litany of the
already mentioned violations, we note the activities
of terrorist groups in some parts of Libya who are
exploiting the ongoing conflict. We have repeatedly
cautioned against that, which plays into the hands of
19-23359

29/07/2019

The situation in Libya

S/PV. 8588

terrorists and enables them to continue their activities.
Such activities will not be limited to Libya alone, they
will also threaten international and regional peace
and security. Despite the attacks on the capital and its
neighbourhoods, GNA forces continue to combat the
terrorist groups and track down their members. A case
in point is our strategic cooperation with a number of
countries, in particular the United States of America.

challenges that need to be addressed, which call for
the operationalization of the army and the police.
Given its sensitive nature, the situation requires that it
be addressed in a gradual manner. We have therefore
introduced security measures and held consultations
in coordination UNSMIL. At the same time, we
have seen a positive response to those measures by
most stakeholders.

It is not a secret that documents and reports of
the Panel of Experts of the Sanctions Committee
established by Security Council’s resolution 1973
(2011) have sufficient information and evidence on
such interventions, which regrettably have not been
met with a firm position by the Council to stop such
countries and hold them to account for their behaviour,
which runs counter to the Charter of the United
Nations and the principle of State sovereignty and
non-interference in their internal affairs. In that regard,
we recall resolution 2419 (2018) and call on the Council
to shoulder its responsibilities.

We had hoped to see the strengthening and a
fruitful outcome of those efforts with the convening
of the inclusive national conference. We had looked
forward to the conference producing a road map leading
to security for our country. What has happened since
4 April, however, has undermined those efforts and
complicated the challenges facing our country.

The position of the countries that support Haftar
and allege that his criminal militias are the Libyan
National Army encroaches on the rights of the GNA
in accordance with Security Council resolutions,
starting with resolutions 2259 (2015) and 2434 (2018),
which recognize the Libyan National Army under the
control and leadership of the GNA and supreme leader
Serraj — not the Libyan Arab army forces, which is
the name Haftar gives his militias. The countries that
support that aggression have breached the Articles of
Chapter V of the Charter and its functions and powers,
namely, Articles 24 and 25, which provide that Members
of the United Nations shall agree to accept and carry
out the decisions of the Security Council.
Despite the challenges, the Government of National
Accord continues to believe in a peaceful, rather than
a military, resolution of the conflict as the only way to
safeguard the stability and security of Libyans and to
establish a State that meets their aspirations, founded
on justice, democracy and respect for human rights. We
are therefore committed to complying with the Security
Council resolutions on Libya, and the Government has
expressed its continued support for the efforts of Special
Representative Salamé to implement the peace plan.
We have made significant progress in that direction,
and people have begun to feel the improvement
achieved in the security situation, their livelihoods
and services. We have always recognized the security

Pursuing efforts to achieve peace is unavoidable.
As the President of the Presidency Council, Mr. Faiez
Serraj, stated at the twelfth extraordinary summit of
the African Union in Niamey,
“We are well aware that there is no military solution
to the conflict in Libya and that there is no winner
in this war; the only loser in this struggle is Libya”.
Therefore, on 16 June, Mr. Sarraj announced an initiative
to all Libyans who call for a peaceful solution to the
conflict and the establishment of a civil State, aimed at
achieving political stability and cooperation and holding
a meeting with UNSMIL to which representatives of all
sectors of society would be invited to agree on a road
map and establish the constitutional grounds on which
to hold presidential and parliamentary elections by the
end of 2019.
That meeting would also adopt laws on electoral
and constitutional processes and set dates for the
achievement of those milestones, which would be
referred to the High National Elections Commission.
The outcome would be binding for all. The United
Nations would organize and oversee those processes
and ensure the necessary capacity and resources for
their realization.
We continue to entertain high hopes that the
implementation of that initiative will be endorsed at
the regional level and by the international community,
with the Security Council’s support and assistance. But
we are concerned that the inability of the Council to
end the encroachment on the hopes and aspirations of
Libyans might send a message to some people that could
be interpreted as an encouragement for propagating

19-2335919/20

S/PV.8588

The situation in Libya

further devastation, conflict, humanitarian suffering
and political division.
We firmly believe that the attack on Tripoli would
not have happened had the Council taken more robust
and deterrent measures. However, we continue to
believe in the ability of the Security Council to end
the deteriorating crisis in Libya. We are counting on
its unity to engage constructively with the Libyan
crisis with full objectivity, while exercising pressure
on all parties that have embraced acquiring weapons
and personal gain at the expense of the sacrifice that
Libyans have made in terms of their pride and dignity
to establish a democratic State.

20/20

29/07/2019

In conclusion, the Government of National Accord
stands ready to cooperate with the Security Council
with regard to issues related to the safety and security of
the Libyan people. We remain committed to assuming
our responsibilities to serve our people and country. We
stand ready to continue cooperation and consultations
to allow us to achieve a peaceful solution to the situation
in the country
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

19-23359
