Resolution8 adopted on the reporte of the Fourth Committee

3. Declares that the colonial Powers which deprive
the colonial peoples of the exercise and the full enjoyment of those rights, or which subordinate them to
the economic or financial interests of their own nationals
or of nationals of other countries, are violating the
obligations they have assumed under Chapters XI and
XII of the Charter of the United Nations and are
impeding the full and prompt implementation of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
4. Strongly condemns the exploitation of the colonial
Territories and peoples and the methods practised
in the Territories un<ler colonial domination by the foreign financial, economic and other interests which are
designed to perpetuate the colonial regimes contrary
to the principles embodied in resolution 1514 (XV);
5. Deplores the policies of the colonial Powers
which permit the exploitation of the natural resources
of the Territories under their administration contrary
to the interests of the indigenous population and which
promote or tolerate unjust and discriminatory work
systems and other practices ;
6. Calls upon all States concerned to fulfil their
fundamental obligation to ensure that the concessions
granted, the investments authorized and the enterprises permitted to their nationals in the Territories under colonial domination do not run counter to the
present or future interests of the indigenous inhabitants
of those Territories;
7. Further calls upon the colonial Powers to prohibit
the following practices, which run counter to the principles of the Charter, violate the economic and social
rights of the peoples of the Territories under colonial
domination and impede the rapid implementation of
resolution 1514 (XV) :
(a) The exploitation of human and natural resources
contrary to the interests of the indigenous inhabitants;
(b) The obstruction of the access of the indigenous
inhabitants to their natural resources;
(c) The promotion and tolerance of injustice and
discrimination in the remuneration of labour and in the
establishment of working conditions;
8. Calls upon the colonial Powers to review, in accordance with the provisions of the present resolution, all the privileges and concessions which are
against the interests of the indigenous inhabitants;
9. Requests the United Nations Council for South
West Africa to take urgent and effective measures to
put an end to laws and practices established in the
Territory of South West Africa by the Government
of South Africa contrary to the purposes and principles
of the Charter ;
10. Requests the colonial Powers to stop immediately
the practice of alienation of lands from the indigenous
inhabitants and to take immediate action to return
to them all such alienated lands;
ll. Urges all States concerned to co--operate fully
with the United Nations in the rapid and effective im·plementation of resolution 1514 (XV) so as to ensure
to the peoples the exercise of their right to self-determination and independence and to the use of the
natural resources of their own Territorie.s;
12. Requests the Speciai Committee to continue its
<1tudy of the problem and to report thereon to the Gen~ral Assembly at its twenty-third session ;
13. Decides to maintain this item on its agenda.
1622nd plenar_y meeting,
7 December 1967.

2302 (XXU). Question of Oman
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Oman,
Having considered the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territory of Oman,6
Having also considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral ,7
Having heard the statement of the petitioner,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960,

Recalling further its resolutions 2073 (XX) of 17
December 1965 and 2238 (XXI) of 20 December 1966,
Deeply concerned at the serious and critical situation
arising from the colonial policies pursued by the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland in the Territory,
1. Endorses the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territory of Oman;
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Territory as a whole to self-determination and independence and recognizes the legitimacy of their
struggle to obtain the rights proclaimed in the Charter
of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3. Deplores the refusal of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to implement with
regard to Oman the provisions of resolution 1514 (XV)
and of resolutions 2073 (XX) and 2238 (XXI) of
the General Assembly;
4. Further deplores the policies of the United Kingdom, which, by installing and strengthening unrepresentative regimes in the Territory without regard for
the basic rights of the people, is contravening the relevant General Assembly resolutions;
5. Reaffirms that the natural resources of the Territory of Oman belong to the indigenous population
and that the concessions granted to foreign enterprises
without the consent of the people constitute a violation
of the rights of the people of the Territory ;
6. Considers that the military presence of the United
Kingdom and the existence of military bases in the
Territory constitute a major hindrance to the exercise
by the people of their right to self-determination and
independence and are prejudicial to peace and security
in the region ;
7. Calls upon the Government of the United Kingdom to take the necessary measures to implement without delay the provisions of resolution 1514 (XV) and
all other relevant General Assembly resolutions;
8. Further calls upon the Government of the United
Kingdom to give immediate effect in the Territory to
the following measures:
(a) The removal of British troops and military
bases:
6 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-second
Snsion, Annexes, addend!lm to agenda item 23 (A/6700/
Rev.I), chapter XIII.
1 Ibid .. agenda item 70, document A/6909.

so

Genera) Auemb)y-Twenty-nd SenJon

( b) The cessation of all repressive action against
the people of the Territory;
( c) The release of political prisoners and political
detainees and the return of political exiles to the
Territory;
9. Appeals to all Member States to render all necessary assistance to the people of the Territory in their
struggle to obtain freedom and independence;
10. Requests the Special Committee to continue its
examination of the situation in the Territory and to
consider the establishment of a sub-committee on Oman;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to take, in consultation with the Special Committee, appropriate measures for the implementation of the relevant General
Assembly resolutions and to report thereon to the Assembly at its twenty-third session.

1627th plenary meeting,
12 December 1967.
2311 (XXII). Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples by the specialized
agencies and the international institutions
associated with the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized
agencies and the international institutions associated
with the United Nations",
Havi.ng examined the relevant reports of the
Secretary-Genera1 8 and the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial ·countries and Peoples, 9
Recalling the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of
14 December 1960, and in particular paragraph 1 of
the Declaration and the fifth preambular paragraph
of the resolution,
Considering that, by virtue of the Charter of the
United Nations and in conformity with the agreements
between the United Nations and the specialized agencies
and the International Atomic Energy Agency, the
United Nations shall make recommendations for the
co-ordination of the policies and activities of the specialized agencies,
Recalling further its resolutions 2105 (XX) of 20
December 1965, 2107 (XX) of 21 December 1965,
2151 (XXI) of 17 November 1966, 2184 (XXI) of
12 December 1966 and 2189 (XXI) of 13 December
1966, requesting the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the specialized agencies concerned to increase the economic, social and humanitarian
assistance to the refugees from colonial Territories,
Taking note of the fact that the national liberation
movemen·ts in some colonial Territories of Africa have
asked the specialized agencies for urgent assistance in
various social fields, particularly education, health and
nutrition,
8 Jbid., agenda

item 66, document A/6825.
addendum to agenda item 23 ( A/6700/Rev.l), chapter I, section VIII and annex III; chapter V, annex.

1. Recognizes that the specialized agencies, the International Atomic Energy Agency and the international institutions associated with the United Nations
should extend their full co-operation to the United
Nations in achieving the objectives of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
to the specialized agencies which "have co-operated with
the United Nations in seeking to implement the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
3. Recommends the specialized agencies and international institutions concerned to take urgent and
effective measures to assist the peoples struggling for
their liberation from colonial rule, and in particular
to extend, within the scope of their respective activities,
all necessary aid to the oppressed peoples of Southern
Rhodesia and the Territories under Portuguese domination and to work out, in co-operation with the Organization of African Unity and through it with the
national liberation movements, concrete programmes
to this end;
4. Also recommends the specialized agencies and
international institutions not to grant any assistance
to South Africa and Portugal until they renounce their
policy of racial discrimination and colonial domination ;
5. Requests all States, directly and through action
in the specialized agencies and international institutions
of which they are members, to facilitate the implementation of the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly;
6. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
consider, in consultation with the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, appropriate measures
for the co-ordination of the policies and activities · of
the specialized agencies in implementing the f'elevant
resolutions of the General Assembly;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to assist the
specialized agencies and the international institutions
concerned in working out appropriate measures to
implement the relevant resolutions and to report thereon
to the General Assembly at its twenty-third session ;
8. Requests the Special Committee to examine this
question and to report to the General Assembly at its
twenty-third session.
1631st plenary meeting,
14 December 1967.

2347 (XXII). Question of the Trust Territory of
Nauru

The General Assembly,
RecaJling the Trusteeship Agreement for the Territory of Nauru approved by the General Assembly
on 1 November 1947,10
RecaJling its resolutions 2111 (XX) of 21 December
1965 and 2226 (XXI) of 20 December 1966,
Mindful of the relevant provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations and General Assembly r~olution
1514 (XV) of 14 December 1%0 containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples,

9 Ibid.,

10 See General Assembly resolution 140

(II).
