S/2017/623

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 July 2017
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015) and 2332 (2016)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the forty-first submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of
Security Council resolution 2139 (2014), paragraph 10 of resolution 2165 (2014),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2191 (2014), paragraph 5 of resolution 2258 (2015) and
paragraph 5 of resolution 2332 (2016), in which the Council requested the
Secretary-General to report, every 30 days, on the implementation of the resolutions
by all parties to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.
2.
The information contained herein is based on the data available to United
Nations agencies, from the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and from other
Syrian and open sources. Data from United Nations agencies on their humanitarian
deliveries have been reported for the period from 1 to 30 June 2017.
Box 1
Key points in June 2017
(1) The memorandum on the creation of de-escalation areas in the Syrian Arab
Republic, signed by Iran (Islamic Republic of), the Russian Federation and Turkey
on 4 May, continued to show a positive trend of reducing violence; however,
hostilities have continued to be reported, especially in Dar‘a and eastern Ghutah,
and in areas held by Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).
(2) Only three inter-agency cross-line convoys were dispatched in June. Of these,
only one, a convoy to east Harasta, Misraba and Mudayra on 19 June, reached a
besieged area. As at the end of June, the United Nations had reached some 202,500
people under the convoy plan for June and July, which constitutes only 18 per cent
of the 1,081,900 beneficiaries requested to be reached.
(3) Since the offensive began in the city of Raqqah on 6 June, heavy clashes,
shelling and air strikes have resulted in significant civilian casualties and injuries as
tens of thousands of people fled. The number of people displaced across the north east of the country by the offensive continued to grow, with 19,889 people displaced
during June.

17-12045 (E)

240717

*1712045*

S/2017/623

(4) As a result of recently signed local agreements, both Madaya in Rif Dimashq
Governorate and the Wa‘r neighbourhood of the city of Homs were removed from
the list of besieged locations in June. Consequently, there are now 11 besieged
locations, with 540,000 people in total remaining besieged. Although fewer areas
are now besieged, the change is not wholly positive, as sieges are often lifted
following periods of severe restrictions and heavy bombardment, and those leaving
besieged areas often move to other areas of the country where they contin ue to face
hardship.
(5) On 17 June, an inter-agency convoy to east Harasta, Misraba and Mudayra in
Rif Dimashq Governorate came under sniper fire, leaving a driver injured, even
though all deconfliction measures were in place.

II. Major developments
3.
The memorandum on the creation of de-escalation areas in the Syrian Arab
Republic, signed by Iran (Islamic Republic of), the Russian Federation and Turkey
on 4 May, continued to have a positive effect of reducing violence in some a reas.
Nevertheless, hostilities continued to be reported in proposed de -escalation areas,
especially in Dar‘a and eastern Ghutah. Military operations also increasingly shifted
towards ISIL-held areas. The Syrian Democratic Forces, backed by the internation al
coalition led by the United States of America to counter ISIL, encircled the ISIL held city of Raqqah. Meanwhile, pro-government forces intensified their advance in
Raqqah, Homs and Dayr al-Zawr Governorates. On 18 June, the international
counter-ISIL coalition shot down a Syrian military aircraft in Raqqah Governorate,
resulting in the Russian Federation temporarily suspending its deconfliction
mechanism with the United States.
4.
Since the offensive began in Raqqah on 6 June, heavy clashes, shelling and air
strikes have resulted in significant civilian casualties and injuries as tens of
thousands of people fled. During June, the humanitarian situation deteriorated in the
city, where an estimated 30,000 to 50,000 people remain trapped. Initial reports
indicate that, as at 27 June, the Syrian Democratic Forces had encircled the city,
leaving no formal exit routes for civilians. Families are reportedly taking significant
risks to exit the city across conflict lines.
5.
The situation inside the city is reportedly dire. Civilians continue to be killed
by air and ground strikes, with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights (OHCHR) reporting that at least 173 people were killed in June
alone. Some 27 civilians were killed and dozens more wounded at the Euphrates
River while attempting to gain access to water. Scarcity of food and medicine
continued to be reported. Markets and bakeries have remained closed, further
limiting access to food and basic necessities.
6.
The number of people displaced across the north-east of the country by the
Raqqah offensive continued to grow, with 19,889 people displaced during June,
many of whom more than once. To date, the total number of persons internally
displaced since the onset of the offensive in November 2016 is 227,610, including
190,081 since 1 April 2017 alone. Daily arrivals were registered at the Mabrukah
and Ayn Isa sites. Spontaneous settlements have also emerged and receded in line
with the evolution of the security situation and advances by the Syrian Democratic
Forces. Those who have been displaced continue to face protection concerns inside
the camps relating to the screening process with personal identification taken for
sometimes long periods, restrictions on movement and the confiscation of identity
documents.
2/19

17-12045

S/2017/623

Figure I
Key dates in June 2017

Box 2
Land route from Damascus to Qamishli
(1) Qamishli has long been an essential United Nations hub for providing
humanitarian assistance to hundreds of thousands of people in the north-east of the
Syrian Arab Republic. Nevertheless, access has been more challenging since
December 2015, when Turkey closed its border crossing point for security reasons,
which it stated was temporary. In July 2016 the World Food Programme (WFP)
logistics cluster began to airlift food and humanitarian supplies from Damascus to
Qamishli for distribution. Between July 2016 and 25 June 2017, when the airlift
operation was phased out, 533 airlifts were completed, trans porting 18,857 tons of
food, water and sanitation, nutrition, education, shelter and non -food item assistance
on behalf of humanitarian actors, reaching nearly 400,000 people.
(2) In March 2017, in the light of the improved security environment, the United
Nations requested the Government to consider approving the delivery of cross -line
convoys to Hasakah Governorate, through a land route that runs from Aleppo via
Manbij to Qamishli. By May, commercial traffic began moving again from Aleppo
to Qamishli using this route.
(3) On 14 June, the Government responded positively to a United Nations request
to deliver assistance to Qamishli. Following the approval, a three -truck WFP convoy
was deployed on 14 June, arriving on 16 June. A total of 32 trucks fr om WFP and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
reached Qamishli by the end of June.
(4) Replacing the current airlift operation with land access to Hasakah is expected
to save an estimated $19 million per year, enough to provide an additional 100,000
people with food assistance for a year.

7.
The situation in Dar‘a remained of particular concern for the 660,000 people
in need in the governorate, with active conflict continuing even though Dar‘a is one
of the four de-escalation areas identified by the guarantors of the memorandum on
de-escalation. The ongoing fighting notwithstanding, government forces declared a
cessation of hostilities for 48 hours, beginning at noon on 17 June, to support local
agreement negotiations; however, non-State armed opposition groups reportedly
refused to comply with the cessation of hostilities, leading to renewed fighting.
8.
The situation in eastern Ghutah continued to be marked by fighting among
non-State armed opposition groups operating in the area, despite the area being one
17-12045

3/19

S/2017/623

of the four de-escalation areas identified by the guarantors of the memorandum on
de-escalation. Shelling into eastern Ghutah was also reported to have continued
throughout the month, resulting in civilian casualties. At the same time, shelling
from eastern Ghutah by non-State armed opposition groups into Damascus was
reported.
9.
A team of United Nations experts was invited by the guarantors of the
memorandum on de-escalation to attend part of the third technical-level session of
the guarantors’ joint working group on de-escalation in Moscow on 15 and 16 June.
The experts were afforded the opportunity to highlight issues of interest to the
United Nations and offered to continue to provide technical advice, where required,
within the parameters of the Astana talks.
Protection
10. Air and ground-based strikes continued to kill and injure civilians in
significant numbers. As in the past, the high level of civilian casualties remains a
strong indication that violations of the prohibition on launching indiscriminate
attacks and of the principles of proportionality and precaution are continuing.
Children have been particularly affected by the fighting and, in some incidents,
constituted the majority of the casualties.
11. Fighting continued to affect civilian infrastructure, including m edical
personnel and facilities, schools, markets and places of worship. On the basis of
information received by OHCHR, civilian casualties, in possible violation of
international humanitarian law, occurred in various governorates (see annex).
OHCHR documented alleged incidents by many parties to the conflict, including
government forces and their allies, non-State armed opposition groups and Security
Council-designated terrorist groups.
12. The United States Department of Defense publicly confirmed that, in June, the
international counter-ISIL coalition had carried out 870 strikes against ISIL targets
in Raqqah, Hasakah, Dayr al-Zawr and Homs Governorates. Of those strikes, 637
were reported to have been in Raqqah Governorate. On 6 June, it announced the
launch of an offensive to liberate Raqqah, with the coalition providing equipment,
training, intelligence, logistics support, precision fires missiles and battlefield
advice to the Syrian Democratic Forces.
13. The Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation issued statements on 9, 27
and 30 June, saying that it was continuing to support the Syrian Arab Republic in
the fight against ISIL and the Nusrah Front. The statements also provided
information on successes in the north-east of Aleppo Governorate, near Tadmur
(Palmyra), and in the south of the country and on operations along the borders with
Jordan and Iraq.
14. On 19 June, the Iranian Revolutionary Guard publicly announced that it had
launched ballistic missiles against ISIL targets in eastern Dayr a l-Zawr Governorate
in response to the ISIL attack against the Iranian Parliament and the mausoleum of
Ruhollah Khomeini in Tehran on 7 June.
15. The United Nations and health partners received credible reports of four
attacks that affected health-care facilities and personnel in June, of which two have
been verified and two are being verified. The two verified attacks were against
health staff. On 6 June, a nurse working for a local hospital in Dar‘a was killed,
along with his son, when an air strike hit his home. On 17 June, a paramedic
working for a hospital supported by national and international non -governmental
organizations (NGOs) was reportedly killed by an air strike on his way to work.

4/19

17-12045

S/2017/623

16. Educational facilities continued to be affected. On 14 June , in the town of
Tafas, in the western rural area of Dar‘a, air strikes hit adjacent school buildings
Shahid Keywan C1 and Shahid Najjar. At least 9 people, including two children,
were killed and 25 injured in the attacks. The buildings were being used as shelters
for internally displaced persons at the time. On 24 June, an NGO tent, used as a
“safe learning place” in the Nakhla area of the city of Dar‘a, was hit by an air strike,
destroying the tent, damaging the desks and undermining the functioning of t he
facility.

Humanitarian access
Box 3
Key points for humanitarian access
(1) Some 13.5 million people in the Syrian Arab Republic, including 6.3 million
internally displaced persons, remain in need of humanitarian assistance. An
estimated 3.9 million people live in hard-to-reach areas and another 540,000 are
currently besieged in 11 areas.
(2) With a convoy to east Harasta, Misraba and Mudayra on 17 June, one besieged
area was reached through United Nations inter-agency cross-line operations during
the reporting cycle, beyond Dayr al-Zawr (reached through airdrops). Two more
inter-agency convoys were dispatched to hard-to-reach locations, reaching Talbisah
and Tulul al-Humr on 15 June and Rastan on 22 June. Removal of medical supplies
from the convoys remains a major challenge, with supplies sufficient for more than
84,000 treatments removed in June.
(3) As at the end of June, the United Nations had reached some 202,500 people
under the June/July convoy plan, which constitutes 18 per cent of the 1,081,900
beneficiaries requested to be reached. Other inter-agency convoys could not proceed
owing to a lack of approvals, including the lack of facilitation letters by the Syrian
authorities; fighting and insecurity; and other administrative restr ictions after initial
approvals.
(4) Some 712,000 people received food assistance and hundreds of thousands
received medical assistance, water and sanitation support, education support and
other non-food items from the United Nations and partners through cross-border
operations from Turkey and Jordan.
(5) The United Nations and partners continue to respond to the humanitarian
impact of the fighting and insecurity in and around Raqqah, reaching more than
240,000 people with some form of assistance on a monthly basis. Humanitarian
assistance includes various types of food and daily rations of bread, medicines and
medical supplies, as well as nutrition supplies.

17. The delivery of humanitarian assistance to people in need remained extremely
challenging in many areas as a result of active conflict, shifting conflict lines,
administrative impediments and deliberate restrictions on the movement of people
and goods by the parties to the conflict.
18. As a result of changes following the signing of local agreements, two
locations — Madaya in Rif Dimashq Governorate and the Wa‘r neighbourhood in
the city of Homs — were removed from the list of besieged areas in June. Following
an agreement reached as part of negotiations regarding the arrangement for the four
towns of Fu‘ah, Kafraya, Madaya and Zabadani, access has improved in Madaya.
The United Nations conducted an assessment on 8 June and found that the 25,00017-12045

5/19

S/2017/623

30,000 civilians remaining in Madaya were able to move in and out of the town by
public transportation and private vehicles. With regard to the Wa‘r neighbourhood in
the city of Homs, after reaching a local agreement in March, more than 19,000
people were evacuated from the area to Idlib, Jarabulus and northern rural Homs.
On 20 May, the Governor of Homs announced that the evacuation process had been
completed and that the area was again under government control, with an estimated
17,500 people remaining in the area. Although fewer areas are now besieged, the
change is not wholly positive, as sieges are often lifted following the reaching of
local agreements after periods of severe restrictions and heavy bombardment and
those leaving besieged areas often move to other areas of the country where they
continue to face hardship. The United Nations was not party to these local
agreements.
19. There are now 11 besieged locations, with a total estimated population of
540,000 (see table 1). Of these, 7 are besieged by the Government (80 per cent of
the total besieged population), 1 by both the Government and non -State armed
opposition groups (1 per cent), 2 by non-State armed opposition groups (2 per cent)
and 1 by ISIL (17 per cent).
Table 1
Besieged areas, June 2017
Governorate

Location

Estimated
population

Dayr al-Zawr

Dayr al-Zawr

93 500 ISIL

Damascus

Yarmouk

9 800 Government forces
and non-State armed
opposition groups

Idlib

Fu‘ah

12 100 Non-State armed
opposition groups

Kafraya
Rif Dimashq

Total

Besieged by

Non-State armed
opposition groups

Qabun and Barzah al-Balad

30 000 Government forces

Duma area (Duma, Shaffuniyah, Hawsh
al-Dawahirah)

150 100 Government forces

Harasta area (Harasta, Mudayra, Misraba)

46 300 Government forces

Irbin and surrounding area (Irbin, Zamalka and
Jawbar)

49 300 Government forces

Kafr Batna area (Kafr Batna, Ayn Tarma,
Hammurah, Jisrayn, Saqba, Aftris, Hazzah,
Hawsh al-Ash‘ari, Bayt Siwa, Muhammadiyah)

132 400 Government forces

Nashabiyah area (Nashabiyah, Bayt Nayim,
Salhiyah, Utaya, Hazrama)

16 500 Government forces
540 000

20. Access for the United Nations and its partners to those living in besieged and
hard-to-reach locations remains a critical concern. Under the United Nations inter agency convoy plan for June and July, access was requested to 27 locations,
6/19

17-12045

S/2017/623

including besieged areas, with the aim of reaching 1,081,900 people. Access to
836,750 beneficiaries (77.3 per cent) has been approved thus far. There were 3
locations to which access was approved in full, while access to another 23 was
approved with either a lower number of beneficiaries in need than those identified
by the United Nations or without a specified number of beneficiaries to be reached.
One request was denied. Thus far, it has been possible to dispatch only three inter agency convoys to besieged and hard-to-reach locations under the inter-agency
convoy plan for June and July (see table 4).
21. Individual agencies continued to submit requests for single -agency deliveries
to locations across the country. WFP submitted 1,587 official requests to obtain
facilitation letters to transport food assistance to targeted locations across the
country, while UNHCR submitted 84 such requests for the movement of core relief
items and livelihoods kits, the large majority of which were approved. Both
international and Syrian NGOs continued to perform needs assessments and provide
support, including medical, education, psychosocial and protection services, in
besieged and hard-to-reach locations, under extremely challenging circumstances
and in accordance with humanitarian principles.
Figure II
United Nations inter-agency cross-line humanitarian operations: percentage of people
reached each month in besieged areas, including via airdrops to the city of Dayr al-Zawr
100 %

7
Number of besieged
areas reached this year

80 %

60 %

Convoys
40 %

Airdrops
20 %

0%

January

February

March

April

May

June

22. The majority of United Nations agencies and United Nations partners continue
to be unable to reach populations in need in areas controlled by ISIL, as all plans to
deliver assistance to those areas have been suspended owing to continued security
concerns. This has prevented the United Nations and its humanitarian partners from
reaching the city of Raqqah and most of Dayr al-Zawr Governorate, as well as
pockets of northern rural Aleppo and north-western rural Hama.
23. With the opening of the land route to Qamishli, Hasakah and Raqqah
Governorates became more easily accessible. Consequently, food for more than
190,000 people was dispatched to partners for distribution, achieving 100 per cent
of the monthly plan for Hasakah Governorate. Moreover, the United N ations and its
partners have been responding to the humanitarian needs of displaced persons
affected by the hostilities in Raqqah Governorate. Humanitarian response efforts are
taking place across Raqqah, Aleppo and Dayr al-Zawr Governorates, reaching more
than 240,000 people with some form of assistance on a monthly basis. Humanitarian
assistance includes various types of food and daily rations of bread, medicines and
medical supplies, as well as nutrition supplies.
17-12045

7/19

S/2017/623

Figure III
United Nations inter-agency cross-line humanitarian operations by land,
June 2017

24. Life-saving and life-sustaining medical items sufficient for more than 84,000
treatments were removed from inter-agency convoys in June by the Syrian
authorities (see table 2). Additional medical supplies were scheduled to be delivered
as part of the monthly inter-agency convoy plan, but only three convoys have been
able to proceed thus far during the June/July cycle. Furthermore, since the
beginning of 2017, the World Health Organization (WHO) has submitted nine
single-agency requests to the Government to have access to 12 locations in six
governorates. The Government approved three requests, five remain unanswered
and one has been rejected.
Table 2
Medical supplies removed from humanitarian convoys in June 2017
Location

8/19

Number of treatments

Type of supplies

East Harasta,
Misraba and
Mudayra

8 895 Phenobarbitone, amitriptyline hydrochloride, haloperidol,
gastro-resistant sodium valproate, ketamine hydrochloride,
diagnostic ultrasound system, gelofusine, carbamazepine,
beclomethasone nasal spray, atracurium

Talbisah and
Tulul al-Humr

53 948 Latex examination gloves (small), minor surgery instruments
and surgical kits, stainless steel instruments for minor surgery,
heparine sodium, salbutamol, electrocardiograph, salbutamol
sulphate inhaler, budesonide inhalation (aerosol),
beclomethasone dipropionate, inhalation (aerosol), pneumonia
type A kits (P97-023), ketorolac tromethamine, normal saline,
17-12045

S/2017/623
Location

Number of treatments

Type of supplies

glucose 5 per cent, injection solution with IV giving set and
needle
Rastan

21 238 Minor surgery instruments and surgical kits, stainless steel
instruments for minor surgery, M7 diagnostic ultrasound system,
beclomethasone dipropionate nasal spray, carbamazepine,
pneumonia type A kits (P97-023), ketorolac tromethamine,
normal saline with IV giving set, glucose 5 per cent, injection
solution with IV giving set and needle

25. In June, WFP and UNHCR were able to successfully deploy a convoy from
Aleppo through Manbij to Qamishli in Hasakah Governorate (see box 2). This
important development will allow the United Nations to deliver at scale to the
north-east of the country, an area that has required expensive airlifts as a result of
the temporary closure of the Nusaybin/Qamishli crossing point with Turkey since
December 2015.
26. Following the resumption of these regular land deliveries, the United Nations
airlift operations launched in July 2016 to Qamishly were phased out on 25 June. By
then, 533 rotations had been completed, airlifting 18,857 tons of food and other
supplies, reaching some 400,000 people. In June alone, 42 rotations were
completed, enabling the United Nations to dispatch food and other assistance to
partners for 393,300 people living in parts of Hasakah, Raqqah and Dayr al -Zawr
Governorates.

Humanitarian response
27. In June, United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners continued to reach
millions of people in need through all modalities from within the Syrian Arab
Republic and across its borders (see table 3). In addition, NGOs continued to deliver
life-saving assistance. The Government continued to provide basic services to areas
under its control and in many areas beyond its control. Local authorities in many
areas controlled by non-State armed opposition groups also continued to provide
services when possible.
Table 3
People reached by the United Nations and other organizations, June 2017
Organization

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations

36 858

International Organization for Migration

130 000

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

231 991

United Nations Children’s Fund

>1 500 000

United Nations Development Programme

3 868 669

United Nations Population Fund
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East

17-12045

Number of people reached

29 000
>250 000

World Food Programme

>4 000 0000

World Health Organization

1 633 765

9/19

S/2017/623

28. Cross-border deliveries continued from Turkey and Jordan into the Syrian
Arab Republic under the terms of Security Council resolutions 2165 (2014), 2191
(2014), 2258 (2015) and 2332 (2016) (see fig. IV). In line with those resolutions,
the United Nations notified the Syrian authorities in advance of eac h shipment,
including content, destination and number of beneficiaries. The United Nations
Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic continued its operations,
monitoring 433 trucks used in 20 convoys by seven United Nations entities in June,
confirming the humanitarian nature of each and notifying the Syrian authorities
after each shipment. The Mechanism continued to benefit from the excellent
cooperation of the Governments of Jordan and Turkey.
Figure IV
Beneficiaries assisted by the United Nations and its partners per cluster
through cross-border humanitarian deliveries, June 2017
(Thousands)

712

288

72
38

28

Education

Nutrition

Water,
sanitation and
hygiene

77

Non-food
items

Food

Health

29. In June, WFP carried out 14 high-altitude airdrop rotations in Dayr al-Zawr
Governorate, dropping food rations sufficient for 31,035 people and supplies from
other humanitarian actors.
Table 4
Inter-agency cross-line humanitarian convoys, June 2017
Requested target
(number of beneficiaries)

Number of
beneficiaries reached

Talbisah and Tulul al-Humr

101,000

84 000

Multisectoral

East Harasta, Misraba and Mudayra

33 000

11 000

Multisectoral

Rastan

107 500

107 500

Multisectoral

Date

Location

15 June
19 June
21/22 June

Type of assistance

30. The total number of confirmed polio cases had reached 17 by 21 June, with 16
cases reported in the Mayadeen district in Dayr al-Zawr and 1 in Raqqah. The
Ministry of Health, with the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and WHO,
implemented a first round of polio vaccinations on 22 June, reaching hundreds of
thousands of children. Moreover, between late May and early June, UNICEF and
WHO conducted a measles immunization campaign for children between the ages of
7 months and 5 years, reaching more than 1.7 million children.
31. On 22 June, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) concluded a second round of cash assistance
for 2017, which had begun on 2 May, benefiting 409,547 Palestine refugees
(122,576 families) across the Syrian Arab Republic. UNRWA also distributed food
10/19

17-12045

S/2017/623

parcels to 143,188 Palestine refugees and provided health treatments to 46,329
patients (18,991 men and 27,338 women) across the country.
32. Throughout the month, the Russian Federation sent information bulletins to
the United Nations from the Russian Centre for Reconciliation of Opposing Sides in
the Syrian Arab Republic, which outlined the provision of bilateral relief assistance.
Other Member States also continued to provide bilateral and other forms of
humanitarian assistance.

Visas and registrations
33. A total of 30 new United Nations visa requests were submitted to the
Government in June, of which 14 were approved and 16 remain outstanding. Of the
new visa applications submitted in earlier months, a further 12 were approved in
June, 1 was rejected and 21 remain pending. A total of 64 United Nations visa
renewal requests were submitted in June, of which 40 were approved and 24 remain
pending. A further 14 visa renewals submitted in earlier months were also approved,
while 15 remain pending.
34. A total of 22 international NGOs are registered with the Government to
operate in the country. Four international NGOs are completing registration. Those
organizations continued to face administrative hurdles and restrictions affecting
their ability to operate, including in gaining permission to undertake independent
needs assessments. Some 217 national NGOs are authorized by the Syrian Arab
Republic to partner with the United Nations.
Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and premises
35. On 17 June, an inter-agency convoy to east Harasta, Misraba and Mudayra in
Rif Dimashq Governorate came under sniper fire, even though all deconfliction
measures were in place between the Russian Federation and the international
counter-ISIL coalition and the necessary approvals and guarantees of safe passage
had been received from relevant parties on the ground. The attack injured a Syrian
Arab Red Crescent driver, while another was hurt by a bullet but not seriously
injured. No party has claimed responsibility for the attack, which, if directed
intentionally against the humanitarian convoy and its personnel, constitutes a war
crime.
36. On 15 June, dozens of protesters set fire to a police station in the city of
Suwayda’ in retaliation for the detention of a political activist. The demonstrations
continued for two days before some leaders in the area intervened to calm the
situation. On 18 June, an improvised explosive device detonated on Siyahah Street
in the city of Qamishli, some 300 m from the UNHCR office, causing material
damage. All UNHCR staff members were safe. The threat of improvised explosive
devices and vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices is likely to persist, given
the fighting in southern Hasakah and the ongoing offensive in Raqqah.
37. Since the beginning of the conflict, dozens of humanitarian workers have been
killed, including 21 staff members of the United Nations, 17 of whom were UNRWA
staff members, 65 staff members and volunteers of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent
and eight staff members and volunteers of the Palestine Red Crescent Society. In
addition, many staff members of international and national NGOs are reported to
have been killed.
38. A total of 28 United Nations staff members, comprising 1 United Nations
Development Programme staff member and 27 UNRWA staff members, are detained
or missing.
17-12045

11/19

S/2017/623

III. Observations
39. With 13.5 million people in need of humanitarian assistance across the Syrian
Arab Republic, the humanitarian crisis continues in most areas. The conflict
continues to kill civilians and further destroy basic infrastructure. Access to health
care, food, clean water and education continues to pose significant challenges to
civilians. In too many cases, civilians risk their lives, adopting negative coping
mechanisms to address their basic needs.
40. The United Nations and its humanitarian partners provide an essential lifeline
to those in need. The deployment of cross-border assistance, ongoing airdrops to
Dayr al-Zawr, the recent opening of a land route to Qamishli and the constant
efforts to reach areas across conflict lines are all examples of the vital humanitarian
work of the United Nations and its partners and adaptability to reach civilians
trapped by the conflict. The opening of some ISIL -held areas to humanitarian
assistance is a positive development. Nevertheless, too many civilians remain out of
reach, despite all efforts. In particular, the 540,000 people who are besieged face
dire circumstances. I call upon all parties to immediately end sieges so as to allow
sustained humanitarian access and freedom of movement to those currently trapped.
I remind all parties that the deliberate starvation of civilians as a method of warfare
constitutes a serious violation of international humanitarian law and could amount
to a war crime.
41. I remain deeply troubled by the situation on the ground for many civilians who
suffer from the ongoing conflict. Explosive weapons continue to be fired into
populated areas, indiscriminately killing and injuring civilians. I continue to
reiterate my call for the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic to be referred to the
International Criminal Court. I also call upon all Member States to support the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under
International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011.
42. The escalation of hostilities in the east and north-east is of particular concern,
as the ongoing military operations against ISIL take their toll on civilians. This has
come at the cost of civilian lives and, in some cases, the destruction of vital
infrastructure. I reiterate my call upon all those conducting military operations in
the Syrian Arab Republic to do so in compliance with international humanitarian
law, in particular as it relates to the protection of civilians and civilian
infrastructure. All efforts must be made to include a human itarian concept of
operations in all military planning.
43. It is crucial that the de-escalation of violence be achieved in the Syrian Arab
Republic. I welcome the continued and persistent efforts of the guarantors in the
Astana process towards de-escalation, the challenges and difficulties
notwithstanding. Their efforts have resulted in a reduction of violence in some
areas, but I remain concerned about the escalation of violence in Dar‘a and eastern
Ghutah. The reduction of violence must also hold in all four de-escalation areas and
be further expanded. The creation of de-escalation areas must result in a sustained
increase in humanitarian access. Such an increase was not seen in June. Further
progress on issues regarding detainees and missing persons, an d humanitarian
demining, are also important. While also acknowledging the promise of
de-escalation areas to reduce violence, I urge all countries to preserve the right of
all Syrians to seek asylum and enjoy refugee protection until conditions are
conducive for voluntary return in safety and in dignity.
44. Ultimately, the political process is the only course that can offer a lasting
solution to the Syrian conflict and an end to the tremendous suffering of the people.
12/19

17-12045

S/2017/623

There is no military solution. The Geneva and Astana processes can complement
each other, as the formal United Nations-facilitated intra-Syrian negotiations can be
enabled by more conducive conditions on the ground as a result of the de -escalation
efforts by the Astana guarantors. I fully support the continued efforts of my Special
Envoy for Syria through the intra-Syrian talks and I urge the Syrian parties to
constructively address the four baskets, namely, governance issues, constitutional
issues, electoral issues and issues relating to counter-terrorism and security
governance. I remind the international community of the importance of fully
implementing all relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular resolutions
2254 (2015) and 2268 (2016).

17-12045

13/19

S/2017/623

Annex
Incidents affecting civilians recorded by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
June 20171
Rif Dimashq and Damascus Governorates
• On 1 June, ground-based strikes hit the opposition-controlled area of Irbin,
which reportedly resulted in the death of a woman.
• On 2 June, a civilian was allegedly shot in the opposition-held area of
Mudayra while travelling towards Duma.
• Also on 2 June, a ground-based strike hit a residential area in oppositioncontrolled Ash‘ari, allegedly killing a child and severely injuring a woman and
her daughter who were displaced from Shub‘ah.
• On 6 June, a ground-based strike hit a residential area in opposition-controlled
Harasta, reportedly killing a boy and injuring several members in his family
including his brother, mother and grandmother.
• Also on 6 June, a ground-based strike hit a residential building in Harasta,
which reportedly killed a woman and injured her son.
• On 23 June, two successive air strikes hit a residential area in opposition controlled Hazzah. The second air strike hit a building located in the vicinity
of a local market and reportedly resulted in the death of 5 civilians, including
three children, two from the same family, and the injury of at least 12 others,
including women and children.
Dar‘a Governorate
• On 1 June, two improvised explosive devices exploded on a road between Kafr
Shams and Aqraba, hitting a convoy of opposition fighters. As both civilians
and fighters came to provide assistance to the wounded, two ground strikes hit
the location again, reportedly killing seven people, including three civilians
from Kafr Shams, and injuring at least 10 other civilians.
• Also on 1 June, air strikes hit a residential area in opposition -controlled Dera’a
camp, reportedly killing two civilians, including a boy from a family
previously displaced from Qunaytirah.
• On 3 June, several ground-based strikes hit residential areas in governmentcontrolled Dar‘a, including Dar‘a al-Mahattah, Sabil, Kashif and Sahhari,
reportedly killing a civilian and leaving an unknown number injured.
• On 4 June, two civilians were allegedly killed and several others wounded in
ground-based strikes that hit a residential area in the opposition-controlled
village of Tafas.
__________________
1

14/19

In line with Security Council resolution 2258 (2015), the present description of developments on
the ground, and the incidents during the month that the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights has been able to corroborate, relates to the compliance with
Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) by all parties in the
Syrian Arab Republic. The information is provided without prejudice to the work of the Task
Force on the Ceasefire of the International Syria Support Group. The reporting is not a
comprehensive listing of all violations of international humanitarian law and violations and
abuses of international human rights law that took place in the Syrian Arab Republic during the
reporting period.
17-12045

S/2017/623

• Also on 4 June, four air strikes hit a residential area in the town of Ghariyah
al-Gharbiyah. The attack allegedly killed two women and injured an unknown
number of others.
• On 5 June, two air strikes reportedly hit a former government military facility
being used to house internally displaced persons in Tafas, resulting in the
death of seven civilians, including three internally displaced persons from
Uthman, including a boy and a girl.
• Around 5 June, two successive air strikes hit a vehicle carrying civilians on the
road between Tafas and Da‘il, allegedly killing six, including a child.
• On 5 June, ground-based strikes hit a residential area in government-controlled
Dar‘a al-Mahattah, reportedly killing a girl and severely injuring a male
civilian who then died the following day.
• On 7 June, air strikes hit a residential area in the opposition -controlled area of
Tariq al-Sadd in the city of Dar‘a, reportedly killing three civilians, including
a man and a girl from a family previously displaced from Dar‘a al -Balad.
• On 9 June, air strikes hit a residential area in opposition -controlled Dar‘a
al-Balad, reportedly killing a civilian and injuring an unknown number of
others.
• On 10 June, ground-based strikes hit opposition-controlled Nasib, which
resulted in the alleged death of a civilian male and his two children (a boy and
a girl) and a grave injury to another boy from the same family who then died
the following day.
• On 13 June, two civilians were reportedly killed and another severely injured
when an improvised explosive device detonated on the road between
opposition-controlled Da‘il and Nawa. All three victims were internally
displaced persons from the same family previously displaced from Tall Shihab.
• On the morning of 14 June, two air strikes hit a residential area in Tafas,
allegedly damaging a school that served as a shelter for internally displaced
persons from Dar‘a Governorate. Eight civilians displaced from Uthman,
including a girl and two women, in addition to a civilian from Tafas, were
killed and an unknown number injured.
• Also on 14 June, ground-based strikes hit a residential area of Tafas,
reportedly killing two civilians, one of whom was a girl.
• On 22 June, air strikes hit an informal settlement for internally displaced
persons in Nasib, reportedly killing three civilians previously displaced from
the Yarmouk Valley, in addition to leaving an unknown number of civilians
injured.
• On 23 June, ground-based strikes hit a residential area in the government controlled Kashif neighbourhood of Dar‘a city, reportedly killing two
civilians, one of whom was a woman.
• On 24 June, air strikes hit the town of Nasib between noon and 5.30 p.m. ,
causing material damage and injuring internally displaced persons in the area.
• Also on 24 June, air strikes hit an informal settlement for internally displaced
persons located near a market in Nasib, reportedly killing two civilians
previously displaced from Dar‘a al-Balad, one of whom was a woman.
Another civilian severely injured in the strike allegedly died on 29 June.
• On 27 June, ground-based strikes hit a residential area near the Shahid
al-Fakhouri School in opposition-controlled Harah, reportedly killing six
17-12045

15/19

S/2017/623

civilians, including a woman and four girls from a single family. At least 12
civilians, 5 of whom were children, were reportedly injured in the attack.
Aleppo Governorate
• On 18 June, a civilian was reportedly killed and two gir ls were injured as a
result of ground-based strikes on the opposition-held town of Mari‘ in the
northern rural area of the governorate.
• On 19 June, a civilian was allegedly killed and four others were injured when
ground-based strikes hit the town of Mari‘.
Idlib Governorate
• On 1 June, ground-based strikes hit residential areas in the town of Bdama, in
rural Jisr al-Shughur, reportedly injuring a civilian.
• On 8 June, heavy armed clashes broke out in populated areas of the city of
Ma‘arrat al-Nu‘man and allegedly resulted in the death of a 50 -year-old street
vendor.
• On 14 June, ground-based strikes hit residential areas on the outskirts of the
city of Jisr al-Shughur, reportedly injuring four civilians, including a mother
and her child.
• During the afternoon of 24 June, a car bomb exploded near a market in the city
of Dana, north-east of Idlib, reportedly killing 7 civilians, including three
children, and injuring at least 30 more.
Hama Governorate
• In the early morning of 5 June, air strikes hit the ISIL -held village of Abu
Hawadid in the Uqayribat sub-district of eastern rural Hama, reportedly
injuring a male civilian previously displaced from Talbisah in northern rural
Homs and causing extensive material damage.
• In the early morning of 7 June, air strikes hit ISIL-held eastern Suha,
reportedly killing a pregnant woman and her two children.
• On 15 June, ground-based strikes hit a residential area in the city of Lataminah
in opposition-controlled northern rural Hama, reportedly injuring a child.
• On 17 June, air strikes hit a market in the ISIL-held village of Nu‘aymah,
located 2 km east of Uqayribat, reportedly killing at least three civi lians and
injuring others.
• On 22 June, ground-based strikes hit residential areas around Uqayribat,
reportedly killing a male civilian and causing significant material damage. The
strikes also reportedly resulted in the displacement of civilians.
Homs Governorate
• On 13 June, a 13-year-old boy was killed and another severely injured
following the explosion of remnants of a cluster bomb in the village of Izz
al-Din, in Talbisah in rural northern Homs.
• On 21 June, air strikes hit residential areas in the town of Kafr Laha, located in
the area of Hula, reportedly killing a male civilian and injuring five other
civilians.

16/19

17-12045

S/2017/623

• On 29 June, ground-based strikes hit residential areas in Talbisah, reportedly
killing a female nurse and injuring at least five civilians, including a man
whose hand was severed.
• Also on 29 June, a 40-year-old male civilian was shot in the head and killed
while riding his motorcycle on the road linking the village of Ghantu to
Talbisah.
Dayr al-Zawr Governorate
• On 1 June, ground-based strikes hit the government-controlled neighbourhoods
of Qusur and Jurah in Dayr al-Zawr, allegedly killing two male civilians.
• On 4 June, air strikes hit the town of Muhsin in eastern rural Dayr al -Zawr and
allegedly killed at least three civilians, including a girl and woman, and
injured at least four others.
• On 7 June, air strikes hit a civilian vehicle travelling through the town of
Qurayya in eastern rural Dayr al-Zawr, allegedly killing at least eight civilians
and injuring four others.
• On 8 June, air strikes hit residential areas in the town of Ayyash, reportedly
killing at least 3 civilians and injuring 10 others.
• On 9 June, at least one civilian was allegedly killed and three others were
injured as a result of ground-based strikes on the Qusur and Jurah
neighbourhoods of the city of Dayr al-Zawr.
• Also on 9 June, air strikes in the vicinity of a mosque in the village of Jadid
Uqaydat allegedly killed 5 civilians and injured 11 others.
• On 10 June, a child and a woman were allegedly killed as a result of ground based strikes that hit residential areas in the Qusur neighbourhood of the city
of Dayr al-Zawr.
• On 15 June, air strikes hit residential areas in the village of Marrat, eastern
Dayr al-Zawr, reportedly killing seven civilians, including four children and a
woman.
• Also on 15 June, at least six civilians, including a woman and three children,
were allegedly killed and at least four others injured as a result of air strikes
on the village of Hatla, in the eastern rural area of Dayr al -Zawr.
• On 17 June, air strikes hit residential areas in the city of Mayadin, eastern
Dayr al-Zawr, reportedly killing five civilians, including two children and a
woman, and injuring at least seven others.
• During the afternoon of 20 June, air strikes hit residential areas in the village
of Khusham, eastern Dayr al-Zawr, allegedly killing at least 14 civilians,
including at least two women and two children, and injuring no fewer than 7
others.
• On 23 June, air strikes hit residential areas in the village of Muhaymidah, in
the western rural part of Dayr al-Zawr, reportedly killing at least 11 civilians,
including seven children and two women.
• On 24 June, ground-based strikes hit residential areas in the Qusur and Jurah
neighbourhoods of Dayr al-Zawr city, reportedly killing at least five civilians
and injuring several others.
• On 25 June, air strikes hit residential areas in the village of Muhsin, eastern
Dayr al-Zawr, allegedly killing four children and their mother.
17-12045

17/19

S/2017/623

• Also on 25 June, a woman and child were reportedly killed when air strikes hit
their home in the town of Qurayya in the eastern rural part of Dayr al -Zawr.
• At dawn on 26 June, air strikes hit and completely destroyed an ISIL-run place
of detention located near a bridge in the town of Mayadin. Reports received
indicated that at least 40 people, including ISIL members, had been killed in
the strike.
Raqqah Governorate
• On 1 June, a male civilian was allegedly killed by a landmine north of the city
of Raqqah.
• On 3 June, air strikes hit a residential area close to Jisr al -Jadid, south of the
city of Raqqah, reportedly killing at least eight civilians, including a child, and
injuring at least five others.
• Also on 3 June, at least 15 civilians were allegedly killed and 8 others injured
when air strikes hit residential areas behind the Shira‘ swimming pool in the
city of Raqqah.
• On 5 June, air strikes hit a boat that was reportedly carrying civilians from the
northern to the southern banks of the Euphrates River. The boat was reportedly
hit while it was at the southern access side of the city of Raqqah, allegedly
killing 9 civilians and injuring at least 10 others.
• On 6 June, a man and his wife and their three children were allegedly killed
when air strikes hit a residential building in the centre of the city of Raqqah.
• On 7 June, two children were reportedly killed when a landmine exploded
close to them in the village of Ja‘bar, in the west of the governorate.
• On 8 June, five children were allegedly killed when a landmine exploded in
the village of Bougha in northern rural Raqqah. On the same day, two civilians
were reportedly killed when a landmine exploded in the city of Tabaqah.
• Also on 8 June, air strikes hit the city of Raqqah, including the Mafraq al -Jazra
neighbourhood on the west side of the city. At least 14 civilians were allegedly
killed.
• On 10 June, at least 15 civilians, including four women and six children, were
reportedly killed in air strikes that hit residential areas on Nur Street in Dariya,
in the west of the governorate.
• Also on 10 June, ground-based strikes again hit residential areas in Dariya and
allegedly killed at least two women and two children.
• Also on 10 June, air strikes hit residential areas in the Mukhtalatah area of the
Sina‘a neighbourhood, in the east of the city of Raqqah, reportedly killing at
least six civilians, four of whom were children and two women.
• Also on 10 June, air strikes hit residential areas and reportedly killed seven
civilians, including a woman, in the western neighbourhoods of Jazrah and
Sabahiyah in the city of Raqqah.
• On 12 June, four civilians, including at least three children, were allegedly
killed as a result of ground-based strikes on the Sayf al-Dawlah
neighbourhood in the city of Raqqah.
• On 13 June, four civilians from one family, including two children, were
allegedly killed when air strikes hit their home in the Qasr al -Banat area in the
city of Raqqah.
18/19

17-12045

S/2017/623

• On 14 June, four civilians, including a woman, were reportedly killed as a
result of ground-based strikes on the Sab‘ Bahrat area in the city of Raqqah.
• On 15 June, a woman and her four children were allegedly killed when air
strikes hit their home in the village of Kasrat al-Shaykh Jum‘ah in the rural
west of the governorate.
• Also on 15 June, air strikes hit residential areas close to the non -operational
Khalid Ibn al-Walid School in the Intifadah neighbourhood of the western part
of the city of Raqqah, allegedly killing at least four civilians from one family,
including a woman and her three children. On the same day, ground -based
strikes hit residential areas and reportedly killed at least 7 civilians and injured
no fewer than 14 others in the city.
• On 16 June, three civilians, including a woman and a girl, were killed as a
result of ground-based strikes in the vicinity of the Nur mosque area in the city
of Raqqah.
• On 18 June, two women and two children were reportedly killed and at least
three other civilians injured as a result of ground -based strikes on the Badu
neighbourhood in the city of Raqqah.
• On 19 June, two children were allegedly killed and seven civilians injured
when air strikes hit close to the Imam al-Nawawi mosque in the city of
Raqqah.
• On 21 June, air strikes hit residential areas in the Nur mosque neighbourhood
of the city of Raqqah and reportedly killed at least 18 civilians and injured no
fewer than 11 others. On the same day, ground -based strikes hit the city and
reportedly killed at least 9 civilians and injured no fewer than 17 others.
• Also on 21 June, at least 10 civilians were reportedly killed and 3 others
injured when air strikes hit residential areas in the Amn al -Dawlah
neighbourhood of the city of Raqqah.
• On 24 June, at least eight civilians were reportedly killed when air strikes hit
residential areas in the Rumaylah neighbourhood of the city of Raqqah.
• Also on 24 June, air strikes hit a residential house in the Nahdah
neighbourhood of the city of Raqqah and reportedly killed five civilians,
including a woman.
• On 25 June, three civilians were allegedly killed when an air strike hit their
vehicle as it was travelling alongside the River Euphrates, south of the city of
Raqqah.
Hasakah Governorate
• On 17 June, the Syrian Defence Forces reportedly held seven civilians for
forced recruitment in the village of Harmun in rural Hasakah.
• On 19 June, air strikes hit residential areas in the village of Tall al -Jayir,
located in the eastern Shadi area bordering Iraq, and reportedly killed at least
12 civilians.

17-12045

19/19
