RNOlntiom adopted wlthont referenee to a Main Committee

S. Rrit,rat,s its declaration that the continuation of
colonial rule threatens international peace and security
and that the practice of apartheid and all forms of racial
discrimination constitute a crime against humanity ;
6. Reaffirms its recognition of the legitimacy of the
struggle of the colonial peoples to exercise their right
to self-determination and independence and notes with
satisfaction the progress made in the colonial Territories by the national liberation movements, both
through their struggle and through reconstruction programmes, and urges all States to provide moral and
material assistance to them ;
7. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, the specialized ~encies concerned and other international relief organizations for the help they have so far given, and requests
them to increase their· economic, social and humanitarian assistance to the refugees from Territories under
colonial domination ;
8. Requests all States, directly and through action
in the international institutions of which they are members, including the specialized agencies, to withhold
assistance of any kind from the Governments of Portugal and South Africa and from the illegal racist
minority regime of Southern Rhodesia until they renounce their policy of colonial domination and racial
discrimination ;
9. Draws the attention of all States to the grave
consequences of the development in southern Africa
of the entente between the Governments of South
Africa and Portugal and the illegal racist minority
regime of Southern Rhodesia, the activities of which
run counter to the interests of international peace and
security, and calls upon all States, particularly the
main trading partners of the entente, to withhold any
support or assistance to the members of the entente ;
10. Requests the colonial Powers to dismantle their
military bases and installations in colonial Territories
and to refrain from establishing new ones. and from
using those that still exist to interfere with the liberation of the peoples in colonial Territories in the exercise
of their legitimate rights to freedom and independence ;
11. Once again condemns the policies, pursued by
certain administering Powers in the Territories under
their domination, of imposing non-representative regimes and constitutions, strengthening the position of
foreign economic and other interests, misleading world
public opinion and encouraging the systematic influx
of foreign immigrants while displacing, deporting and
transferring the indigenous inhabitants to other areas,
and calls upon those Powers to desist from such
mancruvres ;
12. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
perform its task and to seek suitable means for the
immediate and ,full implementation of the Declaration
in all Territories which have not yet attained independence;
13. Requests the Special Committee to make concrete suggestions with a view to assisting the Security
Council in considering appropriate measures under the
Charter of the United Nations with regard to developments in colonial Territor.ies which are likely to
threaten international peace and security, and recommends the Council to take such suggestions fully into
consideration ;
14. Imtes the Special Committee, whenever it considers it proper and appropriate, to recommend a deadline for the accession to independence of each Territory

I

in accordance with the wiahes of the people and the
provisions of the Declaration;
15. Requests the Special Committee, in the performance of its tasks, to take account of the special
activities envisaged in connexion with the International
Year for Human Rights and in particular to particii:-te,
as it considers appropriate, in the International Conference on Human Rights to be held at Teheran in
April 1968;
16. Requests the Special Committee to examine the
compliance of Member States with the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples and other relevant resolutions on the question of decolonization, particularly those relating to
the Territories under Portuguese domination, Southern
Rhodesia and South West Africa, and to report thereon
to the General Assembly at its twenty-third session;
17. Invites the Special Committee to pay particular
attention to the small Territories and to recommend
to the General Assembly the most appropriate methodt
and also the steps to be taken to enable the populations
of those Territories to exercise fully their right to selfdetermination and independence ;
18. Urges the administering Powers to co-operate
with the Special Committee by permitting access to the
colonial Territories ·by visiting missions, in accordance
with decisions previously taken by the General Assembly and by the Special Committee ;
19. Requests the Special Committee to consider and
submit recommendations to the General Assembly at
its twenty-third session regarding the holdini( early
in 1969 of a special conference of representatives of
colonial peoples for the purpose, inter alia, of considering the most effective means by which the international
community can intensify its assistance to them in their
efforts to achieve self-determination, freedom and independence;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to take concrete
measures through all the media at his disposal, including publications, radio and television, to give effect
to the provisions of its resolutions 2105 (XX), 2189
(XXI), 2262 (XXII), 2270 (XXII) and 2288
(XXII) concerning the widespread and continuous
publicizing of the work of the United Nations in the
field of decolonization, of the situation in the colonial
Territories and of the continuing struggle for liberation
being waged by the colonial peoples ;
21. Requests the administering Powers to co-operate
with the Secretary-General in promoting the large-acale
dissemination of information on the work of the United
Nations in the implementation of the Declaration;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all
the finn~cing ;md facilities necessary for the implementation of the present resolution.
1636th plmary meetmg,
16 Decen1ber 196'!.
2345 (XXII), Agreement on the Reaeue of A•tronauts, the Retum of A1tronauta and Ille
Return of Object• Launched Into Oater
Space14
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind its resolution 2260 (XXII) of 3
November 1967, which calls upon the Committee on the
it In accordance with a decision taken by the General Aasembly at its 1640th plenary meetinr, on 19 December 1967, the

General A■■embly-Twenty-aeeond Sea1ion

6

Peaceful Uses of Outer Space to continue with a
sense of urgency its work on the elaboration of an
agreement on liability for damage caused by the launching of objects into outer space and an agreement on
assistance to and return of astronauts and space vehicles,
Referring to the addendum to the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space,u
Desiring to give further concrete expression to the
rights and obligations contained in the Treaty of Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon
and Other Celestial Bodies, 16
1. Commends the Agreement on the Rescue of
Astronauts, the Return of Astronauts and the Return
of Objects Launched into Outer Space, the text of
which is annexed to the present resolution;
2. Requests the Depositary Governments to open
the Agreement for signature and ratification at the
earliest possible date ;
3. Expresses its hope for the widest possible adherence to this Agreement ;
4. Calls upon the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space to complete urgently the preparation
of the draft agreement on liability for damage caused
by the launching of objects into outer space and, in
any event, not later than the beginning of the twentythird session of the General Assembly, and to submit
it to the Assembly at that session.
1640th plenary meeting,
19 Di'Cember 1967.
ANNEX
Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, the Return of
Astronauts and the Return of Objects Launched into
Outer Space

The Contracting Parties,
Noting the great importance of the Treaty on Principles
Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and
Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial
Bodies, which calls for the rendering of all possible assistance
to astronauts in the event of accident, distress or emergency
landing, the prompt and safe return of astronauts, and the
return of objects launched into outer space,
Desiring to develop and give further concrete expression to
these duties,
Wishing to promote international co-operation in the peaceful
exploration and use of outer space,
Prompted by sentiments of humanity,
Have agreed on the following:
Article 1
Each Contracting Party which receives information or discovers that the personnel of a spacecraft have suffered accident
or are experiencing conditions of distress or have made an
emergency or unintended landing in territory under its jurisdiction or on the high seas or in any other place not under
the jurisdiction of any State shall immediately:
question dealt with in the addendum to the report of the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space was examined
directly in plenary meeting, and the present resolution was
adopted without reference to the First Committee. See also, with
reference to item 32, resolutions 2260 (XXII) and 2261

(XXII).
15 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-second
Session, Annexes, agenda item 32, document A/6804/ Add.I.
16 General Assembly resolution 2222

(XXI), annex.

(a) Notify the launching authority or, if it camlOt identify
and immediately communicate with the launching authority,
immediately make a public announcement by all appropriate
means of communication at its disposal ;
(b) Notify the Secretary-General of the United Nation,,
who should disseminate the information without delay by all
appropriate means of communication at his. disposal.

Article Z
If, owing to accident, distress, emergency or unintended
landing, the personnel of a spacecraft land in territory under
the jurisdiction of a Contracting Party, it shall immediately
take all possible steps to rescue them and render them all
necessary assistance. It shall inform the launching authority
and also the Secretary-General of the United Nation, of the
steps it is taking and of their progress. If assistance by the
launching authority would help to effect a prompt rescue or
would contribute substantially to the effectiveness of search
and rescue operations, the launching authority shall co-operate
with the Contracting Party with a view to the effective
conduct of search and rescue operations. Such operations shall
be subject to the direction and control of the Contracting
Party, which shall act in close and continuing consultation with
the launching authority.

Article 3
If information is received or it is discovered that the personnel of a spacecraft have alighted on the high seas or in
any other place not under the jurisdiction of any State, those
Contracting Parties which are in a position to do so shall, if
necessary, extend assistance in search and rescue operations
for such personnel to assure their speedy rescue. They shall
inform the launching authority and the Secretary-General
of the United Nations of the steps they are taking and of their
progress.

Article 4
If, owing to accident, distress, emergency or unintended
landing, the personnel of a spacecraft land in territory under
the jurisdiction of a Contracting Party or have been found
on the high seas or in any other place not under the jurisdiction of any State, they shall be safely and promptly returned
to representatives of the launching authority.

Article S
1. Each Contracting Party which receives information or
discovers that a space object or its component parts hu
returned to Earth in territory under its jurisdiction or on
the high seas or in any other place not under the jurisdiction
of any State, shall notify the launching authority and the
Secretary-General of the United Nations.

2. Each Contracting Party having jurisdiction over the
territory on which a space object or its component parts has
been discovered shall, upon the request of the launching authority and with assistance from that authority if requested,
take such steps as it finds practicable to recover the object or
component parts.

3. Upon request of the launching authority, objects launched
into outer space or their component parts found beyond the
territorial limits of the launching authority shall be returned
to or held at the disposal of representatives of the launching
authority, which shall, upon request, furnish identifying data
prior to their return.
4. Notwithstanding paragraphs 2 and 3 of this article a
Contracting Party which has reason to believe that a s~ce
object or its component parts discovered in territory under its
jurisdiction, or recovered by it elsewhere, is of a hazardous
or deleterious nature may so notify the launching authority,
which shall immediately take effective steps, under the direction
and control of the said Contracting Party, to eliminate possible
danger of harm.

S. Expenses incurred in fulfilling obligations to recover and
return a space object or its component parts under paragraphs
2 and 3 of this article shall be borne by the launching authority.

Reaolution1 adopted without reference to a Main Committee

7

5. The Depositary Governments shall promptly inform all
signatory and acceding States of the date of each 9ignature,
the date of deposit of each instrument of ratification of and
accession to this Agreement, the date of its entry into force
and other notices.
6. This Agreement shall be registered by the Depositary
Governments purauant to ·\rticle 102 of the Charter of the
United Nations.

Article 6
For the purposes of this Agreement, the term "launching
authority" shall refer to the State responsible for launching,
or, where an international intergovernmental organization is
responsible for launching, that organization, provided that that
organization declares its acceptance of the rights and obligations provided for in this Agreement and a majority of the
States members of that organization are Contracting Parties
to this Agreement and to the Treaty on Principles Governing
the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer
Space, including the Moon and other Celestial Bodies.

Article 8
Any State Party to the Agreement may propose amendments
to this Agreement. Amendments shall enter into force for
each State Party to the Agreement accepting the amendments
upon their acceptance by a majority of the States Parties to
the Agreement and thereafter for each remaining State Party
to the Agreement on the date of acceptance by it.

Article 7
1. This Agreement shall be open to all States for signature.
Any State which does not sign this Agreement before its
entry into force in accordance with paragraph 3 of this article
may accede to it at any time.

Article 9

2. This Agreement shall be subject to ratification by signatory States. Instruments of ratification and instruments of
accession shall be deposited with the Governments of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of
America, which are hereby designated the Depositary Governments.

Any State Party to the Agreement may give notice of its
withdrawal from the Agreement one year after its entry into
force by written notification to the Depositary Governments.
Such withdrawal shall take effect one year from the date of
receipt of this notification

3. This Agreement shall enter into force upon the deposit
of instruments of ratification by five Governments including
the Governments designated as Depositary Governments under
this Agreement.
4. For States whose instruments of ratification or accession
are deposited subsequent to the entry into force of this Agreement, it shall enter into force on the date of the deposit of
their instruments of ratification or accession.

This Agreement, of which the Chinese, English, French,
Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall be de1,osited in the archives of the Depositary Governments. Duly
certified copies of this Agreement shall be transmitted by the
Depositary Governments to the Governments of the signatory
and acceding States.
lN WITNESS
WHEREOF the
undersigned, duly authorized,
have signed this Agreement

*

Article JO

*

*

Other decisions
Notification by the Secretary-General under Article 12, paragraph 2, of
the Charter of the United Nations
(Item 7)

At its 1564th plenary meeting, on 23 September 1967, the General Assembly
took note of the communication dated 18 September 1967 from the SecretaryGeneral to the President of the General Assembly. 17
Adoption of the agenda
(Item 8)

At its 1629th plenary meeting, on 13 December 1967, the General Assembly
took note of paragraph 3 of the fifth report of the General Committee. 18 concerning
a correction to the French text of rule 15 of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly.
Report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization
(Item 10)

At its 1642nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 1967, the General Assembly
took note of the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization. 19
17 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-second Session. Annexes, agenda
item 7, document A/6819.
lB Ibid., agenda item 8, document A/6840/ Add.4.
19 Ibid., Twenty-second Session, Supplement No. 1 (A/6701 and Corr. l) and Supplement
No. JA (A/6701/Add.l).
