S/PRST/2004/18*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 May 2004
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4978th meeting of the Security Council, held on 25 May 2004, in
connection with the council’s consideration of the item entitled “Letter dated 25
May 2004 from the Permanent Representative of the Sudan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2004/425)”, the President of
the Security Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Council expresses its grave concern over the deteriorating
humanitarian and human rights situation in the Darfur region of Sudan. Noting
that thousands have been killed and that hundreds of thousands of people are at
risk of dying in the coming months, the Council emphasizes the need for
immediate humanitarian access to the vulnerable population.
The Council also expresses its deep concern at the continuing reports of
large-scale violations of human rights and of international humanitarian law in
Darfur, including indiscriminate attacks on civilians, sexual violence, forced
displacement and acts of violence, especially those with an ethnic dimension,
and demands that those responsible be held accountable. The Council strongly
condemns these acts which jeopardize a peaceful solution to the crisis, stresses
that all parties to the N’djamena humanitarian ceasefire agreement committed
themselves to refraining from any act of violence or any other abuse against
civilian populations, in particular women and children, and that the
Government of Sudan also committed itself to neutralizing the armed
janjaweed militias, and urges all parties to take necessary steps to put an end to
violations of human rights and international humanitarian law. In this regard,
the Council takes note of the recommendations of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights in his report dated May 7 2004 (E/CN.4/2005/3).
The Council reiterates its call on the parties to ensure the protection of
civilians and to facilitate humanitarian access to the affected population. In
that regard, the Council emphasizes the need for the Government of Sudan to
facilitate the voluntary and safe return of refugees and displaced persons to
their homes, and to provide protection for them, and also calls upon all parties,
including opposition groups, to support these objectives. The Council calls on
all parties, in accordance with the provisions of resolution 1502 (2003), to
allow full unimpeded access by humanitarian personnel to all people in need

* Reissued for technical reasons.

04-36495* (E) 260504

*0436495*

S/PRST/2004/18

of assistance, and to make available, as far as possible, all necessary facilities
for their operations, and to promote the safety, security and freedom of
movement of humanitarian personnel and their assets.
The Council, while welcoming the ceasefire agreement signed April 8 in
N’Djamena, Chad, emphasizes the urgent need for all parties to observe the
ceasefire and to take immediate measures to end the violence and calls on the
Government of Sudan to respect its commitments to ensure that the Janjaweed
militias are neutralized and disarmed. Stressing that a ceasefire commission
with international representation is a central component of the April 8
agreement, the Council expresses its full and active support for the efforts of
the African Union to establish the ceasefire commission and protection units
and calls upon the opposition groups and the Government of Sudan to facilitate
the immediate deployment of monitors in Darfur, and to ensure their free
movement throughout Darfur. The Council also calls upon Member States to
provide generous support for the efforts of the African Union.
The Council welcomes the announcement by the Government of Sudan
that it will issue visas to all humanitarian workers within 48 hours of
application, eliminate the need for travel permits, and facilitate the entrance
and clearance of equipment imported for humanitarian purposes. The Council
acknowledges the appointment of a Fact Finding Commission by Presidential
Decree. The Council, however, is seriously concerned about continued
logistical impediments prohibiting a rapid response in the face of a stark and
mounting crisis and calls upon the Government to fulfil its announced
commitment to cooperate fully and expeditiously with humanitarian efforts to
provide assistance to the imperiled populations of Darfur, noting with
particular concern that the humanitarian challenge will be aggravated by the
imminent onset of the rainy season.
The Council calls upon the international community to respond rapidly
and effectively to the consolidated appeal for Darfur.
The Council observes with distress the prolonged absence of an
accredited Resident Coordinator/Humanitarian Coordinator and affirms the
need for the immediate appointment and appropriate accreditation of a
permanent Resident Coordinator/Humanitarian Coordinator to ensure daily
coordination in order to address impediments to humanitarian access brought
to the UN’s attention by the international aid community.
The Council encourages the parties to step up their efforts to reach a
political settlement to their dispute in the interest of the unity and sovereignty
of Sudan.
The Council requests that the Secretary-General keep it informed on the
humanitarian and human rights crisis as it unfolds, and, as necessary, to make
recommendations.”

2
