S/2009/243

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 May 2009
Original: English

Letter dated 12 May 2009 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General
I have the honour to inform you that the members of the Security Council have
decided to send a mission to Africa, tentatively from 14 to 21 May 2009. The
mission will travel to Ethiopia, Rwanda, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Liberia. Ambassador John Sawers (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland) and Ambassador Ruhakana Rugunda (Uganda) will co-lead the Ethiopia
(Addis Ababa) and Rwanda (Kigali) segments; Ambassador Jean-Maurice Ripert
(France) will lead the Democratic Republic of the Congo (Goma and Kinshasa)
segment; and Ambassador Susan Rice (United States of America) will lead the
Liberia (Monrovia) segment. The members of the Council have agreed on the terms
of reference of the mission (see annexes).
Following consultations with the members, it has been agreed that the
composition of the mission is as follows:
Ambassador Thomas Mayr-Harting (Austria)
Ambassador Michel Kafando (Burkina Faso)
Counsellor Long Zhou (China)
Ambassador Jorge Urbina (Costa Rica)
Ambassador Ranko Vilović (Croatia)
Ambassador Jean-Maurice Ripert (France)
Ambassador Yukio Takasu (Japan)
Ambassador Abdurrahman Shalgham (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)
Ambassador Claude Heller (Mexico)
Senior Counsellor Vladimir Safronkov (Russian Federation)
Minister Fazli Çorman (Turkey)
Ambassador Ruhakana Rugunda (Uganda)
Ambassador John Sawers (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland)

09-33627 (E) 130509

*0933627*

S/2009/243

Ambassador Susan Rice (United States of America)
Ambassador Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam)
I should be grateful if you would have the present letter and its annexes
circulated as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Vitaly Churkin
President of the Security Council

2

09-33627

S/2009/243

Annex I
Security Council mission to Africa: terms of reference
African Union
Led by the Ambassador John Sawers (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland) and Ambassador Ruhukana Rugunda (Uganda)
1.
To continue to develop an effective partnership and enhance cooperation
between the African Union and the United Nations through an exchange of views on
issues of interest to both the United Nations Security Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council.
2.
To exchange views on situations of interest to both the United Nations
Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council, which include
but are not limited to the following:
(a)

A brief overview of the peace and security situation in Africa;

(b)

The situation in the Sudan:

(i) Darfur: the challenges to the political process and the functioning of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID);
(ii)

Humanitarian situation in Darfur;

(iii) Implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and the
challenges being faced;
(iv) Sudan/Chad: the role of the Dakar contact group and the challenges to
the implementation of the Doha Agreement and previous bilateral agreements;
(c)

The situation in Somalia:

(i) Political, security and military developments in Somalia and the
functioning of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), including
the United Nations logistical support package for AMISOM;
(ii)

Piracy;

(d) The situation in the Great Lakes region, in particular eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo: progress and challenges to stabilization in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo;
(e) The resurgence of unconstitutional changes of government: efforts
undertaken by the African Union to resolve and prevent unconstitutional changes of
Government.

09-33627

3

S/2009/243

Annex II
Security Council mission to Africa: terms of reference
Great Lakes region (Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda)
General elements
1.
To recall the commitment of the Security Council to the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of all States in the region.
2.
To express the strong support of the Security Council for the improvement of
relations among the countries of the region and to encourage them to continue
reinforcing their political, military and economic cooperation in order to guarantee
the long-term stabilization of the Great Lakes region.
3.
To reiterate support for the strengthening of the regional dynamic, including
through the development, where appropriate, of economic projects of common
interest and the implementation of appropriate steps to facilitate legal trade and put
an end to illegal trafficking of natural resources.
4.
To stress that all parties should reinvigorate their participation in the Goma
and Nairobi processes, which are the agreed framework for stabilizing the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and urge all parties to fully recommit
to their respective disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation, resettlement and reintegration programmes.
5.
To emphasise the support of the Council for action against the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA).
6.
To underline the importance of full implementation of the sanctions measures
put in place through resolution 1857 (2008).
7.
To underscore the scale of the resources committed by the United Nations to
peacekeeping in the Great Lakes region and the need for a clear commitment of
cooperation on the part of all national and regional actors.
8.
To emphasize the continuing concerns of the Council about the protection of
civilians, to address the situation of internally displaced civilians and to advocate
for respect for human rights and international humanitarian law, to raise awareness
of the need for sexual violence and child protection issues to be addressed, and to
encourage the parties and Governments concerned to ensure that those responsible
for serious violations of human rights and humanitarian law are brought to justice.
Additional elements for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Led by Ambassador Jean-Maurice Ripert (France)
9.
To acknowledge the primary responsibility of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to consolidate peace and stability, and to
promote recovery and development in the country, which require long-term
sustained efforts and appropriate international support.
10. To reaffirm the support of the Security Council to the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and to

4

09-33627

S/2009/243

receive a briefing on the MONUC strategic workplan requested by the Council in its
resolution 1856 (2008).
11. To get updates on the Kimia II and Rubia II operations, jointly planned and
conducted by the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (FARDC)
and MONUC against the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR),
the Lord’s Resistance Army and other armed groups, and to reaffirm that all military
operations should be carried out in accordance with international humanitarian,
human rights and refugee law and take appropriate measures to protect civilians.
12. To call on the Congolese authorities to intensify their efforts to reform the
security sector, with the assistance of the international community.
13. To emphasize the support of the Council for the strengthening of democratic
institutions, the rule of law, and good governance in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, including through the holding of local elections.
14. To examine ways to improve the protection of civilians in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and in particular to strengthen its efforts to prevent and
respond to sexual violence and to enhance child protection, bearing in mind the
conclusions of the Security Council Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict.
15. To recall the utmost importance of the fight against impunity, notably in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, by bringing to justice those
who have committed crimes and atrocities.
Additional elements for Rwanda
Led by Ambassador John Sawers (United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland)
16. To discuss Rwandan concerns in the region, and how these can be addressed
while respecting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States in the Great
Lakes region.

09-33627

5

S/2009/243

Annex III
Security Council mission to Africa: terms of reference
Liberia
Led by Ambassador Susan Rice (United States of America)
1.
To reaffirm the continued support of the Security Council for the Government
and people of Liberia as they rebuild their country, strengthen the foundations of
sustainable peace, constitutional democracy, and economic development and assume
their rightful place in the community of nations.
2.
To express support for the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and their efforts to promote
peace and security in Liberia.
3.
To review progress in the implementation of the mandate of UNMIL, in
particular progress made in meeting the benchmarks outlined in the eighteenth
progress report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/86), and assess the logistic
constraints affecting the UNMIL troop and police mobility.
4.
To assess the operational capacity and sustainability of the Liberian National
Police and other national security institutions, and assess progress made in training
the Armed Forces of Liberia.
5.
To encourage Liberian authorities to increase their efforts to prepare national
security institutions to assume greater responsibility for responding to law and order
challenges.
6.
To express support for the efforts of the Government of Liberia to extend and
consolidate effective State authority in all 15 counties of the country, with the
assistance of the international community.
7.
To examine the impact of subregional factors on the situation in Liberia, and
explore ways to strengthen regional cooperation, including measures to counter the
threat of illegal drug trafficking.
8.
To underline the importance of promoting and protecting the rights of
civilians, in particular women and children, and assess progress in combating
violence against children and women, including sexual and gender-based violence
and sexual exploitation and abuse.
9.
To underline the support of the Council for civil society, including women’s
groups.
10. To underline the need for full implementation of the sanctions regime on
Liberia.

6

09-33627
