TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

th
MEETING: 27 MARCH. 1969

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1467) . , , , , + . , , . , . , . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda , . . + . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , , . . . , . . . I . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 26 March 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/91 13) . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 27 March 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Israel
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/91 14) , . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/I’V. 1467

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

JlocumWs

of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in quarterly

Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Secuti2y Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEENHUNDREDANDSIXTY-SEVENTHMEETING
Held in New York on Thursday,
President: Mr. Kriroly CSATORDAY

(Hungary).

27 March 1969, at 3.30 p.m.
to take a place at the Council table in order to participate,
without vote, in the discussion,

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. El-Farra
(Jo&an), Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) and Mr. J. M. Baroody
(Saudi Arabia) took places at the Council table.

Provisional agenda (SIAgendall467)

3. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): The Security Council will continue its consideration of the items on
its agenda.

1. Adoption of the agenda.

4. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): The Security Council is again
considering the question of the aggressiveactions of Israel
in the Middle East.

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 26 March 1969 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/91 13).

5, The distinguished representative of Jordan, Ambassador
El-Farra, gave us a detailed factual description of Israel’s
latest attacks on his country. Jordanian villages, rest houses
and other civilian objectives in the Es Salt area were
barbarously bombed with napalm and heavy bombs and
rockets. Many peaceful inhabitants were kihed or wounded,
mainly very young children, schoolchiIdren and elderly
women.

3. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 27 March 1969 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/9 114).
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda wusadopted.
6. The fresh criminal acts of the Israeli militarists-the
latest in Israel’s flagrant violations of the cease-fire resolutions of the Security Council-were by no means chance
occurrences. They were premeditated, planned acts of
aggression carried out under decisions of the official
authorities of Israel. They are an expression of the
aggressive course which was consistently and deliberately
pursued by Israel’s previous administration and which, as is
now obvious, is being continued by Israel’s new leaders
against the neighbouring Arab States. Israel’s aggressive
policy constitutes the main obstacle to the establishment of
peace and tranquillity in the Middle East and to a political
settlement in that region.

The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 26 March 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/91 13)
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 27 March 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Israel addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/9114)
1. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): In accordance with the decision taken at this morning’s meeting I
now propose, with the Council’s consent, to invite the
representatives of Jordan and Israel to take places at the
Council table in order to participate, without vote, in the
discussion,

7. By its actions Israel has again demonstrated to the
entire world that its policy is a policy of aggression. The
ruling circles in Israel continue to attain their ends in the
Middle East, not by the establishment of a just peace on
mutually acceptable basis, in the interests of all States in
the region but by the use of armed force.

2. I should also like to inform the members of the
Security Council that the representative of Saudi Arabia has
submitted a request [S/91 161 to participate in the Council’s discussion of the items on the agenda. I accordingly
propose, with the Council’s consent, to invite the representative of Saudi Arabia, in keeping with the usual practice of
the Council and in accordance with its rules of procedure,

8. It should be recalled that not so long ago [I462nd
meeting] the Security Council unanimously condemned an
aggressiveact of Israel, the piratical raid on Beirut airport,
and warned Israel that if such military acts were to be
repeated the Council would take the appropriate further
steps.
1

16. Then you will easily realize that there is no difference
whatsoever between the resistance and struggle of the
European peoples against -the Hitler invaders and the
resistance and struggle of the Arab peoples against the Israel
invaders. The supreme law of self-defence and self-preser
vation applies in both cases. In Europe then and in the
Middle East today we have resistance and struggle against
foreign invaders and aggressors.

9. Subsequent events have shown that the Israeli authorities have chosen to ignore even this serious warning of the
Security Council. They are continuing to carry out fresh
criminal attacks on the neighbouring Arab States. The
members of the Security Council have detailed information
on this subject, presented by the mission of Arab countries
to the United Nations.
10. The Council knows that on 24 February the Israel air
force invaded Syrian air space and bombed population
centres in the vicinity of Damascus, as a result of which
there were numerous casualties among the civilian population,

17. In invoking the supreme law of self-preservation and
self-defence for yourself, for your own country, YOU dare
not-you cannot-logically deny the right of the Arabs
living temporarily under Israel occupation to apply that
same law.

11, The members of the Council were informed that Israel
aircraft and armoured personnel carriers attacked Jordanian
troops and civilian objectives in an area south of the Dead
Sea. From documents of the Security Council it is known
that Israel armed forces are systematically staging military
provocations in the Suez Canal zone.

18. The short-sighted politicians of Tel Aviv who place
their hopes in military threats and blackmail should have
realized by now that the struggle of peoples against
aggressors and occupiers of foreign soil is not only just and
valid from the standpoint of international law and the
United Nations Charter, it is also ineluctable and irresistible. It cannot be stopped by means of intimidation or
repression. The longer Israel’s troops remain in the seized
Arab territories, the fiercer and wider will be the growth of
the liberation struggle of the Arab peoples against the
invaders and the greater will be the support and sympathy
for this sacred struggle among all peace-loving countries and
peoples of the world.

12. Israel’s acts of aggression against Jordan reported in
the letters of the Jordanian representative dated 16 and 17
March circulated as Security Council documents [S/9083
and S/9085],1 and especially the latest attack of 26 March,
are new links in the chain of Israel’s uninterrupted attempts
to heighten the already acute and dangerous military
tension in the Middle East and to use it as a pretext for
holding on to the Arab territories occupied by Israel troops
and for consolidating Israel positions there.

19. The representatives of Israel, and particularly the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Eban, advance yet another
concept in connexion with the persistent acts of aggression
against the Arab States. They declare in the press, at news
conferences and in official statements that these are all
minor incidents of little significance, that on the wholse
there is peace and tranquillity in the Middle East, and no
particular threat to the cause of peace.

13. In committing these acts of aggression, the Israel
Government advances by way of explanation the concept
of “active defence”, To listen to the Israel representative,
when Israel armed forces destroy Jordanian villages, kill
women and children, sow terror and death among the
civilian population, they are merely taking defensive
measures.

20. I should like to ask how we are to understand remark.s
of this kind. The killing of children-is that tranquillity?
The destruction of homes by bombing and the killing of
peaceful inhabitants-is that security? Can the bombardment of Jordanian villages with rockets and napalm frorn
aircraft be described as peace and tranquillity in the Middle
East?

14. First Israel unleashes an aggressive war against the
neighbouring Arab States and occupies their territory; then,
when a wave of popular wrath and indignation grows and
spreads in these territories, and a national liberation
movement against the foreign occupiers and oppressors
develops, Israel persists in directing fresh military blows at
the territory of the very States which are the victims of its
aggression. If ‘these are defensive measures, what then must
we call international gangsterism? But Israel and its leaders
should bear in mind that Israel cannot count on going
unpunished for bringing death and destruction to the
territories of neighbouring Arab States,

21. It is hard to view such statements by official representatives of Israel as anything but hypocritical and false words
which challenge the conscience of any honest man. Th.e
reasoning behind the assertion that the situation is calm in
the Middle East is obvious. If it is calm there, nothing need
be done; no settlement is needed; everything can be left as
it is. In other words, we can let Israel “assimilate” the
seized Arab territories and close our eyes to the killing, the
destruction, all the crimes perpetrated by Israel’s military
against the Arab population and against the Arab States,

IS. Mr. Tekoah, do not invoke the sacred memory of the
resistance fighters against Witlerite Germany. Do not try to
shield Israel’s continuing acts of aggression against the Arab
States behind references to the supreme law of self-preservation and self-defence. Look at the other side of the coin.
Imagine yourself for a moment in the place of a peaceful
inhabitant of an Arab country subjected to military terror
by foreign aggressors, and apply the supreme law of
self-preservation and self-defence to yourself.
1 Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-fourth
Supplembnt for January, February and March 1969.

22. But the representatives of Israel will not succeed in
deluding anyone with their soothing words. Just as aggression cannot be passed off as defence, just as the killing of
children and women and the destruction of peaceful villages
cannot be presented as peaceable acts, so talk about an
alleged tranquil situation in the Middle East cannot conceal
the dangerous situation which really exists there. The

Year,

2

aggressive actions of Israel are creating a fresh threat to the
peace in the Middle East, with all the consequences which
that entails.

taining peace and security in the Middle East and for
achieving a political settlement in that part of the world.
30. Everything that has been said here leads us to a single
conclusion-that the Security Council mfrst rapidly, clearly
and unambiguously condemn Israel’s fresh acts of aggression against Jordan and demand of Israel that it unconditionally and unreservedly comply with the Council’s
earlier cease-fire resolutions and that it’stop its actions
aimed at disrupting efforts for a peaceful political settlement of the Middle East problem. The Council should warn
Israel’s leaders that if they intend to act in such a way as to
disrupt the efforts towards a political settlement in the
Middle East which are now being undertaken, they will be
fully answerable for this to the Security Council, to the
United Nations, to the peoples of the world and to their
own people.

23. Israel’s latest acts of aggression against Jordan take on
an especially sinister character since they come at the very
time when, as all members of the Security Council are
aware, new active efforts are being made at the international level to find ways of settling the Middle East problem
on the basis of the Security Council’s resolution of 22
November 1967, at the time when intensive preparations
are being made for important negotiations which all those
who sincerely wish to see international peace strengthened
lrope will produce constructive results.
24. If in these precise .circumstances Israel commits one
act of aggresgion after another against the neighbouring
Arab States, this is indeed dangerous and fraught with
serious consequences, primarily for Israel itself. Israel’s
actions can mean only one thing-that the Government of
Israel wants to undermine the international efforts aimed at
restoring peace in the Middle East and to jeopardize the
success of the negotiations which are under way.

31. The Soviet Union is fully prepared to support a
resolution by the Security Council which would SO stipulate.
32. Mr. KHATRI (Nepal): It was indeed with a profound
feeling of sadness that we heard the statements made this
morning by the representative of Jordan and the representative of Israel, We are sad because large-scale violence has
again erupted in the Middle East, Repeated warnings given
by the Security Council have gone unheeded; loss of
innocent civilian lives and damage to property have
occurred, and the cease-firehas been violated.

25. But this cannot be permitted. The hopes of millions of
people who live in the :regioq, for lasting peace and a
tranquil existence are bound up with a political settlement
in the Middle East. All the peoples of the world bind their
hopes for an easing of international tension and for general
progress in the development of international relations
towards the strengthening of peace and world security with
such a task.

33. This new violence has taken place at a time when we
thought that we had detected some positive signs indicat-,
ing; we hoped, that progress was being made, slowly but
steadily. All of those signs, in our view, augured well for a
return to an atmosphere of sanity and understanding and,
ultimately, for a settlement of the troubled situation in the
Middle East.

26. The ‘representative of Israel has again spoken here
today about Israel’s desire for peace. But these are empty
words. They do not carry conviction. What is needed is
deeds, not words. What are the Israeli Government’s
protestations that it wants peace worth if at a time when
many States, the Security Council, the Secretary-General of
the United Nations, his Special Representative Ambassador
Jarring and the permanent members of the Security Council
are making serious efforts to arrive at a political settlement
by applying all the provisions of the Security Council’s
resolution of 22 November 1967, Israel is working to
disrupt such a settlement and is persisting in its policy of
refusing to implement that resolution?

34. First, we were glad that, after careful consultations
and preparations at Headquarters, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Dr. Gunnar Jarring, could
at last return to the area to pursue his peace efforts
actively.
35. Secondly, we were also awaiting with anticipation and
hope the projected mission reportedly being carried out by
the Jordanian monarch, His Majesty King Hussein.

27. Behind these words about a desire for peace lies
something
quite different-a policy of protracted war
against the Arab States, of delaying a settlement in the
Middle East and of annexing the seized Arab territories. But
it is time that the politicians in Israel realized that this is
not only an unreal policy but a dream, a utopia.

36. Last, but not least, preparations were believed to be
nearing completion for the Big Four talks, in which we have
placed a great deal of faith and hope.
37. Now, all those hopeful signs-those careful preparations and the good groundwork for an essential settlement,
which took a lot of time and energy-would surely suffer at
the hands of this act of violence, an act which is ill-timed,
premeditated and thoughtless. Moreover, we regard this act
to be wholly inconsistent with the requirements of selfdefence.

28. Israel’s conduct at this moment deepens its guilt as an
aggressor and its responsibility for sabotaging the cause of
peace in the Middle East and for seeking deliberately to
prevent a political settlement. This policy cannot fail to
arouse indignation and condemnation among the peoples of
the-‘entire world, who hate war, curse the warmongers, and
want peace.

38. We regret this state of affairs. We sympathize with the
dead and their families; we are sorry for the loss of
property; and, above all, we deplore and we condemn all

29. All of this enormously increases the Security Council’s
responsibility under the United Nations Charter for main3

often mistaken for genuine statesmanship. We appeal to thi:.
leaders of both sides to rise above the vicious cycle of
violence, terrorism and retaliation and display statesmanship of which they are no doubt capable by controlling that
cycle and helping to implement the provisions of the
November 1967 resolution. By so doing; they wotild herald
together a new and glorious era in the history of the Middle
East.

violence, all violations of the cease-fire, all resort to the use
of force, and all attempts at setting back the progress made
towards our objective. And I submit that, in the question of
the Middle East, we all know before hand what the
objective is. It is not as though we did not know our goal.
The Security Council, in its resolution of 22 November
1967, has set forth, very clearly and very objectively, the
framework and the shape of a just and equitable settlement
of the situation in the Middle East.

46. As a distant and peace-loving country, Nepal cherishes
its friendship with all the peoples of the Middle East, Arabs
as well as Israelis. We hope, that they realize that their
common destiny lies in friendship, understanding anld
goodwill, After three rounds of major conflicts anld
countless armed encounters, it is high time that the:y
realized this. Theirs is a land made holy and sanctified b:y
the lives and teachings of a great many teachers and
saviours of mankind.

39. The solution lies not in the finding of a new formula!
but in the implementation
of an existing one, laid down by
the Security Council by a unanimous vote.
40, The views of His Majesty’s Government, as stated time
and again since the outbreak of the 1967 Arab-Israel
conflict, pre-date the adoption of the November resolution.
Those views are motivated by a strong desire for peace and
justice. Therefore, it is but natural that our views conform
to the provisions of that resolution in all its essential parts.

47. Mr. YOST (United States of America): Once again we
have been summoned to n session of this Council because of
the tragic results of continued violence in the Middle East.
We have heard grim descriptions of death and destruction
and accusations against one side or the other for causing it
all.

41. His Majesty’s Government has always maintained the
view that a lasting peace in the Middle East is possible only
through a settlement, negotiated either between the parties
directly concerned or within the framework of the United
Nations, which includes, first, the withdrawal of armed
forces from occupied territories; and, second, termination
of all claims or states of belligerency, and acknowledgement
of and respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of all States in the area and of their right to live in peace
and within secure and recognized boundaries. We envisaged
the settlement as a further guarantee of the maritime rights
of all States in the area and as a just solution of the refugee
problem.

48. The air attack that wascarried out by Israeli Air Forc’e
planes yesterday in the area south of es Salt caused
the death, we are told, of eighteen persons and the injury of
twenty-five others-all unarmed civilians except for two
local policemen, We deeply deplore this loss of life and the
human suffering in this tragedy, In the face of this event,
my Government wishes to make clear once again, as it hiiS
so often in the past, its firm opposition to attacks of this
nature. We urge the Government of Israel once again finally
to avoid such indiscriminate actions and all other violations
of the cease-fire resolutions of this Council, This occurrence
was a flagrant violation of the cease-fire, and my delegatioln
deeply deplores it.

42. In the light of this position, His Majesty’s Government
has lent its full support to the November resolution and the
Jarring Mission, as well as to the recent initiative taken by
the Big Four Powers towards promoting a just and accepted
settlement within the framework of that resolution.
43. It is a matter of satisfaction for us, therefore, that
preliminary
consultations have already started between
those Powers. It is right that those Powers should start
consultations, Under the Charter, it is the duty of the Big
Four, as permanent members of the Security Council, to
take rightful initiative in matters related to the maintenance
of international peace and security.

49. But we know all too well that this attack was not an
isolated incident but must be seen in the total context of
the continuing absence of peace in the Middle East. WC
know of other equally serious incidents as well. The hard,
brutal, tragic reality is that violations of the cease-fire, from
whatever quarter, act to stimulate answering violations of
the cease-fire. Thus, while condemning yesterday’s attaclk,
we cannot refrain from condemning the other grave
violations from the other side which have taken place. The
roster is a long and sad one. UNTSO has provided us with
numerous reports in recent weeks, particularly concerning
the all-too-frequent exchanges of fire across the Suez Canal
which show the continued fragility of peace throughout the
area. These too are serious violations of the cease-fire which
are to be greatly deplored and which should likewise be
renounced. There have been other incidents: bombs iirl
markets, attacks on civilian aircraft, an explosion in a
university cafeteria. Arab fe&yeen organizations have
proudly proclaimed their responsibility for these. Miy
Government equally deplores these actions and the Govemmerits of Arab countries cannot completely escape responz;ibility for them. This violence must be stopped and all
cease-fire violations brought to an end.

44. I should also like to say that His Majesty’s Government does not condone any attempt from any side to
aggravate the situation, which would create difficulties for
the establishment of a lasting peace. As the Foreign
Minister of Nepal has recently stated, the commando
activities carried on inside the territories under Israeli
chntrol from across the border, and the reprisals and
counter-reprisals, cannot be approved of, in the interest of
peace in the region. While we appreciate that the continued
occupation of Arab lands by Israel does provide a cause for
provocation, we also feel that such activities do not
contribute to an improvement of the situation.
45. In these troubled times, an excessive show of bravado
and a concern for short-term military and political gain are
4

.

50, The pattern that we see before us is all too clear and,
of course, it. is not new. As violence increases on one side, it
is answered by greater or more frequent violence on the
other. It would be tragic enqugh if only military personnel
or others who have armed themselves and seek battle were
involved. But this, as we all know, is not the case. Nor can
we expect it to be otherwise when a pattern of violence
such as we have witnessed develops. Innocent civilians
inevitably suffer. Those who would claim to be acting on
their behalf, to be protecting them, become instead the
indirect instrumefits of their death and injury. Schoolchildren, women doing their daily marketing, quiet picnickers-these are the ones who s;lffer most.

ing] that whatever incidents

took place in the Middle
East-or, more precisely, Palestine-would be merely links
in an titerminable chain of events that might one day lead
to a world conflict. Since March 1968, the number of
incidents, reported and unreported, is legion, I do not have
to catalogue them; they are in the records of the United
Nations, either in the records themselves or in the form of
letters sent by the various parties to the dispute.
58. It seems that what I said bears repetition, because the
work of this Council is becoming merely academic. There
have been thirteen or fourteen-I have lost count of the
number-condemnations
of Israel; and to be fair, there have
also been certain criticisms of the Arab States that were at
war with Israel. But nothing has happened, and I dare say
nothing ever will happen, that will be conducive to a just
peace, because that edifice, that house, that State called
Israel was built in contravention of the highest principles of
the Charter of 1945. As we know from the lessons of
history, any house built on sand will totter and fall. I do
not feel at all happy that any house should fall. We do not,
none of us, feel any sat&faction that any people, whether
Jews or gentiles, should suffer and be killed. But the whole
problem stems from an injustice. The Charter speaks of
peace with justice, Need I repeat, from among the purposes
and principles of the Charter, Chapter I, Article 1, paragraph 1 which states: “. . , in conformity with the principles of justice and international law”? Need I repeat,
from among the purposes and principles of the Charter,
Chapter I, Article 1, paragraph 2 which states: “To develop
friendly relations among nations based on respect for the
principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples,
and to take other appropriate measures to strengthen
universal peace”?

51. In spite of the gloomy situation on the ground, there
are hopeful developments as well which we must not lose
sight of. The Secretary-General’s Special Representative is
in the area actively consulting the parties and we were
encouraged
to learn that he has addressed a series of
substantive questions to the Governments concerned. We
very much hope that the replies to his questions will be
positive
and that, as a result, his efforts pursuant to
Security
Council resolution 242 (1967) will receive new
impetus.
52. In addition, consultations among certain permanent
members of the Security Council are in train on ways and
means whereby Ambassador Jarring’s efforts can best be
assisted. In the not-too-distant future, it is likely that the
bilateral
exchanges now taking place will expand into
four-Power
consultations in support of Ambassador
Jarring’s efforts.
53. On the other hand, the kind of incidents which
occasioned this meeting today, and which have all too
frequently
occurred in recent weeks, greatly hinder the
achievement
of the basic objectives set forth in resolution
242 (1967). What is urgently required, in addition to
co-operation
with Ambassador Jarring, is for the parties
scrupulously
to comply with the cease-fire arrangements.
They must make every effort to see that all violations of
the cease-fire are prevented and they must co-operate in
strengthening
the arrangements for the supervision of the
cease-fire.

S9. We adopted the Charter in 1945 at San Francisco, and
my country, together with other countries, large and small,
appended its signature to the Charter. Those of us who
were contemporaries of the League of Nations know why
the League of Nations foundered: because it did not respect
the Covenant in so far as it spelled out the observance of
justice and peace. Certain Powers, in the 193Os, flouted the
Covenant of the League of Nations, and the League of
Nations fell. And its fall was indeed great, because it led us
to the Second World War. Two years after the Charter was
adopted, none other than the President of one of the major
Powers, through pressure, obtained three votes fcr the
partition of Palestine. I do not wish to mention the names
of the countries whose Foreign Ministers told me what
pressure was brought to bear upon them to cast their votes
in favour of the partition of Palestine, It was threatened
that they would not receive aid-and everybody wasin need
of aid in the wake of the Second World War-if they did nqt
vote for the partition of Palestine. It was only two or three
votes that made the partition of Palestine the tragic reality
with which WCare still confronted twenty-two years later.

54. Once again, we call upon all of the Governments
concerned
to stop this senselesswaste of human life, to
abide scrupulously by the cease-fire and to devote themselves sincerely and whole-heartbdly to .the search for a just
and lasting peace in the Middle East. The United States is
determined
to spare no effort in pursuit of this goal.
55.
upon

The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian):
the representative of Saudi Arabia.

I call

56. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia) Thank you, Mr. President, for granting me permission to speak on this expanded
item of which the Council is seized. I must indeed thank
my good friend the representative of the United States,
Ambassador
Yost, for having insisted that the two communications
should figure under the title “The situation in
the Middle East”.

60. Why should I take the floor today, one might ask? All
or many 6f the things I am going to say may have been
mentioned not only by me but also by those who have
spoken before. I have lived with this question since 1920,
but a person like myself is not consulted because of his
expeiience in this matter. People from various parts of the
world who are thousands of miles from the area concerned

57. Members
of the Council may recall one of my
-speeches of March 1968, when I repeated [1406tlz meetS

are supposed to decide the fate of Palestine, and Of Israel
for that matter, My prime reason, however, for asking to
participate in this debate is nothing new: it is to correct the
distortions of Mr. Tekoah and to go into the genesis of the
problem so that not only the members of the Council but
also
people who read its proceedings may have a clearer
view of the situation, and so that perhaps some trend may
become visible in world public opinion and gather momen
tum so as to touch the conscience of responsible people all
over the world.
61. Mr. Tekoah is very adept in his logical argumentation
of the Israeli side. He resorts to rhetoric, he talks of the
twenty centuries that it took his people, or the Jewish
people, to be specific, to regain their homeland. For twenty
centuries the Jewish people had to fight. He did not say
“the Jewish peoples”. He said “the Jewish people” had to
fight to regain their homeland.
62. Who are the Jewish people? Is there one Jewish
people? I ask again and again and again: Is there one
Christian people ? Is there one Moslem people? Or are
there peoples? I shall cite quotations from Jewish writers
and scholars as to who the Jewish people are-1 mean
precisely those who came from Eastern and Central Europe,
thoie who carried the torch of Zionism and, under that
torch, blasted their way through all kinds of atrocities to
take the Holy Land of Palestine.

But here I must add the following
Encyclopedia:

from the &/ew!&

6‘* 1I Nisi by his son, Aaron II.“-1 am referring to those
Kings of the Chazars-“King Joseph himself was a son of
Aaron, and ascended the throne in accordance with the
law of the Chazars relating to succession.”
64, And here, because many aspersions are thrown at the
Arabs, I am quoting from the Jewish Encyclopedia in order
to show whether there is any such thing as a pure people, aa
a people with pure blood, a concept which has been refuted
by anthropologists and by ethnologists:
“The king had twenty-five wives, all of royal blood, and
sixty concubines”-1 do not know of what origin they
were-“all famous beauties”. He must have had an eye.
“Each one dwelt in a separate tent and was watched by a
eunuch.” (This seems to have been the beginning of the
downfall of the Chazar kingdom.)
65. Some went to Hungary, your country, Mr, President.
when they were dispersed. That is from the Jewish
Encyclopedia. But the great mass of the people remain& in
their native country.
66. None other than the illustrious Jewish scholar land
Professor Graetz confirms what I say--and I do not know
whether the Zionists would denounce him, because he
shows that there was not one people. Those Jews from
Eastern and Central Europe had nothing to do with the
Semites; they were not Semites. I am quoting from the
great Jewish Professor H. Graetz.

63. If you turn to volume IV, pages 1 to 5 of the Jewish
Encyclopedia, you will find that those Jews who held the
torch of Zionism were no more Semites than you or I,
Mr. President, are Chinese, ethnologically speaking. Sometunes I wish I were Chinese. I shall quote from the Jewish
Encyclopedia:

“The Chazars professed a coarse religion which was
combined with sensuality and lewdness. After Obad.iah
came a long series of Jewish Shagans’“-meaning Kings
“for according to a fundamental law of the State only
Jewish rulers were permitted to ascend the throne. For
some time the Jews of other countries had no knowleid@
of the conversion of this powerful Kingdom to Judaism.
And when at last a vague rumour to this effect reached
them, they were of the opinion that Chazaria was peopled
by the remnant of the former ten tribes.”

“In, the second half of the sixth century the Chazar:
moved westward. The kingdom of the Chazars wasfirmly
established in most of South Russia long before the
foundation of the Russian monarchy by the Varangiansthat was in 855 A.D. At this time the kingdom of the
Chazars stood at the height of its power and was
constantly at war. . , .
“At the end of the eighth century of the Chaghan”meaning the King-“of the Chazars and his grandees
together with a large number of his heathen people
embraced the Jewish religion,

67. And Mr. Tekoah speaks of “my people”, “my Sernitiz
people” and of people being ‘Lanti-Sen~ites”. There am
Jewish peoples just like there is an American people, which
consists of various nationalities, but it is an American
people. My Chinese colleague knows that when Kubla Khan
took China, he and his dynasty became Chinese. They were
Mongolians, but the Chinese are proud of Kubla Khan.

“The Jewish population in the entire domain of the
Chazars, in the period between the seventh and the tenth
centuries, must have been considerable. . , , about the
ninth century it appears as if all the Chazars were Jews
and that they had been converted to Judaism only a short
time before. It was one of the successors of Bhulan,
named Obadiah, who regenerated the kingdom and
strengthened the Jewish religion. He invited Jewish
scholars to settle in his dominions and founded synagogues and schools. The people were instructed in the
Bible, the Mishnah and Talmud, and in the ‘divine service
of the hazzanim’.

68. One cannot say that there is a Chinese blood. I cannot
say that there is even an Arab blood, because we are all
mixed. Many people who were Arabized embraced Arabimr
just as many embraced Islam and others embraced Judaism.
Here I come to the word “Judaism” and must quote for the
benefit of Mr. Tekoah a passage from another great Jewish
scholar-and he must be familiar with him, unless he is too
secular to delve into the origin of Judaism. From Ithe
photograph he really looks like a very honest man, as most
genuine scholars are. The book he wrote is y&r&m
a&
Other Discourses. This is by the late Rabbi Adolph Moses.

“In their writings, the Chazars used the Hebrew letters
The Chazar language predominated. Obadiah was succeeded by his son . . .”
6

That book had an introduction by II. G. Enelow, D.D.,
Rabbi of the Congregation Adath Israel in Louisville,
Kentucky, This book is sixty-six years old having been
published in Louisville in 1903.

71. Everyone’s religion is a private matter between the
individual and his conscience. Some people do not believe
~JI God; others do; others like the Buddhists believe in
self-restraint; the Confucians believe in a code of ethics; the
moral codes are there in religions, But the Zionists want
every Jew all over the world to become Israelis and come to
Palestine. At whose expense? Of the indigenous people of
Palestine. Forget that they are Arabs. They are the
idigenous people of Palestine, As I mentioned time and
again, many of them may have been Jews originally. Some
of them may have been pagans. But they have lived right
there for centuries.

69. Why do I take the time of the Council to mention all
Because of the words “my Jewish people” and
because of the misuse of the word “Judaism”. May I, with
your permission Sir, read only short excerpts from his
chapter on Yahwehism. I mentioned, I believe, in one of
my interventions that the word Yahweh came from the
name of the God of Moses’ wife, the Midianite; and this was
the God of ancient Israel. Here this great scholar tells us
something about the origin of Judaism and how it had
different
connotations. In fact, it was Josephus the
historian who lived seventy years after Christ and who was
the first to use the word “Judaism’. Then it was forgotten
for a long time and came into current usage in the Middle
Ages and more especially in the seventeenth, eighteenth and
nineteenth
centuries. This is the scholarly rabbi who is
speaking:
this?

72. But this is not all. This attempt of the Zionists to
carve for themselves a State did not apply only to Palestine.
And here I want Mr. Tekoah to go back to his history,
although
in 1920 he may not have been born; I do not
know
how old he is; he may have been a child. When Russia
expanded after Ruric, the Chazars were dispersed; some of
them even went to Spain, and as I mentioned, Sir, some
went to Hungary; others went to Poland. Remember that
these Chazars were not of Semitic origin. By “Semite” I do
not mean Semitic blood, because there is no such thing as
Semitic blood. I mean Semites by culture, language, way of
life and food.

“Among the innumerable misfortunes which have been
befalling the Israelites since they ceased to form a
State” -meaning in Palestine, and that was 2,000 years
ago-“and
a nation, one of the most fateful in its
consequences is the name Judaism. In the minds of the
Gentiles this name indissolubly associates our religion,
which is universal in its deepest sources and universal in
its scope and tendency, with the Jewish,race, and thus
stamps it as a tribal religion, Worse still, the Jews
themselves, who have gradually come to call their religion
Judaism, are most of them misled to believe that their
faith is bound up altogether with the Jewish race, that it
is a religion for Jews alone and not for people of any
other race or nationality.”

73. This is what constitutes a culture, a people. The
culture constitutes the people, the way of life, the language,
‘the poetry, the literature, the music. Incidentally, some of
the greatest German musicians happened to be of the
Jewish faith, such as Mendelssohn and Meyerbeer. Their
music has nothing in common with Semitic music. I know
Semitic music when I hear it. Mr. Tekoah must now
recognize Semitic music when he hears the music of the
Oriental Jews and the Arabs there. Mendelssohn wrote in
the German tradition; so did Meyerbeer; so did Offenbach
who wrote in the French musical idiom; so did Heine the
literator, so did the philosophers who were of the Jewish
faith, but were Europeans. And these Chazars who helped
the torch of Zionism are Europeans from eastern and
central Europe. Herzl put that idea into their heads because
of the persecution of the Jewsin the Middle Ages. We never
had any persecution of Jews in the whole of the Middle
East, Our brothers in the Ottoman Empire had some
Ministers who were Jews, as they also had Ministers who
were Christians. They were a Moslem State, one of the most
tolerant empires in that respect, the Ottoman Empire.

70. The philosophy of Zionism is that all Jews the whole
world over constitute one race and should possess one
nationality,
If so, and the Zionists succeed, 17 million Jews
should become Israelis and their ingathering, according to
HerzI’s dream, should be in Palestine. Is it any wonder that
the Arabs are afraid of Zionist expansion? Of course I do
not believe that one per cent of American Jews have left for
Israel, because they are proud of their American citizenship. But they are being brainwashed every day in the
national press here. They are told “Your first duty is to
lsrael”. And those American Jews, poor and rich, are proud
of being Americans. But Mr, Tekoah and his Government
will keep working and working here and in Western
Europe-and
also in the Soviet Union-to bring over the
Jews and call them Israelis. Many Jews were part of the
great Russian Revolution; they worked on principle and
ideology. They did not identify themselves with Judaism;
they identified themselves with Leninism. But they are told
“No, you are not Russians, you are first and foremost one
people, one blood, one race” even though anthropolgists,
sociologists and ethnologists have told us that there is no
such thing as one blood and one race. We are all homo
strpiens; we differ because of the geographical impact on
people; where the sun was intense throughout the agesthe
skin became pigmented; but we all belong to one specieshorn0

74. “My people have fought for twenty centuries to regain
their hom&md”-those
are the words of Mr. Tekoah, as
paraphrased by me. I have proved time and again that they
were not Semites, that they had embraced a Seniitic
religion as a Scotsman or a Scandinavian may have
embraced Christianity, or an African from dark Africa may
have embraced Islam, And both Christianity and Islam, like
Judaism, are Semitic religions. There are Jewish peoples, I
submit; there are Christian peoples, and there are Modem
peoples, It so happens that there are Arab peoplesnationalities, various nationalities. But they have more or
less a common culture and language, the same language and
the same way of life, more or less.
75. I started to mention something about how the Zionists
wanted to carve out a state for themselves even before they

sapiens.

7

77. NOW, they did not succeed in Poland, because Poland
is a European country; there are forces to contend with
there. 1 am not going to mention all the political factors
that went into the picture arid stood in the way of the
realization of such a scheme. But where did they go?
Having not succeeded in Poland, those Chazars wanted to
carve out. a national home, which became a state in
P&&e.
At whose expense? At the expense of the Arabs.

succeeded through pressures of the Western world, more
specifically from the United Kingdom in 1917, because
they succeeded in railroading the United States into the
First World War. I read the documents on this matter and
do not want to encumber the Council with more quotations, However let me say that they succeeded inter alia in
railroading the United States into the First World War and
the price was paid by the indigenous people of Palestine6,000 miles away from the United States, 3,000 miles away
from the United Kingdom.

78, But let us forget that they are Arabs. They are the
indigenous people of Palestine. It so happens that the Ara’bs
had been ruled for 400 years before, and in between the
two world wars, for twenty years, by High Commissioners
of European Mandates. It fell to the British Mandate ‘to
introduce those people of Chazar origin into Palestine. This
is not a Jewish, Semitic movement. This is a Chmr,
European, alien movement to the Middle East.

76. Where is justice? Peace with justice? What happened
in 1947 is a mockery. Peace with justice? After the First
World War they wanted to carve out a state, first, on a
federal basis, in Poland. There happened to be remnants of
those Chazars who bec.ame very active in Polish life. Many
of you come from central Europe. I do not know how
many millions of Jews there were in Poland and the
surrounding ‘lands. And none other than Mr. Woodrow
Wilson sent over Mr. Henry Morgenthau Sr. who happened
to be of the Jewish faith, but he was one of the most loyal
Americans in this country, one of the most loyal American
Jews, loyal to America because he decried Zionism. He said
that our loyalty-we Jews in America-should be to
America, as he repeatedly mentioned in his memoirs. Thus,
Mr. Woodrow Wilson sent out Mr. Morgenthau Sr. Incidentally, during the First World War he was the American
Ambassador to Turkey. This is from Mr, Morgenthau’s
book, published in 1922 by Doubleday Page Company. He
was at the head of a commission sent by Mr. Woodrow
Wilson, who enunciated the Fourteen Points and the
principle of self-determination, which later, in this very
United Nations, was elaborated by colleagues and myself
into a right. And it figures in both Covenants of Human
Bights, I quote from Mr. Morgenthau’s book:

79. If you decide in this Council-although
you are not
scholars you can ask scholars, Jewish scholars for that
matter-that there could be only one Jewish people, even
then they have no title to Palestine because the Jews at one
time happened to be there 2,000 years ago. The Indians
were here 500 years or so before Colu1~~5us
came. Woulid
the United States give back the whole continent to the
Indians? Why should the Arabs give back the Holy Land of
Palestine to some tribes, who are Semites like ourselves,
who had vanished from the scene or had converted 1.0
Christianity or Islam? Who was St, Paul? Who were the
Apostles around Jesus but Jews’? Forget about the Arab
invasion of Palestine. The Arabs came and the people of the
whole fertile crescent rebelled against Byzantia because of
the tyranny of Byzantia in that period, not only because of
the might of Arab warriors from the peninsula. Many of the
indigenous people of Palestine and the fertile crescent may
have been Jews, then Christians, and many then became
Moslems. Whom are you fooling here, Mr. Tekoah, in saying
“our people”, “my people”? There are Jewish peoples.-and many of them I salute for their loyalty to thclr
countries of birth and adoption, including the United
States, including the Soviet IJnion, including Lebanon,
including many other countries, Arab and non-Arab, where
there are Jews, notwithstanding all the insults that have
been thrown since the Zionists created a Jewish world
problem.

“We found that, among the Jews, there was a thoughtful, ambitious minority, who, sincere in their original
motives, intensified the trouble by believing that its
solution lay only in official recognition of the Jews as a
separate nationality,”
They did not want to be considered Polish. They had lived
there for many years and the Poles were generous to them,
And rightly so because most of them, he says, identified
their interests with the interests of the Poles. He adds:
“They had seized on Zionism as a means to establish
the Jewish nation. To them, Zionism was national, not
religious; when questioned, they admitted that it was a
name with which to capture the imagination of their
brothers whose tradition bade them pray thrice daily for
their return to the Holy Land.
“ . . . Meanwhile, they wanted to join the Polish nation

SP. All those Jewish people in Palestine do not want to be
gathered in Palestine. This is a movement that has use~d
Judaism, a noble religion, for political and economic ends
to exploit the Middle East. They even play on the
sentiments of their own citizens. The leaders are hardboiled
secular men-and lately, a woman. At whose expense? At
the expense of the indigenous people’of Palestine. Theocracy: they do not mention it. At one time, I remember, in
the forties, it was said here in our debate that theocracies
were anachronisms. Now our colleagues from Israel do not
mention that the State should be based on religioll or that
religion should be based on the State. It is by force of
conquest, a fait accompli: here we are and we have all the
means of establishing ourselves; whether you like it or not,
we are here, the Zionists assert, And they defy the four Big
Powers by saying: “If You bring out something which is in
consonance with what we want, then we will listen to You.”
They defy the four Big Powers.

in a federation having a joint parliament where both
Yiddish and Polish should be spoken: their favourite way
Of expressing it was to say that they wanted something
like Switzerland where French, German, and Italian
cantons work together in harmony.”
1 can quote other passagesto show how Mr. Morgen&au
decried that plan and, being a loyal American, he reported
to Woodrow Wilson ‘that that was one of the maddest
schemes he had ever heard of.
8

81. And then Mr. Tekoah says that Israel has no choice
but to defend itself. What about the indigenous people of
Palestine? He mentioned the Fatah, an organization which
is a Palestine liberation movement. There are other liberation organizations as well. Why does he not put himself in
their place, in the place of those who had homes there,
whose ancestors are buried in the soil of Palestine? Why
does he not put,himself in their place, in the place of those
who are trying to retrieve their homeland, objectively
speaking? Had they not lived there for centuries? Do they
r-rot have to retrieve their homeland? No; the French have
the right to retrieve their homeland from the Germans in
Zllsace and Lorraine. The British have the right to crush
anybody who trespasses on them. The Dutch, the Belgians,
in Europe, by underground fighting, have that right, but
not the Palestinians; they are a second brand. No, Sir; they
consider themselves as having a right like every human
being. I deplore the fact that they have to kill and be killed.
82. And what is the policy of Israel? The policy of Israel
is to compel-at least they tink they can compel-the Arab
countries to crush those Palestinians. I submit that the Arab
countries would neither want to crush nor dare to crush
them, this is more important-because they would be shot,

brother, you are off the tangent. The Zionists want to
establish a state. Do not waste your breath.”
86. When I used to speak with the Zionists in London, in
the thirties-not only myself, but others-and tried to
explore the possibility of establishing a binational state,
one-third Jewish and two-thirds Arab-that was the racial
make-up in 1939~they would not listen to us. We were
called the moderates among the Arabs. They would not
listen to the moderates.
87. And when none other than Mousa Husseini met with
Mr. Ben Gurion in Europe to see whether something could
be worked out-and it was intimated to me what went
on-Ben Gurion put his hand on his shoulder and said,
“Look, you could be as old as my son. We will settle for
nothing less than a Jewish State in Palestine”-a Zionist
State in Palestine.
88. When somebody like myself has known all these facts
since 1920~and here we talk in platitudes of how this
problem should be solved-I tell you that this problem will
not be solved in the Council; and even if the four Big
Powers mean business I do not think they will scratch the
surface of a solution-with all due respect to their representatives sitting here and to their Governments in their
capitals-because there happens to be a Palestinian people
that has been aroused. The Israelis thought that within
twenty years the old folks among those refugees would
have died and that, then, their children and grandchildren
would have had no association with their homeland, and
that they would be dispersed in the Arab lands. I warned
this .Council even before the war, in 1966, you may
recall-and you can go back to the records-m this and
other organs of the United Nations that the Palestine
question was no longer the sole dispute between the Arab
countries contiguous with Israel. Of course, there is a
dispute; there is a problem. But the core of the problem is
the Palestinian people, which has awakened like the
Algerian people before them, and which will not be
restrained until it retrieves its homeland,

83. A courageous King is coming here in a few days. I
knew his grandfather. I used to meet with him, King
Abdullah, in, London at the Hyde Park Hotel where there
were conferences on this Palestine question thirty-two years
ago. He was shot by Mousa I-Iusseini, a member of one of
the illustrious families of Palestine. Husseini is related to
the Mufti, whom Mr. Tekoah tried to-to what shall I say?
I should use a polite word-whose reputation he tried to
blemish. Where would he have wanted the Mufti to have
gone? In taking refuge where during the Second World
War? In Paris? Or in Vichy? They would not have wanted
him there. He would have been hounded. Of course he went
to Germany. But as if the Germans would have paid him so
much attention, even in their strategy, as to ask the Mufti
what should be done with the Jews. Go and see what
Rosenberg said-he may have been a Jew, I do not know!
Rosenberg was that racial writer who wrote about nazism.
He had it all planned. I do not know what Rosenberg was;
he may have been a Chazar and then turned into a
Christian. He was a racist-the Mufti was not. The Mufti
was trying to defend Palestine, his country. He took refuge
in Germany because the Allies would have put him in
prison. There is nothing wrong in taking refuge somewhere
where one may feel safe.

89. I warned this Council, and I warned other organs of
the United Nations; but not until three or four years ago
did I realize that there was going to be continuous trouble,
when I ascertained that the Palestinian people was ready to
die to retrieve its homeland.
90. If somebody is ready to die to retrieve his homeland
and you come and tell him, “Never mind; go and live
somewhere else”, he wiIl kilI any Arab who teIls him
that-or the Governments, for that matter. And the Arab
Governments know it. So what does Israel’s policy revolve
around? “Let there be anarchy in the Arab world; we will
hit Jordan; we will hit Egypt; we will hit every country that
harbours those terrorists”-freedom-fighters,
as we call
them. They have improved their terminology: now they call
them “commandos” and ‘fedayeen”, Perhaps they are
trying to get in touch with some of them; I wish they
would, instead of getting in touch with Arab countties. If
they talked sense,maybe they will talk to the Israelis. They
are the people who have lost their country. Egypt and
Jordan have lost parts of their territory, but the freedomfighters have lost their homeland.

84. What about Mr. Churchill when they asked him: “How
come you, the arch enemy of Zionism”-no, not Zionism;
he was a Zionist himself of a sort-“the arch enemy of
Communism,
ally yourself with Stalin? ” He said: “I will
ally myself with the devil in order to win the war.” And
had it not been for Russia, I believe-leave the devil
aside-there would have been no United Kingdom.
85. Why does Mr. Tekoah not mention these things? He
picks on the Mufti every now and then. The Mufti is a
personal friend of mine. I have known him since 1925. He
told me several times, when I remonstrated with him about
having a population of two-thirds Arabs and one-third Jews
in Palestine, and both peoples living side by side: “My
9

93. tit us see what Mr, Nixon is going to do. I wish 5’0%
my dear friend from the United States, would bring this
speech to his attention, He was Vice-President then; now he
holds the highest office.

91. Why do the four Powers not think of something
constructive, instead of just revolving in circles, and try to
send some of their representatives to interview the freedom-fighters of Palestine and see what they want, or invite
them to come here and appear before the Council? Why
not? We have asked many representatives from Africa
whose people were fighting-the Rhodesians, the South
Africans and others-to appear before organs of the United
Nations. Why do the four Powers not ask some of the
representatives of those Palestinian freedom-fighters to
attend a conference-in camera first-and after that, let
them appear here and present the case of Palestine, rather
than me or my brother from Jordan. Of course, my brother
from Jordan has to bring this dispute before the Council
because many Jordanians are being killed. But there will be
no end to this fighting at the rate we are going now,
because the entire Arab people, from the land of Morocco
to the confines of Iran, down to the heart of the Sudan, is
enflamed. And you exp’ect the Arab Governments to tell
the four Powers, “Oh, we will overlook those Palestinians,
we have to settle the problem, one way or another.” They
would not; they dare not.

94. But what about the Palestinian people? Shall America
leave them in the lurch, America which, through ae
principles enunciated by Woodrow Wilson, open.ed up a
new chapter in the history of the world by giving the rieht
of self-determination to many peoples under the colonial
yoke? Will the United States unwittingly abet, b:,’ providing arms to Israel.7 Do they expect the Palestinian people
to be crushed either through the Governments of the
countries where they have taken refuge or by any other
means’? I do not believe so because there is Still a
conscience in the United States, a collective CCbnSCience
which will bring to task any administration that tries to
crush a people that is fighting for its self-determination and
for retrieving of its usurped homeland. Will the Soviet
Union having itself fought a revolution, consent to see a
people crushed like the Palestinian people and a& deal
with this question in a peripheral manner? Only France has
finally realized the just cause of the Palestinian peopk in
recent pronouncements of its jllustrious leader. And what
treatment he is getting from the international press Whidl
to a large extent is controlled by Zionists!

92. Well, none other than an illusfrious kesident of the
United States, Mr. Eisenhower, who had one of the greatest
Secretaries of State, I should say not only in grasping the
principles of the United Nations but how these principles
should be afiplied to the Middle East-Mr. Eisenhower-may
God prolong his life, although he is in bad shape now, as far
as his health is concerned-delivered a radio and television
address on the situation in the Middle East to the American
people twelve years ago on 20 February 1957. This address
is published in pamphlet form, my dear Mr. Buffum, by the
United States Department of State, and it is as if he were
still speaking here. I am not going to read the entire
speech-only a relevant exerpt:

95. Even one of his compatriots, Mr. Cassin, who should
be a Frenchmen first and foremost rather than a ZI,ionist in
disguise-I discovered him in 1950 or 1951 in the ‘Pal& de
Chaillot when many of us were defending the right af
self-determination; he stood against us in the Sa’cial and
Humanitarian Culture Committee, against those of US who
were fighting for the right of self-determination. That man
associated himself with the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and he wasgiven such publicity in the newspapers as
if he and two or three others had actually invented human
rights. I wish I could have corrected that notion without
mentioning him by name, but now I have mentioned him;
all we have done in the United Nations is to codify human
rights, not invent them. These rights have been enunciated by
prophets, by reformers and by teachers throughout the ages
in all parts of the world. Mr. Cassin has been using his
office, using his Nobel prize, time and again in newspapers
in Nice and now in newspapers in Paris and he has been
quoted by none other than Mr. Tekoah to bolster his
argument that the Palestinian people should be crushed, of
course through all the modalities and sophistries of dialectics.

“Israel seeks something more. It insists on firm guarantees as a condition to withdrawing its forces of invasion.”
I am quoting from President Eisenhower’s speech. “This
raises a basic question of principle: Should a nation which
attacks and occupies foreign territory in the face of
United Nations disapproval be allowed to impose conditions on its own withdrawal? If we agree that armed
attack can properly achieve the purposes of the assailant,
then I fear we will have turned back the clock of
international order. We wiIl in effect have countenanced
ihe use of force as a means of settling international
differences and, through this, gaining national advantages.
I do not myself seehow this could be reconciled with the
Charter of the United Nations. The basic pledge of all
Members of the United Nations is that they will settle
their international disputes by peaceful means and will
not use force against the territorial integrity of another
State. If the United Nations once admits that international disputes can be settled by using force, then we will
have destroyed the very foundation of the Organization
and our best hope of establishing a world order. That
would be a disaster for us all, I .would, I feel, be untrue to
the standards of the high office to which you have chosen
me if I were to lend the influence of the United States to
the proposition that a nation which invades another
would be permitted to exact conditions for withdrawal.”

96. I hope I will be excused if I speak with emotion on
this question because emotion is part of the human self. WC
harbour no hatred or rancour towards our Jewish brothers.
even though they may be Zionists, if they do not hurt the
Palestinian people. We are all brothers under the skin, but Et
is high time we leave aside platitudes as a mi:ans of
endeavouring to settle questions in the United Nations.
There is the International Court of Justice to which in 1947
we asked that the question of self-determination
of the
Palestinian people be referred, and I do not have to tell you
all that happened as you can find it in the records. We wepe.
assured that the United Nations was created to bring about
peace with justice. What kind of justice is that when jn
I919 the Palestinian people made up 94 per cent of &e
10

population and there were only 6 per cent Jews and when
that land is transferred to them? We are now dealing with a
fait accompli, you may say. We do not accept that fait
accompli. If we Arab Governments accept the ,fait accompli,
the Palestinian people will not accept it. A
secretary of mine, originally a Palestinian, was in tears the
other day. He is a Saudi now. He has been with me for
twenty years. I said, “What is the matter? ” He said, “I
received a letter from my sister who is in one of the Arab
lands, She found a piece of paper scribbled by her
fourteen-year old son. He said, ‘I have left with my friends
to join the freedom-fighters to retrieve our homeland.” He
is fourteen years old. His mother did not want him to go
but the fire of the love for his homeland made him and
others go. Who are the fighters? Are they old fogies
belonging to the old regime? No, most of them are
between
the ages of fourteen and thirty and there are
several hundred thousand of them; there will be more.
97.

What do you want us, the Arab Governments, to do
them, crush them? What does Mr. Tekoah want us to
do? The only way, I submit, is for Israel to concede that if
its citizens want to have life in the Middle East-in the long
run; I am not talking about , the short term or the
intermediate
term-it has to recognize that we are living in
the twentieth century and that it is not possible to rob a
people, which has awakened, of its own homeland, but to
find a way whereby the Jewish people in Palestine will not
ultimately
perish, as I am afraid they might do-perhaps not
in my lifetime-or be assimilated for that matter, in which
case they would lose their identity. But if they want to
urvive in the future, it is up to them to admit that it wasa
mistake
to establish a State by causing the indigenous
people
of Palestine to leave their homeland by such
violence as was perpetrated by the Stem terrorists, by the
Irgun Zvai Leumi terrorists and by the Haganah terrorists.
with

98. Mr. Tekoah talks of terrorists. His leaders have a
psychosis of the wrong cause or rather they had a psychosis
of their cause in the wrong land because it was a land that
was
already populated. Now the Palestinians have a
psychosis of retrieving that homeland. They could live side
by side in peace only under the aegis of the United Nations,
if there were no such thing as an Arab State in Palestine, no
such thing as an Israeli State, but a State in which both
communities
could live in peace without one dominating
the other-and if they were wise both of them would hoist
the flag of Palestine, Incidentally the name “Palestine”
came from the Philistines and the Philistines came from
Crete and the Cretians lived at the time of King David of
the Bible in Gaza.
99. That is the only solution. Otherwise, whether I am
around here in years to come or not, it is not far-fetched
for me to say that there may be a miscalculation whereby
the coexistence that now prevails among the four Powers
may perhaps turn into a period of irritation, whence a
miscalculation
which, with the diabolical weapons now at
the command of the Big Powers, might well spell a third
world war and the end of humanity.
100. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian]: 1 call on
the representative of Israel.

101. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I should like to bring to the
Council’s attention two reports that may throw additional 0
light on the nature of the terrorist bases at Ein Hazar. It has
become known from authoritative sources that in the
course of the Israeli action carried out yesterday, at least
fifteen members of the terror organization were injured.
Some of them were hospitalized in the Salt Hospital.
Among them there were two commanders of the terror
organization, A certain Yusuf Ali Mahmud AbuJamil, a
member of the Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine, captured by an Israeli patrol in the Dead Sea area
on 27 February 1969 during an encounter between his unit
and the Israeli patrol, told his interrogators the following:
At the end of December 1968, he spent a few hours in one
of the houses which Ambassador El-Farra described today
as “cafes” or “rest-houses”, at Ein Hazar. He wasnot alone,
however, in that “rest-house”; there were thirty other
saboteurs, dressed in uniforms of the terror organization
and armed with rifles. Abu-Jamil also gave a detailed
description of the El-Fatal-i basesat Ein Hazar.
102. Whatever changes may occur from time to time in
the policies of the individual Governments, they cannot
affect the validity of fundamental principles of international law. I trust that this is a tenet accepted by all,
including the Soviet Union. All definitions of aggression,
whether incorporated in international instruments or in the
works of recognized authorities on international law,
establish the sponsorship of acts of terror against another
State as aggression. This is also true of the 1937 Convention
for the Prevention and Punishment of Terrorism, and it is
true of the definition we find in Oppenbeim, volume I,
pages 292 to 294. It is true also of the Soviet draft
submitted to the General Assembly on 25 August 1953,
and of the latest Soviet definition of aggression, submitted
at the end of February to the Special Committee on the
Definition of Aggression.
103. There has never been any doubt that this concept
applies to the situation obtaining between Israel and the
Arab States. At the 354th meeting of the Security Council,
on 19 August 1948, the President of the Council, speaking
in his capacity as representative of the Soviet Union, said:
“ . . . each party should be responsible for the actions of
the individuals or groups on its territory or under its
authority to ensure that their actions do not violate the
truce or lead to a situation that would result in a
resumption of military operations”. (Page 45.1
And as recently as 31 December 1968, the representative of
the USSR declared in the Security Council, in a debate
concerning Israel’s action against terror warfare from
Lebanon:
‘I . . . if a State helps armed bands which are being
organized on its territory and which then proceed to the
territory of another State to attack it, that kind of action
must be regarded, from the point of view of international
law, asaggressiveaction”. [1462nd meeting, para. 51.1
Then he continued :
“But the Israeli side has not shown any evidence which
could prove the responsibility of the Government of

’

Lebanon for the attack against the Israeli airplane in the
Athens airport. The Government of Lebanon, on the
other hand, denies any participation in that act.”
104. We submit that the open sponsorship of, and
assistance to, terror organizations operating against Israel,
and the maintenance of their training bases, recruitment
offices and other installations on Jordanian territory fall
within the Soviet representative’s definition of helping
armed bands to enter another State. Jordan cannot be
absolved of responsibility for continued aggression against
Israel. It would require a complete reversal of legal
principles to disregard the fact that Jordan has waged war
against Israel since 1948 and that it openly pursues warfare
now by means of terror operations. It is therefore regrettable that the Soviet Union should refuse to apply its own
concepts of aggression to the Middle East situation. It is
regrettable, but perhaps not surprising, that the USSR,
contrary to international law and opinion and contrary to
United Nations jurisprudence, has given blanket approval to
Arab terror warfare waged against Israel, The Soviet
representative has made this clear again today, and his
spurious attempt to legitimize, terror warfare is open
encouragement to the Arab States to continue to violate
the cease-fire and undermine further the prospects for
peace, through the initiation of, and support for, the terror
operations. With the terror operations that are being
directed against Israeli civilians, statements such as the one
we heard today from the Soviet representative could be
interpreted as an open invitation to murder for murder’s
sake.

support for Arab aggression against Israel and for Arab F
terror warfare against Israeli citizens, that Soviet role can :
only be a destructive and sinister one.
109. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): I call
upon the representative of Jordan.

’

110. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): Mr. Tekoah challenged the f
statement of Jordan this morning about the places that
were bombed yesterday by the Israeli jet fighters, and I I
should like to put the following before the Council. What I
said this morning has been corroborated and emphasizedl by
a reporter of The New York Times, who said in tod,ay’s
issue: “The raid by Israeli jets killed a number of Arab taxi l1
,
drivers and passengerswho were relaxing at this traditional
and picturesque roadside rest near Salt.”
!
111, What is more, I referred this morning to Mr. Sullivan, i
who was another eyewitness. He went to the scene to 1
examine the place, met people and then reported to New ’
Yorkers at 9 o’clock this morning on CBS. I quoted what :
he said this morning. But I should like to emphasize one
thing which he said: “There were no signs of commandos in i
the area attacked by Israel.” Not only were there no ,
commandos, but there were no signs of commandos in that
area,
112. Mr. Tekoah can try to distort facts, but facts are
stubborn. He cannot distort the truth. The facts are there;
the eyewitnesses are there.
113. Yesterday we invited the Red Cross to visit and
examine the area and to see what is going on there, to see
the results of the cruel and brutal Israeli attack against
civilians, What is more, we invited the embassies not only of
the permanent members of the Security Council, but of all
members with accredited embassies to Jordan, to go there,
to see and to report. I hope they will report the truth and I
hope the truth will also be reported by my colleagues
around this table as it is received by their representativles in
Amman in Jordan. These are the facts, and no distortion,
no campaign of deceit or misrepresentation can cover the
truth.

105. ‘As I had the honour to mention at this morning’s
meeting, associations of European anti-Nazi resistance
fighters, the winner of the Nobel Peace Prize for 1968,
Rend Cassin,. as well as the ‘world press and other nations
have condemned Arab terror warfare as similar to the Nazi
murder of Jews. Yet, unfortunately, the Soviet Government
has associated itself with this despicable movement directed
against the liberty and the lives of the Jewish people in
Israel,
106. It is a matter of common knowledge that the
proclaimed objective of Arab terror warfare is the destruction of Israel, All this throws light on the persistently grim
role the Soviet Union has been playing in the continuation
of Arab belligerency against Israel and in the adamant
refusal of the Arab States to join with the Government of
Israel in the quest after a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East.

1
j

/
/
I

114. Mr. Tekoah mentioned the’ arrest of Abu Jamal. I do 1
not know who Abu Jamal is. But I do know that I
presented before the Council the testimony of students
who were arrested within the occupied area, of the way :
they were tortured to make confessions. They made all I
kinds of confessions in order to be relieved of Israeli
torture, persecution and oppression. Torture is familiar to
all members around this table, and I need not mention
confessions that were made on other problems not by ;
civilians, but by navy personnel, because they were under
torture, they had said. Even if this Abu Jamal does exist,
which I doubt-Israeli fiction can create manv Abu Jamals, i
and we are used to that-whatever is related by Mr. Telko&
is the invention of Mr. Tekoah or of his authorities. It may
be signed by Abu Jamal, but it is really the work of another
member of the same gang, the Israeli gang of terrorism
within the occupied area.

107. Had the Soviet Union a desire to see the termination
of the Arab war waged against Israel since 1948 and had it
favoured the promotion of peace agreements between IsraeI
and the Arab States as called for in the Security Council
resolution of 22 November 1967, it would not have come
out in support of one of the principal factors which are
today endangering the achievement of that objective.
108. It is proper to recall all those facts as one hears these
days, and as we have heard again today from the Soviet
representative, that the Soviet Union aspires to play a role
in the quest for a settlement in the Middle East. Now as
long as the Soviet Union does not modify its policy of blind

115. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
I should just like to make one

(translated from Russian):

comment.
12

116. The second statement by the representative of Israel
makes me even more convinced-and I dare say this also
applies to many other members of the Security Councilthat his statement today and the position he has taken in
the discussion of this question are directed towards
undermining efforts to achieve a peaceful political settlement of the situation in the Middle East. This is quite
obvious from his statement,

which the Soviet representative has put forth for terror
warfare directed by the Arab Governments against Israeli
civilians would have applied equally to his own country and
to the presence of his country’s military forces in Germany
after World War II and to the German movement of the
so-called werewolves who were fighting and acting by the
same methods then as the Arab terrorists are acting today
against Israel?

117. In its statement, the Soviet delegation showed that
the commission of an aggressive act by Israel at a moment
when sincere efforts are being made to find ways of
achieving a political settlement in the Middle East, can only
be interpreted, from the political point of view, from the
international point of view, and from the point of view of
the United Nations Charter and international law, as a
premeditated attempt to undermine those noble efforts.
And however much he may quibble, the representative of
Israel cannot conceal that fact.

122, As for the question of peace in the Middle East, I
should Iike to emphasize that I pointed out that had the
Soviet Union desired to see the termination of the Arab war
waged against Israel since 1948, and had it in fact favoured
the promotion of peace agreements between Israel and the
Arab States, as called for in the 22 November 1967
resolution, .it would not have come out in support of one of
the principal factors which are today endangering the
achievement of that objective. That factor is Arab terror
warfare against Israel, warfare which is being waged with
the proclaimed objective to achieve not peace but the
destruction of Israel and the annihilation of its people.

118. As for the references to international law and the
draft definition of aggression, no formula can be found
anywhere in international law, in any text-book on interna
tional law, or in the commentaries of the most authoritative
international jurists, which states that the population of a
territory which seized by the enemy is deprived of the right
to hate the invader. There has never been and, I imagine,
never will be such a principle of international law. Only
Israel is attempting to introduce this principle that the Arab
population,
suffering under the jack-boot of the Israel
invaders, should kiss that boot. Such a principle is quite
impossible and no principles of international law can justify
the aggressive and terroristic acts perpetrated against the
population of the Arab territories occupied by Israel’s
forces. The sooner Israel embarks upon the path of
co-operation with those who are sincerely striving to
achieve a peaceful political settlement in the Middle East,
the sooner the people of Israel and the people of the
neighbouring Arab countries will be able to live peacefully.

123. The representative of Jordan, in quoting a report by
Mr. Sullivan omitted two simple words which, I believe,
were in that report-the words “I heard”. Mr. Sullivan
“heard” from the Jordanian authorities what he reported
-the same authorities which claimed that Israel took action
on 15 March against civilian villages at the very same time
that the terror organizations themselves were announcing
that their bases were struck and their commandos hit.
Mr, Sullivan “heard” from these Jordanian authorities. We
heard otherwise.
124. The PRESIDENT (translated porn Russian): I call
upon the representative of Jordan.
125. Mr. ELFARRA (Jordan): If Mr. Tekoah does not
want to accept the article of the eyewitness of The New
Yoovk T&es, and if he also does not want to accept the
radio dispatch of Mr. Sullivan-1 do not have the tape of
that dispatch, it is difficult to get it now-may I refer this
august body to the words of Israel itself so that it can see to
what extent this campaign of distortion is continuing. What
did the Israelis say before attacking and after attacking
these civilian centres? Again I will quote the statement of
the Israelis in The New York Times of today, 27 March
1969. They said:

119. That is the only political conclusion and one which
should have been drawn long ago by Israel’s leaders, both
the previous leaders and those who have recently come to
power. Yet judging by their official statements, the new
leaders who have come to power seem to be determined to
pursue no less hawkish a policy than the former leaders.
The sooner they renounce such a policy, the better for the
Arab people and for the people of that whole troubled and
dangerous region.

“Israeli jets crossed the cease-fire line today in what is
now becoming a routine military operation to attack
what were described here”-described by whom? By the
Israeli authorities--(‘ as suspected Arab commando bases
in Jordan.”

120. The PRESIDENT (trunsZated from Russian): I call
upon the representative of Israel.
121. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): It is not the first time that the
Soviet Union has demonstrated that when it comes to Israel
the laws generally applicable are not to be applied insofar as
Israel is concerned, He refers to the presence of Israeli
forces in certain territories held today under our control
without referring, however, to the question now of how the
Israeli forces reached those territories in the course of a war
which has been continued by the Arab States against Israel.
since 194.8, a war of defence by Israel, a war which the
Soviet representatives in 1948 described as an Arab war of
aggression against Israel. I wonder whether the excuse

“Suspected”. Does mere suspicion warrant a campaign of
murder? Does it warrant an act of genocide? They are
“suspecting” the presence of commandos. Supposing that
even this statement is to be accepted-not The New York
Times, nor the radio dispatch, but the Israeli statement-is
it enough to “suspect” to send jets to murder and kill and
destroy?
126. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): In clarification, I should like to
13

reply briefly to the question of the representative of Israel.
He asked how the Israeli forces came to be on Arab
territory. My answer Is clear: as a result of Israel’s
aggression in June 1967. And the sooner they leave Arab
territory the sooner the problems will be solved. The sooner
Israel officially declares before the whole world that it
.recognizes Security Council resolution 242 (1967) and is
prepared to implement all its provisions, the sooner will the
problem of the Middle East be settled in a peaceful political
manner. The question is clear.

to Israel’s independence, would harbour such ideas. What I[
indicated, however, is that today again the representative 0:f
the Soviet Union expressed unreserved support for Ad
terror warfare. It is this Arab terror warfare which is being
carried on under the banner of the destruction of Israel and
the annihilation of its people. Consequently, the Soviet
Union’s support ,for this warfare is sinister and grim,. and
cannot be a constructive contribution to the efforts that are
being made today to reach a peaceful solution in the
establishment of just and lasting peace in the Middle East.

127. And it is high time the representative of Israel
stopped slandering the Soviet Union, The Soviet Union
provides the best example in the middle of the twentieth
century of the unity of a multinational State, since more
than 100 nationalities in the Soviet Union live as friends
and brothers in a single State, a fact of which we are proud.
We consider that to have thus turned our homeland into a
truly fraternal family of more than 100 nationalities is one
of the greatest achievements and victories of the Great
October Socialist Revolution in our country.

131. Mr, MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): I apologize for speaking once
again. I should like to refer to an official statement of the
Soviet Union. Only recently I had the honour to address to
you, Mr. President, a letter transmitting a Tass statement
which included the following passage:
“As regards the statements by Tel Aviv politicians
concerning ‘massive reprisals’, they should bear in mind
that the struggle of peoples against invaders and occupiers
is justified and legitimate from the point of view of
International law, The longer the Israel forces remain in
occupied Arab territories, the stronger and more extensive will the Arabs’ struggle for liberation become. Thh
should be kept in mind by those shortsighted politicians
who are heading for a protracted war while professing
their readiness for talks.” [S/9073.] 2

128. And you slander the Soviet Union by saying that we
support the destruction of States, including the State of
Israel. That is a slander, a malicious base slander. It is high
time to put an end to this, especially in such a forum, for it
is a complete fabrication by those who have nothing to say.
That is why they resort to slander. The way to a peaceful
settlement is very clear. The Soviet Union has said this
repeatedly. We are sincerely striving towards that end
together with all those who sincerely wish to see a speedy
political settlement in the Middle East, without the use of
force, without propaganda for the imposition of a solution,
We are not concerned with the imposition of a solution, but
with the question of peacefully settling this problem which
is a very dangerous one and which is creating a dangerous
hotbed of international tension. The world has still not
heard a clear and definite statement from Israel either
about the resolution or about its agreement to implement
the resolution, or about its agreement to participate
sincerely and seriously in the efforts now being made on
this very important question by, among others, the four
great Powers which are permanent members of the Security
Council.

132. This is the truth, this is logic, these are the rules of
international law. No rules of international law can justify
the occupation of the Arab territories.
133. In the Tass statement, the following is said about the
position of the Soviet Union:
“The Soviet Union declares itself to be firmly in favour
of an immediate peaceful political settlement in the
Middle East, in conformity with the Security Council
resolution of 22 November 1967. The States and peoples
of the Middle East must finally have the opportunity of
living in a fair and lasting peace, free from violence and
no longer at the mercy of aggressive forces.” (Ibid.]
This applies to the peoples of all States in the Middle East
both Israel and the Arab States.

129. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): I call
upon the representative of Israel,

134. <l’he PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): I have
no more speakers on my list. I therefore propose to adjourn
this meeting. As a result of consultations with
members
of
the Council, and with their agreement, I propose to
convene the next meeting tomorrow morning at 10.30.

130. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I agree entirely with the
representative of the Soviet Union that slander and abuse
will not make us move in the constructive direction that we
should be moving in at the present stage in our quest for
peace. I have not said that the Soviet Union supports the
idea of the destruction of the State of Israel. We would
have never thought that a Member State of the United
Nations, a permanent member of the Security Council, one
of the States that were among the first to give recognition

The meeting rose at 6.35 p.m.
2 Ibid.,

page 118.

14
Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price:

$U.S.

0.50

(or equivalent

in other

currencies)

82020-November

1972 -2,050
