S/PV.9328

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9328th meeting

Wednesday, 24 May 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Baeriswyl . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Switzerland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Bongo
Mr. Boateng
Mrs. Shino
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-14650 (E)
*2314650*

S/PV.9328

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate in
this meeting: Mr. Tor Wennesland, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process; and Ms. Tania Hary,
Executive Director of Gisha.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Wennesland.
Mr. Wennesland: This past month, we have been
reminded again of the volatile security situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory, as yet another deadly
escalation between Israel and Palestinian armed factions
in Gaza took place. While the ceasefire is holding,
conflict mitigation efforts must also be met with steps by
both sides, supported by the international community,
to reset a trajectory out of the cycle of violence. I call on
all parties to stop unilateral and inflammatory actions
that undermine prospects for peace and to address the
acute financial and institutional challenges faced by the
Palestinian Authority (PA).
I am particularly alarmed by the funding crisis
facing United Nations agencies supporting basic
services and social support, including emergency food
assistance, to Palestinians. Without new funding, the
World Food Programme (WFP) will suspend cash
assistance to approximately 200,000 Palestinians next
week, and the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
will not have the resources to deliver core services in
September. That comes alongside existing financial
challenges faced by the PA and declining donor support
overall. I encourage Member States to immediately
seek ways to increase their support for Palestinians,
including funding to UNRWA and WFP, without which
we will face serious humanitarian and, potentially,
security challenges. There is no time to spare.
Tensions increased between Israel and Palestinian
armed factions in the Gaza Strip on 2 May, when a
Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ) leader, Khader Adnan,
2/17

24/05/2023

died in an Israeli jail following an 86-day hunger strike.
In response, PIJ and other armed factions in Gaza fired
more than 100 rockets towards Israel, causing damage,
but no injuries. The Israeli Air Force responded with
air attacks against what it said were Hamas and PIJ
targets in the Strip, killing one Palestinian and causing
damage. Following intensive efforts by Egypt, Qatar
and the United Nations, hostilities ended on 3 May. One
week later, in the early hours of 9 May, the Israeli Air
Force carried out air strikes in Gaza that killed three
senior members of PIJ’s military wing in their homes.
Israeli officials said that the three were responsible
for firing the rockets on 2 May. The strikes against
residential structures also killed 10 civilians — family
members and neighbours — including women and
children. Over five days, Israel conducted 323 air
strikes against what it said were PIJ military targets
in Gaza, while Palestinian militants — mainly PIJ’s
Al-Quds Brigades — launched more than 1,200 rockets
and 250 mortars towards Israel, of which nearly 300 fell
short within Gaza, and more than 400 were intercepted
by Israel’s aerial defence system.
Thirty-three Palestinians, including at least 12
civilians, four women and six children, were killed
during the hostilities. Of those, one Palestinian worker
was killed in Israel by rocket fire from Gaza, and the
United Nations is verifying reports that at least three
fatalities were due to rockets falling short within the
Strip. According to the Ministry of Health in Gaza, 190
Palestinians were injured, including at least 38 women
and 64 children. One Israeli civilian woman was killed
by rocket fire. According to Israeli authorities, six
Israelis were moderately injured, and 89 lightly injured.
The escalation compounded the already dire
humanitarian situation in the Strip. According to
authorities in Gaza, nearly 100 housing units were
completely destroyed, and more than 125 were
damaged and rendered uninhabitable, displacing more
than 1,100 Palestinians. Israeli authorities closed both
crossings between Gaza and Israel, preventing the
entry of food, medical supplies and fuel for the Gaza
power plant. As a result, hundreds of patients were
unable to access essential medical care in the West
Bank or Israel. Throughout the reporting period, the
United Nations engaged intensively with all parties,
alongside with efforts by Egypt, together with regional
and international partners, including Qatar, to end the
hostilities and prevent further loss of life. I commend
Egypt for its role in bringing the parties to a ceasefire.
23-14650

24/05/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

I am deeply concerned that civilians continue to
bear the brunt of such hostilities. I am particularly
appalled that children, who must never be the target of
violence, continue to be victims. I echo the SecretaryGeneral’s condemnation of the unacceptable loss
of civilian lives and his call on Israel to abide by its
obligations under international humanitarian law,
including the proportional use of force and the taking of
all feasible precautions to spare civilians in the conduct
of military operations. I also reiterate the SecretaryGeneral’s condemnation of the indiscriminate launching
of rockets from Gaza towards Israel, including from
densely populated residential areas, which violates
international humanitarian law.
Turning to the occupied West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, the level of violence remained high.
Seventeen Palestinians, including two children, were
killed and 138 Palestinians, including two women and
23 children, were injured by Israeli security forces
during demonstrations, clashes, search-and-arrest
operations, attacks and alleged attacks on Israelis and
other incidents. Another 24 Palestinians, including
two children, were injured by Israeli settlers or other
civilians in shooting attacks, stone-throwing and other
incidents. Thirty-three Israeli civilians, including four
women, as well as four Israeli security forces personnel,
were injured by Palestinians in shooting and ramming
attacks, clashes, the throwing of stones and Molotov
cocktails and other incidents.
As in previous months, many Palestinian casualties
occurred in the context of Israeli military operations
in Area A and subsequent armed clashes. On 4 May in
Nablus, Israeli security forces killed three Palestinian
members of Hamas’s military wing who, according to
Israeli security forces, were responsible for the April
killing of three Israeli civilians in the Jordan Valley.
Israeli security forces also killed three Palestinians
during an operation in Qabatiya, south of Jenin, on
10 May, one of whom was an unarmed bystander. Three
Palestinians were killed while carrying out attacks or
alleged attacks on Israeli security forces, including a
person killed in an alleged ramming attack near Salfit
on 27 April, a Palestinian woman who committed a
stabbing attack that resulted in light injury in Huwwara,
near Nablus, on 4 May, and one person killed in an
alleged stabbing attempt at a checkpoint west of Jenin
on 13 May.
During the reporting period, Israeli forces imposed
significant movement restrictions, particularly around

S/PV.9328

Jericho, Nablus and Hebron, following either Palestinian
attacks or stone-throwing, affecting tens of thousands
of Palestinians and their local economies.
Thousands of right-wing Israeli activists, including
senior Government ministers, participated in the
highly provocative annual Flag Day march through
Jerusalem’s Old City, marking Jerusalem Day. Many
chanted racist slogans, including “Death to Arabs”,
with scuffles breaking out between Israeli participants
and Palestinians. Israelis also threw bottles and
other objects at media personnel covering the event,
injuring two journalists. Such provocations and
incitements — which continued in the days after the
march — are unacceptable and should be condemned
by all. I also reiterate that the status quo at the holy sites
must be respected. Levels of settler-related violence also
remained high, with five Palestinians shot and injured
by Israeli settlers using live ammunition. I reiterate that
all perpetrators of violence must be held accountable
and swiftly brought to justice. Security forces must
exercise maximum restraint and use lethal force only
when strictly unavoidable in order to protect life.
From 3 to 4 May, the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
convened in Brussels, where the parties and
donors discussed measures to support Palestinian
institution-building and strengthen the Palestinian
Authority and economy. The Chair’s summary called
on both sides to implement previous agreements
between them, commit to de-escalation and refrain
from steps that undermine Palestinian institutions and
the possibility of a two-State solution, while calling on
the international community to increase assistance to
the Palestinians, including through support to UNRWA.
I regret to say that we have observed more
settlement plans being moved forward, with tenders
published for some 310 housing units in Area C and
demolitions continuing. On 18 May, the Israeli military
issued an order, in line with the Knesset’s March
amendment to the 2005 Disengagement Plan, to allow
Israelis to re-enter the area of the evacuated settlement
of Homesh, built on private Palestinian-owned land in
the northern West Bank. During the reporting period,
Israeli authorities demolished, seized or forced owners
to demolish 33 Palestinian-owned structures in Area
C and 17 in East Jerusalem, including a donor-funded
school east of Bethlehem, displacing 89 Palestinians,
including 45 children. The demolitions were carried out
due to the lack of Israeli-issued building permits, which
are nearly impossible for Palestinians to obtain.

23-146503/17

S/PV.9328

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

On 7 May, Israel’s High Court of Justice rejected
a petition to compel Israeli authorities to carry out
demolition orders against the Palestinian village of Khan
Al-Ahmar. The justices agreed with the Government of
Israel’s position that the Court should not intervene in
setting a timeline for the demolition. The Court also
agreed that the demolition would not be carried out at
this time, citing Israel’s security and foreign relations as
reasons. I reiterate that all settlements are illegal under
international law and a substantial obstacle to peace,
and they must stop. I also call on Israeli authorities to
end the displacement and eviction of Palestinians and
to approve plans that will enable Palestinians to build
legally and address their development needs.
Turning to the region, in the Golan, while the
ceasefire between Israel and Syria has been generally
maintained, the situation continues to be volatile owing
to violations of the 1974 Disengagement of Forces
Agreement by the parties. The situation along the Blue
Line remained stable following the 6 April breach of
the cessation of hostilities.
In recent weeks, the United Nations, together with
regional and international partners, mobilized once
again to end hostilities between armed factions in Gaza
and Israel. Such efforts are crucial to saving Palestinian
and Israeli lives. Nevertheless, we must also keep at the
forefront the issues that are fundamental to creating the
conditions for a lasting peace. The immediate priority
is to support steps to bolster the Palestinian Authority
and preserve the provision of critical services to the
Palestinian people. Those steps should be implemented
in a way that encourages the Palestinian parties to
engage with each other, including on underlying
political issues. That requires greater efforts by Israeli
and Palestinian leaders, alongside increased support and
attention from the international community. We must
take action, not only to ensure Palestinians’ well-being
and governance but also as an integral part of ending
the occupation and restoring a political horizon toward
a viable two-State solution, based on United Nations
resolutions, international law and previous agreements.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Wennesland for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Hary.
Ms. Hary: My name is Tania Hary, and I am the
executive director of Gisha. We are an Israeli human
rights organization that promotes the freedom of
movement and other rights that are dependent on it,
4/17

24/05/2023

especially in the Gaza Strip. Gisha means “access” and
“approach” in Hebrew.
Gisha was founded in 2005 in response to Israel’s
removal of its settlements and military installations
from the Gaza Strip because we knew that Israel’s
occupation there was not ending. Eighteen years later,
Israel’s control persists, particularly over movement
and access; over the Palestinian population registry
determining where people can live and over Gaza’s
electricity supply, communications network and air and
sea spaces.
I am here today, just a week and a half after a
ceasefire agreement was reached following yet another
escalation in the region. Tel Aviv and Jerusalem have
returned to normal. Diplomats have moved on and are
dealing with other priorities. Gaza has also returned
to normal, but for Gaza, normal means Israeli drones
buzzing overhead at all hours and the familiar cycle
of destruction, reconstruction, mourning and trauma.
Between the wars, when Gaza is out of the headlines
and fewer people are paying attention, the ongoing
warfare of movement restrictions continues. Security
Council members regularly call for the lifting of those
movement restrictions, and those calls are vital and must
continue. But what do systemic movement restrictions
look like on the ground? What does closure really
mean? Closure means that people are likely to wait for
weeks or even months to get a permit to go from Gaza
to Jerusalem to access life-saving medical treatment.
In 2022, one third of patients’ permit applications and
62 per cent of companions’ permit applications were
delayed or denied. One quarter of patients exited the
Strip without a companion, including hundreds of
children without their parents.
Closure means that if your mother in the West Bank
is sick, you have to prove to the Israeli military that
she is at risk of death in order to hope to get a permit
that will be valid only three to five days, at most. It
means that if you want to start a company in Gaza, most
likely all the equipment, machinery and raw materials
you would need are considered by Israel to be dual-use.
Getting those items can take months or even years, and
sometimes it is impossible. In those and hundreds of
other ways, Israel’s decisions continue to have a deep
impact on every aspect of life in Gaza. That level of
control creates responsibility.
This was the sixth major Israel military attack in
Gaza, among hundreds of smaller campaigns, over the
23-14650

24/05/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

past 15 years. Our former Minister of Defence referred
to it as “mowing the lawn”. Officials say things, such
as “we have no choice but to manage the situation”
because “there is no solution”. True leadership would
work tirelessly to create hope instead of surrendering to
perpetual occupation, recurrent military attacks, rocket
fire from Gaza and other travesties.
As in previous rounds, Israeli officials said they
were protecting Israeli citizens from rocket fire. I am
one of those citizens. I do not wish the reality of rocket
fire on anyone. The question should be: what do we
need to do to break that cycle?
Today 2.2 million people live in the Gaza Strip. Half
of them are children, and nearly 70 per cent are under
the age of 30. Young people in Gaza know no other
reality than closure and war. Most of the population has
never been out of the Strip. Unemployment is 46 per
cent, and among young people it is 68 per cent. Some
80 per cent of children in Gaza are said to suffer from
emotional distress. Children and their parents know the
names of all six children who were killed in the most
recent military campaign. The wounds that cannot be
seen — the trauma, hopelessness and helplessness — are
the hardest to heal. How can the situation possibly
contribute to security? Real, sustainable security and
deterrence are not created by force, they are created
by hope.
The closure of Gaza is part of what Israel calls
the separation policy. Movement between Gaza,
Israel and the West Bank is barred other than in
exceptional circumstances. Israel faces legitimate
security challenges, but movement restrictions are not
in place for security needs alone. They drive political
goals to pressure the population and maintain control
over the West Bank. Most importantly, Israel’s narrow
interpretation of its obligations towards Palestinians
creates a crisis of accountability.
Settlements and the separation policy are two sides
of the same coin — the same push towards annexation of
the West Bank. Isolating Gaza, or the Gaza Bantustan,
as the Palestinian human rights organization Al
Mezan Center for Human Rights coined it, fragments
Palestinians and reinforces the disastrous Palestinian
political division. Access via Egypt is more possible
than in previous years, but Egypt does not connect
Gaza to the West Bank and Israel. It is as if New York
City were cut off from the rest of the state and the states
around it, for decades.

S/PV.9328

Recently, more movement has also been possible via
Erez, the pedestrian crossing between Gaza and Israel,
but for one category only: Palestinian day labourers.
More than 140,000 people applied for a 20,000-permit
quota, before registration was closed. That means that
less than 1 per cent of demand in Gaza is being met
with those permits. Women in Gaza are not included
in that 1 per cent. Their needs for professional access
continue to go unacknowledged in Israel’s criteria for
permits. An agenda that prioritizes women and peace
and security must take into account the impact of the
closure on the specific needs of women.
Gisha represents a minority view in Israel, but
we are part of a vibrant civil society in Israel and
in Palestine under increasing threat. Our allies and
potential allies are being silenced by false accusations
of anti-Semitism, which undermine the necessary fight
against the real and dangerous forms of anti-Semitism
growing around the world. This is a critical time for the
Council’s leadership and courage, as extremism in our
region is feeding on incitement, poverty and oppression.
What gives me hope are the many young people in
Gaza who dare to dream of a better future and know
they deserve it, despite the leaders around them who
are failing them. People around the world also realize
that the struggle for freedom and dignity cannot be
suppressed forever, not with the highest walls or the
strongest armies.
I would like to end with four recommendations.
First, let the hopes of Gaza’s young people guide
Council members as they consider bold actions that
their Governments might take. There is no reason not
to facilitate the freedom of movement that women and
young people need to fulfil their dreams. Secondly, we
must protect the space for humanitarian and human
rights work in Israel and in Palestine. In a situation of
rising extremism, civil society is critical. Thirdly, we
must recall the crisis of accountability. As a matter of
routine, Palestinians are punished for actions beyond
their control. The international community has a
particularly important role to play in bringing the
closure — a persistent and pernicious injustice and
form of collective punishment — to an end. Finally, I
ask the Council not to let another military assault put
Gaza and Palestine back on the agenda, but to put it
there because members know that it is the right thing
to do.

23-146505/17

S/PV.9328

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Hary
for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Special Coordinator Wennesland
for his informative briefing. I also sincerely thank
Ms. Hary for her presentation today.
It has been a challenging month for the region, and
the United States extends condolences to all Israelis
and Palestinians affected by the ongoing violence.
When the Council last convened on this issue (see
S/PV.9309), it was against the backdrop of hundreds of
rockets being fired at Israel by Gaza-based Palestinian
terrorist groups. Those attacks posed a threat to
civilians in Israel and harmed Palestinian civilians in
Gaza. At that time, the United States reaffirmed its
support for Israel’s inherent right to self-defence. We
unequivocally condemned the attacks on Israel, and we
called on all parties to exercise restraint in both action
and rhetoric. I am pleased that, with the assistance of
Egypt and Qatar, the parties took steps to de-escalate the
situation, and that the ceasefire announced on 14 May
has held, with the exception of only one incident. The
question we must ask today, in the aftermath of the
most recent round of fighting, is: what can be done to
prevent future violence and better protect Israeli and
Palestinian civilians? We believe diplomacy and direct
engagement must be central to those efforts.
This year’s meeting in Aqaba, Jordan, and Sharm
El-Sheikh, Egypt, between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority, convened by Egypt, Jordan and the United
States, resulted in several important commitments.
Now, the parties must focus on implementation, just as
the parties must refrain from further escalatory actions.
That includes racist statements and incitement, as well
as violence.
President Abbas’s statement on 15 May, equating
Israel with the lies of infamous Nazi propagandist
Joseph Goebbels, offers a case in point. His comments
are a gross affront to Holocaust victims and survivors.
Making that kind of statement about the world’s only
Jewish State is entirely unacceptable, especially during
a time of rising anti-Semitic violence around the world.
Similarly, President Abbas’s claim that the United
States “wanted to get rid of the Jews and benefit from
their presence in Palestine”, is totally without basis and
6/17

24/05/2023

deeply offensive to the American people. As I have
said many times before, the United States supports all
efforts to achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace based on the two-State solution, but violence and
incitement only move us away from that shared goal.
The United States is also concerned about the
provocative visit made by an Israeli Minister to Al-Haram
Al-Sharif/Temple Mount in Jerusalem on 21 May and
the accompanying inflammatory rhetoric. That holy
place should not be used for political purposes, and we
call on all parties to respect its sanctity. Furthermore,
I want to reaffirm our long-standing position in
support of the historic status quo at Jerusalem’s holy
sites. We are deeply troubled by Israel’s decision to
allow citizens to establish a permanent presence at
the Homesh outpost in the northern West Bank, which
according to Israeli law was illegally built on private
Palestinian land. That order is inconsistent both with
former Prime Minister Sharon’s written commitment in
2004 and the commitments made by the current Israeli
Government through the Aqaba and Sharm El-Sheikh
process. Let me be clear. Advancing Israeli settlements
in the West Bank undermines the prospects for peace.
We also unequivocally condemn the racist speech that
occurred during the Flag Day march through Jerusalem
on 18 May, including chants of “Death to Arabs”.
Those chants are outrageous and unacceptable. Hateful
speech of any kind, such as the examples I just noted,
runs counter to the efforts of the Secretary-General and
Under-Secretary-General Moratinos to combat racism
and other forms of bigotry, including antisemitism.
The United States also recognizes the severe fiscal
crisis that the Palestinian Authority is facing is fostering
further instability in the West Bank. We encourage all
parties in the region to consider ways to support the
Palestinian Authority and alleviate that financial crisis.
Now is the time to make meaningful contributions to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and pursue further efforts
toward the long-term stabilization of its finances.
In conclusion, I want to again urge all parties to
exercise restraint in both action and rhetoric and to
find ways to build confidence, such as by returning
the remains of those killed in conflict. In that regard
I make particular reference to Hadar Golden. We must
find a way to give his parents peace. All parties need to
de-escalate tensions, prevent any further loss of life and
recommit to efforts such as those agreed in Aqaba and
Sharm El-Sheikh, which will rebuild trust and create
23-14650

24/05/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

conditions for constructive dialogue. Let us all do our
part, as members of the Council, to help build a future
where Israelis and Palestinians enjoy equal measures of
freedom, security and dignity.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): I thank Special Coordinator
Tor Wennesland and Ms. Tania Hary for their briefings.
The most important recent development is last
week’s ceasefire between Israel and Gaza, ending days
of violence during which many were killed or wounded.
Japan commends Egypt, along with Qatar, Lebanon
and the United States, for their roles in brokering the
ceasefire, and we are encouraged that it has largely
held. The Security Council should call on all sides to
observe the ceasefire and maintain its efforts to ensure
that the agreement will improve regional peace and
security in a sustainable manner.
The numbers of casualties that we have seen this
year are totally unacceptable. We urge all parties
to implement the commitments outlined in the
communiqués that came out of the five-party talks in
Aqaba and Sharm El-Sheikh. The Israeli Government
and the Palestinian Authority must refrain from
provocations, including incitement to violence, and
should work together in a constructive manner.
Japan continues to be one of the largest donors
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). This
year we are commemorating the seventieth anniversary
of Japan’s partnership with the Agency. It was in 1953,
even before Japan joined the United Nations itself, that
we made our first financial contribution to the Agency,
at a time when Japan was still struggling to overcome
the ravages of war. Last week we hosted an event at
which UNRWA’s Deputy Commissioner-General,
Ms. Leni Stenseth, emphasized the crucial role that the
Agency plays in providing fundamental social services,
including health and education, to Palestinian refugees.
With UNRWA facing a serious funding shortfall, Japan
highlights the importance of the pledging conference
to be held on 2 June and calls on all Member States to
support the Agency in continuing its essential work.
We condemn the ongoing unacceptable unilateral
acts by both parties. Japan calls on Israel to immediately
stop settlement expansion, demolitions, forced transfers,
evictions, settler violence and military incursions. We
also call on Palestinian militant groups to stop attacks
on Israeli civilians and to refrain from attacking Israel
with rockets.

S/PV.9328

On Japan’s part, Prime Minister Kishida recently
held a summit meeting in Tokyo with His Majesty King
Abdullah II of Jordan. The two leaders stressed the
need for both parties to exercise maximum restraint and
avoid unilateral actions. Ultimately, the conflict will be
resolved only through direct negotiations between the
parties to achieve a two-State solution, with Israel and
Palestine existing side by side in peace, security and
mutual respect. Japan supports every effort to achieve
that goal.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland
for his comprehensive briefing and for his continued
efforts to de-escalate the situation, especially in recent
months. I also thank Ms. Tania Hary for her briefing,
in which she shed light on the challenging situation in
the Gaza Strip.
Our meeting today is taking place during a month
that has been marked by grave developments in the
occupied Palestinian territory. Those events further
contribute to the ongoing escalation since the start of
this year, despite the Council’s numerous meetings and
the international community’s repeated calls to halt
all unilateral measures. The current situation portends
additional worrisome repercussions. We therefore need
to make significant progress towards restoring calm and
charting a clear political path that can pave the way to
ending the conflict and achieving a two-State solution.
We must acknowledge that recurring provocative
actions are driving the continued escalation, with results
that serve the interests of none of the parties. The state of
escalation witnessed this month in both the Gaza Strip
and Israel are testament to that fact. There must therefore
be a clear commitment to ceasing all hostilities and
illegal practices and to exercising maximum restraint
if we are to avoid a spiral into unprecedented levels of
violence and large-scale confrontations. In that context,
we condemn the Israeli raids that targeted areas in the
Gaza Strip and left several Palestinians, including
women and children, dead or injured. Likewise, we
condemn the incendiary speeches during the Flag
Day march and the repeated storming of the Al-Aqsa
Mosque by extremists, members of the Knesset and
the Israeli Government, the last of whom was Minister
Ben-Gvir, who stormed the site yet again on Sunday.
Those provocations, which resulted in clashes just days
after a ceasefire in Gaza was reached, underline the
extreme fragility of the situation and the high levels
of tension. We reiterate once again our firm position

23-146507/17

S/PV.9328

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

calling for the full protection of the Al-Aqsa Mosque
and respect for the role of the Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan as Custodian of the Holy Sites and Endowments
in Jerusalem in accordance with international law. We
also underscore the urgent need to renounce hate speech
and violence, particularly in areas rife with tension.
While the parties involved bear the responsibility
to de-escalate the situation, we stress the important
contributions made by regional and international
mediators to contain the situation and promote peace,
the most recent of which have been the tireless efforts
made by the Arab Republic of Egypt to reach a ceasefire,
restore calm in Gaza and stop the civilian bloodshed.
Therefore, it is imperative that the international
community continue to work in the coming period
to sustainably maintain and consolidate the fragile
ceasefire, while also exploring new paths to create an
environment conducive to peace and a political horizon
that will bring the parties back to the negotiating table.
In that regard, we look forward to building on the
meetings held in Aqaba, Jordan, and Sharm El-Sheikh,
Egypt, while maintaining the progress achieved during
the talks.
The humanitarian and economic conditions in
the occupied Palestinian territory remain a matter of
great concern, which is particularly worrisome with
regard to the Gaza Strip, which cannot withstand any
further escalation. Its population is already grappling
with high levels of poverty and unemployment, while
also trying to recover from the events of recent years.
In that context, we welcome this month’s meeting of
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination
of the International Assistance to Palestinians to
discuss the challenges involved in improving the
economic conditions of the Palestinian people and
potential solutions. We note, however, that improving
living conditions in the occupied Palestinian territory
requires, above all, putting an end to the ongoing
settlement activities, demolitions, displacement and
restrictions on the movement of people and goods.
They all constitute violations of international law,
including international humanitarian law, and further
exacerbate humanitarian and economic conditions. We
condemn the recent order by the Israeli Government to
establish a permanent presence in one of the outposts in
the northern West Bank and all attempts to legitimize
such settlement outposts.
Lastly, we reaffirm the call made in the final
communiqué of the Arab League Summit held in
8/17

24/05/2023

Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, last week to step up efforts
to reach a comprehensive and just settlement of the
Palestinian question in accordance with the agreed
international references, particularly the Arab Peace
Initiative and the relevant international resolutions.
We stress that the Palestinian people deserve to live in
security, peace and dignity.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Let me start by
thanking Mr. Tor Wennesland for his informative briefing
and Ms. Tania Hary for her sobering intervention.
Brazil remains deeply concerned about the situation
in Israel and Palestine. The loss of lives, including
children, as a result of Israeli air strikes, and the
indiscriminate firing of rockets against Israeli territory
during another eventful month, is deeply regrettable.
We extend our heartfelt condolences to the families
who have lost their loved ones.
Brazil commends Egypt for its central role in
facilitating the cessation of hostilities and expresses
gratitude to all parties that have put effort into the
achievement of the ceasefire. We call on all parties
to respect the agreement and to intensify their efforts
to exercise restraint. Regrettably, not long after the
ceasefire announcement, distressing incidents occurred
during the annual flag march in Jerusalem’s Old City.
The participation of Israeli high-ranking authorities
in the march and in a visit to Haram Al-Sharif does
not contribute to stabilizing the situation and bringing
calm to the region. As Mr. Wennesland noted — and
we agree — leaders bear the responsibility to take a
stand against extremism and condemn acts of violence
and incitement unequivocally. The unjustifiable attacks
on journalists during the flag march are also deeply
concerning. During conflicts, journalists and media
workers, as civilians, are protected by international
humanitarian law. They play an invaluable role by
ensuring the free flow of information.
Brazil reaffirms its long-standing commitment
to the two-State solution, with Palestine and Israel
living together in peace and security within mutually
agreed and internationally recognized borders. Ending
the protracted conflict requires confronting some
challenging outstanding issues. The expansion of Israeli
settlements, in flagrant violation of international law,
is one such issue. In addition to igniting violence and
hatred, settlement activities obstruct the path to peace by
undermining the feasibility of a contiguous Palestinian
State. Recent reports about the intention to further
23-14650

24/05/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

expand Israeli settlements in the West Bank in large
numbers are alarming. Brazil also calls on Israel to stop
the continued demolitions and seizure of Palestinian
structures and the displacement of Palestinian families.
We strongly condemn the demolition of a European
Union-funded school in Area C on 7 May. In that regard,
it is worth recalling resolution 2601 (2021), which calls
for safeguarding the right to education and emphasizes
the necessity of uninterrupted educational services in
conflict situations.
The matter is also related to the critical financial
situation faced by the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA). Ensuring adequate funding and support
for the Agency is paramount to sustaining essential
services for the Palestinian people, including education
programmes, which are crucial to offering Palestinian
children quality education and fostering hope for a
better future. UNRWA plays an indispensable role in
maintaining stability in the Middle East, particularly in
sustaining the livelihoods of Gaza residents. In offering
essential services, UNRWA not only improves their
quality of life, but also promotes social stability, which
is crucial to peacebuilding efforts in the region.
Since the beginning of the year, parties have made
commitments to desist from provocative unilateral
actions and to pursue further actions in support of
de-escalation. Brazil hopes that they will work to
translate promises into responsible and constructive
policies and initiatives aimed at improving the situation
on the ground. That would be an important first step to
fostering an environment conducive to dialogue aimed
at a just and comprehensive solution to the conflict.
In conclusion, I would like once again to express
Brazil’s appreciation for the work of the Special
Coordinator, Mr. Wennesland. We value his detailed
briefings to the Security Council and his relentless
efforts to ease tensions on the ground. Brazil agrees
with his overall assessment that merely managing this
conflict indefinitely is unsustainable. The Council
must seriously reflect on its role in breaking those
vicious cycles of violence and revitalizing the stalled
peace process.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I too would like to thank the
Special Coordinator for his update on the developments
on the ground and for his continued efforts. I also
thank Ms. Hary for her striking testimony and
insightful remarks.

S/PV.9328

We have just left behind weeks of escalatory
tensions and exchanges of fire, with large numbers of
victims and many wounded waiting to recover. Those
events, with huge repercussions for civilians, are
becoming more frequent, and the increase in the death
toll of Palestinians and Israelis is a matter of primary
concern. We welcome the ceasefire between Israel and
the Palestinian Islamic Jihad and commend Egypt and
other international and regional actors for their efforts
to prevent escalation on the ground. We call on the
parties to fully implement the ceasefire, preserve the
calm recently restored and bear in mind that it is always
the civilians who pay the high price of any tensions
and violence.
The people of Israel do not deserve to live under the
threat of blind and indiscriminatory rocket attacks from
Gaza from terrorist groups or other terrorist acts against
them. We fully support Israel’s right to proportionate
self-defence. It should be noted that many of the rockets
recklessly launched by Islamic groups are also falling
inside Palestine territory, claiming innocent lives. We
are deeply troubled by the negative impact that the
conflict is having on Palestinian civilians, including
women and children. International humanitarian law
must be fully observed and respected and civilian
casualties must be avoided. Whether lives are Israeli
or Palestinian, they are worth the same. The cycle of
violence must end, and unilateral actions that trigger
its proliferation should be avoided. Both sides must
exercise maximum restraint. That is the prerequisite for
generating what is missing nowadays — hope.
It is troubling to note that discriminatory rhetoric,
racism and antisemitism are more and more frequent.
Albania strongly condemns all those provocative and
harmful displays, which are inciting hatred among
people and becoming a direct source of violence. We
are concerned about the impact that such behaviour
is having on journalists and free reporting. Marching
and chanting “Death to Palestinians” is unacceptable.
It is as reprehensible as calling for death to Israelis. All
leaders have a responsibility to act against extremists
and to speak out against violence and incitement.
Albania fully supports freedom of religion and
belief and the historic status quo of the holy sites in
Jerusalem. We praise the special role of Jordan’s
custodianship. The holy sites in Jerusalem are a place
only for prayer. We call on those responsible to refrain
from provocative actions that undermine the rights
and sensibilities of those worshipping at Al-Haram

23-146509/17

S/PV.9328

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Al-Sharif/Temple Mount. Peaceful coexistence
between Muslims, Jews and Christians, respect for
religious diversity and tolerance towards different faiths
and beliefs are fundamental values to be diligently
preserved and further cherished.
The commitments made in the Aqaba and Sharm
El-Sheikh meetings are clear about what the parties
should be doing in good faith to prevent escalation and
take useful measures for a peaceful settlement between
the Israelis and the Palestinians. We call on the parties
to abide by those commitments and to refrain from
actions that undermine the prospects for peace. In
that context, we reiterate our position that settlements
and outposts are illegal under international law and
that their advancement is an obstacle to a two-State
solution. The indiscriminate violence by Israeli settlers
against Palestinian civilians, including the destruction
of homes, schools and property, are deplorable and
should be properly investigated.
We welcome the efforts of Germany, France,
Egypt and Jordan to restore the political horizon for a
peaceful solution to the conflict in the Middle East and
their commitment to working with all the parties for
a resumption of a credible political process. We also
commend all the efforts in advancing and expanding
the Abraham Accords. The security, economy and
good-neighbourly relationships between the countries
in the Middle East are beneficial to all. In that context,
I would like to reiterate Albania’s full support for a
negotiated and just two-State solution within the 1967
borders. Any and all efforts leading to it are positive
and welcomed. A comprehensive peace between
Israelis and Palestinians with a safe and secure Israel
and a viable, independent and democratic Palestine is
the only way forward. We cannot not say it enough — a
solution with two States, for two peoples, with mutual
recognition and Jerusalem as their shared capital, will
ensure that both sides, Israelis and Palestinians, can live
as neighbours in safety and security and enjoy freedom,
dignity and justice.
Peace is needed and peace is possible. But it will
never come as a surprise, and it will not fall from the
sky. It requires courage, vision, leadership and trust
between the parties for it not to be and remain, as it
looks now, a Sisyphean task.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): We thank the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Tor
Wennesland, for his important update and his efforts
10/17

24/05/2023

for peace, stability and understanding in the Middle
East. We express our appreciation to Ms. Tania Hary,
Executive Director of Gisha, for her excellent briefing
to the Security Council.
During our previous meeting on the Middle East
peace process and the Israeli-Palestine conflict in April
(see S/PV.9309), we expressed our condemnation of
the high number of deaths, injuries, imprisonments
and land occupations that have been unfolding in the
region. Today we want to reiterate our call for the illegal
occupation and aggression to cease. Most importantly,
we advocate an immediate resumption of negotiations
and a revitalization of the peace process between the
conflicting parties. Amid what appear to be promising
signs of normalization and détente in the Middle East,
the continued plight of the Palestinians in the occupied
territories and the erosion of hope for any prospect of
a two-State solution are deeply disturbing. They testify
to the abysmal failure of our collective efforts to force
the parties to the conflict towards the real concessions
necessary for peace to prevail after nearly seven
decades of conflict.
We commend recent diplomatic efforts in the region
aimed at reviving the peace process and addressing
major impediments to peace between Israelis and
Palestinians. We encourage those initiatives and
further urge the parties to pursue them in earnest. In
that context, we strongly urge Israel to halt all of its
settlement expansion and land occupation, as those
actions frustrate the major goal of achieving a twoState solution. We call on the Council to exercise its
influence to ensure that Israelis and Palestinians
abide by the internationally endorsed decisions for a
just solution, based on the decisions of the Council,
the resolutions of the General Assembly, the Madrid
principles and the Arab Peace Initiative.
We call on the international community for urgent,
greater and more predictable and sustainable support
for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East and the World Food
Programme. They need to be able to respond to the dire
humanitarian situation facing Palestine. We reaffirm
our profound appreciation for the Special Coordinator’s
sustained and continued efforts to restart a genuine
and legitimate political process, leading to peace.
Mozambique wishes to reiterate its long-standing
and principled position in support of the right to selfdetermination of the Palestinian people and the right to
exist of the State of Israel.
23-14650

24/05/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by thanking Mr. Tor Wennesland,
the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, for his briefing and you, Madam President,
for convening today’s meeting. I also thank Tania Hary,
whose statement we listened to carefully.
In this month of May we have witnessed the
indiscriminate launch of hundreds of rockets from
Gaza into Israel, resulting in the death of at least one
civilian and a number of injured, as well as an Israeli
military operation in Gaza that killed dozens, including
several civilians, women and children. Those events, as
with all acts of violence against civilians wherever they
occur, are worrisome and reprehensible.
We recognize the right to legitimate self-defence.
At the same time, we want to remind everyone that
compliance with the norms of international law and
international humanitarian law is not optional. And
no one is exempt. We welcome efforts to put an end to
the clashes and urge the parties to continue respecting
the ceasefire that has been agreed to. The Council
must do all it can to help avoid another escalation.
In that regard, we again call on the parties to refrain
from inciting violence or provocative acts. Extremist
or fanatical positions, rhetoric and acts are the fuel
that fans the flames of a cycle of violence that must
end now. A few days ago, we witnessed new tensions
at the holy sites of Jerusalem, whose status quo must
be respected, and elsewhere. At the risk of repeating
myself, I underscore the call for restraint and common
sense. We must be able to understand that violence only
leads to more violence.
The persistent factors of conflict create a climate
of mistrust and tension that undermines the prospects
for a political solution. As we said in the Council’s
presidential statement in February (S/PRST/2023/1),
we strongly oppose all unilateral measures that are
obstacles to peace, including Israel’s construction and
expansion of settlements, confiscation of Palestinians’
land, its so-called legalization of settlement outposts,
demolition of Palestinians’ homes and displacement of
Palestinian civilians. In that regard, we condemn the
demolition on 7 May of a school in the West Bank close
to Bethlehem. Such actions affect the right of children
to education and in no way help to create a climate of
peace or dialogue.
We know that resources are scarce and must be
prioritized. On the third floor of the General Assembly

S/PV.9328

building, just a few metres from this Chamber, there is a
chart that compares the resources allocated to weapons
with those directed to development and humanitarian
assistance. With that in mind, I would like to address
the humanitarian situation, in particular the work of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and its precarious financial
situation. Meeting the needs of displaced people
is a responsibility of the international community,
regardless of the causes of the conflict or the people
who caused it. We call on all who can contribute to do
so in this case and in every case. If even a fraction of
what is spent on rockets, war planes and missiles were
allocated to funding the development and welfare of
populations, there is every likelihood that we would
be closer to solutions that today appear distant if not
almost impossible.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I would like to start by thanking Special Coordinator
Wennesland and Ms. Hary for their informative briefings.
The security situation in Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territories has deteriorated further, to the
detriment of Israelis and Palestinians alike. In Gaza,
Palestinian Islamic Jihad and other militant factions
fired 1,748 rockets at Israel. Indiscriminate rockets from
Gaza caused the deaths of an Israeli and four Gazans.
The United Kingdom unequivocally condemns the
indiscriminate firing of rockets against civilians, and
indeed all forms of terrorism. The Foreign Secretary
of the United Kingdom welcomed the announcement
of a ceasefire between Israel and militant factions in
Gaza and is grateful for the support of Egypt, Qatar
and the United States. We urge all parties to honour the
ceasefire and prevent further loss of life.
The United Kingdom supports Israel’s right to
self-defence. But Israeli conduct must always be in
line with international humanitarian law, including the
principles of distinction, humanity, proportionality and
military necessity. We were concerned about reports of
at least 12 civilian deaths, including of six children, in
Israeli strikes on Gaza. This month we have also seen
further deaths in the West Bank, where Israeli security
forces have killed 110 Palestinians this year, including
militants and civilians. If killing continues at that rate,
2023 will be the deadliest year for Palestinians in the
West Bank since United Nations records began in 2004.
Israeli security forces must show restraint in their use
of force and investigate civilian casualties. Nineteen
Israelis, residents and tourists, including Lucy, Maia and

23-1465011/17

S/PV.9328

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Rina Dee, have already been killed in terrorist attacks
in 2023. The Palestinian Authority must also reassert
control over Area A and take steps to tackle terrorism.
A solution to the conflict will not be found until
both Israel and the Palestinians tackle inflammatory
rhetoric and incitement, as they agreed to do in Sharm
El-Sheikh on 19 March. Yet only last week we heard
racist slogans and slurs from President Abbas and from
Israeli participants in the Flag Day march in Jerusalem.
Such rhetoric and incitement, including by both Israeli
and Palestinian political leaders, undermines the cause
of peace. Israel must also tackle increasing settler
violence and coercion — which on Monday resulted in
the forcible transfer of the Palestinian population from
Ein Samiya — and desist from settler expansion, which
is illegal under international law.
Finally, the United Kingdom also strongly supports
the historic status quo governing Jerusalem’s holy
sites and values the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan’s
important role as custodian. The United Kingdom
remains firm in its belief that a negotiated two-State
solution, based on the 1967 lines and with Jerusalem as
a shared capital, is the only way to ensure lasting peace
and security and prosperity between the parties.
At the Ad Hoc Committee of the General Assembly
for the announcement of voluntary contributions to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) to be held in
June, it will be vital for the international community
to put the Agency on a sustainable footing if we are
to protect the delivery of critical services to millions
of Palestinian refugees. UNRWA is crucial to stability
throughout the region.
As its Foreign Secretary stated on 14 May, the
United Kingdom will support all efforts to promote
dialogue and create a pathway towards a just and
sustainable peace. The first step on that pathway is
clear. Both sides must honour the commitments that
they made in good faith in Aqaba and Sharm El-Sheikh.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Tor Wennesland, the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
substantive briefing on the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories. We also listened to the remarks
by Ms. Tania Hary.
The unprecedented escalation of violence in
the Arab-Israeli conflict zone remains a focus of
12/17

24/05/2023

international attention. As a result of Israeli military
raids in the West Bank in Jenin, Jericho, Nablus and
Huwwara, clashes in the context of violations of the
status quo in Jerusalem’s holy sites, especially the
Al-Aqsa Mosque compound, and the escalation of
violence in the Gaza Strip, more than 100 Palestinians
have died and thousands more have been injured since
the beginning of this year. The number of Israeli
casualties is also growing. The Israeli Air Force
continues to launch indiscriminate strikes against
Syria, including on Aleppo airport, which is being
used to transport humanitarian aid to victims of the
devastating earthquake. There has been an alarming
increase in incidents along the Blue Line with Lebanon,
culminating in the most intense exchange of rocket fire
since 2006.
There can be no question that the triggers of the
deteriorating situation on the ground continue to include
unilateral steps aimed at establishing irreversible
facts on the ground and the lack of prospects for
reviving the peace process. Above all, that is a result
of the record rate of Israeli settlement construction
activity, with 7,157 housing units approved this year,
which is double the numbers for 2021 and 2022, along
with the retrospective legalization of outposts, with
corresponding expropriations of land and demolitions
of Palestinian homes. In addition, the number of
arbitrary arrests of Palestinians has increased, with
more than 2,000 people, including minors, detained
since the beginning of the year. Incidents involving
the disproportionate use of force and the heightened
use of socioeconomic pressure measures are also on
the rise. It is noteworthy that neither the meetings in
Aqaba and Sharm El-Sheikh nor the Security Council
presidential statement condemning those unilateral
Israeli actions (S/PRST/2023/1) have had any tangible
effect. Meanwhile, 700 housing units in the settlement
of Givat Hamatos in East Jerusalem were approved for
construction in April of this year.
In the circumstances, Palestinians are increasingly
opting for resistance and stepping up efforts to defend
their legitimate rights before international bodies such
as the International Court of Justice, the Security
Council and the General Assembly. The IsraeliPalestinian conflict has clearly exposed the double
standards of our colleagues from the United States,
which has continued its unilateral attempts to reverse
the deteriorating situation on the ground by substituting
an economic truce for a genuinely political peace.
23-14650

24/05/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Having blocked the work of the Middle East Quartet of
international mediators, the United States is stubbornly
promoting Arab-Israeli normalization while bypassing
a just settlement of the Palestinian question. The real
paradox here is that Washington, which aspires to the
role of sole sponsor of the Middle East peace process,
long ago and definitively lost the neutrality and
impartiality essential to an honest broker. The previous
Administration’s decisions to recognize Jerusalem as
the capital of Israel and Israeli sovereignty over the
Golan Heights effectively erased the United States’
commitment to the relevant Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions.
Against that worrisome backdrop, we can only
welcome the long-awaited decision of the League of
Arab States to restore Syria’s membership. We believe
that Syria’s resumption of its participation in the work
of the Arab League, of which it is a founding member,
will help to improve the atmosphere in the Middle East,
including with regard to the Arab-Israeli conflict. The
League’s decision demonstrates the Arab world’s desire
to strengthen the coordination of efforts to resolve the
region’s outstanding problems through negotiations.
We believe that the international community must
continue to advocate the necessity of relaunching direct
negotiations between Palestinians and Israelis on a
universally recognized international legal basis on all
final status issues — that is, borders, refugees, water
resources and Jerusalem. Only a genuine resumption of
the peace process, with a two-State solution at its core,
will contribute to reducing violence and radicalization
and to restoring mutual trust in the Middle East.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Wennesland and Ms. Hary for their briefings.
France is concerned about the continuing use of
unilateral measures. It condemns the decision by the
Israeli authorities to authorize the establishment of
settlers in Homesh, in the northern occupied West
Bank. That decision, like all announcements of the
establishment or extension of settlements, is contrary to
international law. It also contravenes the commitments
made by Israel at the Aqaba and Sharm El-Sheikh
meetings. France calls on the Israeli Government to
reverse its decision. France will never recognize the
illegal annexation of territories or the legalization of
illegal settlements.
France also expresses its concern about the second
visit by the Israeli Minister of National Security to the

S/PV.9328

Esplanade of the Mosques on 21 May, which constitutes
a provocation. We emphasize the importance of
preserving the historic status quo of the holy sites in
Jerusalem and stress the importance of Jordan’s specific
role in that regard.
The unilateral measures are fuelling tensions
on the ground. France welcomed the ceasefire that
entered into force on the evening of 13 May thanks
to the mediation efforts of Egypt, with the support of
the United Nations and Qatar. We call for a lasting
opening of access to Gaza and an end to the blockade,
accompanied by credible security guarantees for
Israel. France will continue to condemn any attacks on
Israel and reiterates its unwavering commitment to its
security. Any loss of civilian life is unacceptable. The
recent escalation has only increased the suffering of
the civilian population. The situation in the occupied
territories remains precarious. United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes no longer have the
financial resources to operate normally. Between
now and August, the World Food Programme will be
forced to suspend part of its operations in the West
Bank and Gaza if it does not receive the necessary
funds. Similarly, the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East needs
additional resources between now and the summer to
continue its operations.
The Council therefore has a responsibility to defend
the possibility of a two-State solution and to ensure that
its adopted decisions are respected. France welcomes
the efforts of the United States, Egypt and Jordan to
enable the parties to resume dialogue. We call on the
parties to respect their commitments, in particular with
regard to settlements, but also with regard to respect for
the security prerogatives of the Palestinian Authority in
Area A.
As the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of France,
Germany, Egypt and Jordan recalled at the seventh
meeting of the Munich Group on 11 May, it is imperative
to relaunch a credible political process leading to a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace between Israelis
and Palestinians. France stands ready to contribute
to such efforts together with its partners. The United
Nations, and especially the Special Coordinator, has an
important role to play.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland and
Ms. Hary for their briefings.

23-1465013/17

S/PV.9328

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This month, the occupied Palestinian territories,
in particular the Gaza Strip, once again saw tensions.
On 10 May, the Security Council held emergency
consultations at the request of the United Arab
Emirates, France and China. Through the mediation
efforts of Egypt and other relevant countries, the
parties concerned finally reached a ceasefire. However,
it must be noted that the tensions and conflict between
Palestine and Israel have reoccurred repeatedly over
the past few years, and they have therefore fully shown
that the long-stalled peace process and piecemeal crisis
management are unsustainable and that there is no
alternative to a comprehensive and just solution.
In that regard, I would like to stress three points.
First, the historical status quo of religious holy sites
in Jerusalem must be respected and upheld. On 21 May,
a senior Israeli security official entered the Al-Aqsa
Mosque compound for a second time this year and
reignited tensions. With regard to the issue of religious
holy sites, Israel must stop its provocations, guarantee
Muslim worshippers their right to worship, uphold the
peace and tranquillity of religious holy sites and respect
the custodianship of Jordan.
Secondly, the illegal expansion of settlements on
the occupied territories must stop. Settlement activities
violate international law and resolution 2334 (2016).
Since the beginning of the year, Israel has continued
to advance unilateral measures on approving returns,
building new settlements and legalizing settlements.
We urge Israel to immediately halt those actions and
stop encroaching upon the land and resources of the
Palestinian people.

24/05/2023

of tensions between Palestine and Israel. The parties
concerned are duty-bound to implement them and should
not use them as bargaining chips. The international
community shoulders the responsibility of ensuring
their implementation and should not remain indifferent.
Meeting those three requirements is also a fundamental
step towards reviving the two-State solution. The
international community should not merely pay lip
service to supporting the two-State solution or use
supporting direct Palestinian-Israeli negotiations as an
excuse for shirking its own responsibilities. The country
that has major influence on the parties concerned
should make concrete efforts to advance the Middle
East peace process and should not unjustifiably prevent
the Security Council from arriving at a minimum
consensus on the Palestine-Israeli issue.
China will continue to firmly support the Palestinian
people in their just cause to restore their legitimate
national rights and the establishment of a fully sovereign
and independent State of Palestine, based on the 1967
borders with East Jerusalem as its capital. We will join
hands with the international community and contribute
positively to the early achievement of a comprehensive,
just and lasting solution to the Palestinian question
and the realization of the harmonious coexistence and
common development of the Arab and Jewish peoples.
Ms. Bongo (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland for his briefing
and reiterate my delegation’s support for his work. We
listened to Ms. Tania Hary’s briefing with great interest.

Thirdly, international humanitarian law must be
observed. Since the beginning of the year, more than
100 Palestinians, including children, have lost their lives
in clashes. Israel has also suffered civilian casualties.
All parties concerned should stop all forms of violence
against civilians and targeting schools, hospitals and
other civilian infrastructure. The plight of Palestinian
refugees should be alleviated, and the economic and
livelihood needs of Palestine should be met. Israel
should lift the blockade on Gaza as soon as possible.
The unhindered flow of people and reconstruction
supplies in and out of Gaza should be maintained.

This month of May has been characterized by an
escalation of particularly deadly violence, despite the
international community’s many calls for restraint.
Women and children have once again paid a heavy price.
After dozens of days of fighting, the entry into force of
a ceasefire on 14 May is therefore a genuine relief. We
are aware of the precariousness of the calm, given the
latest reports that three Palestinian fighters were killed
in the northern part of the occupied West Bank on the
night of Sunday, 21 May to Monday, 22 May, during a
raid by the Israeli army. We urge both sides to refrain
from belligerent rhetoric and other provocations that
could reignite tensions. Settlement activities, which
contravene international law, must also cease.

Upholding the historical status quo of religious
holy sites, halting the expansion of settlements and
respecting international humanitarian law are key
requirements for preventing the repeated escalations

Gabon reiterates its call for restraint, dialogue and
a diplomatic solution. The key role played by Egypt in
the cessation of hostilities and the efforts made by the
United States, Lebanon and Qatar to reach a ceasefire

14/17

23-14650

24/05/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

are to be commended. Both Palestinian and Israeli
civilian populations must be able to live in safety.
Let me to conclude by recalling that a political
resolution of the conflict will undoubtedly improve
the alarming security, economic and humanitarian
situation on the ground, whose negative impact on the
region is no longer the subject of debate. All initiatives
aimed at peace and a negotiated political solution must
lead to the realization of the two-State solution, which
will ensure shared prosperity and stability for the
entire region.
Mr. Boateng (Ghana): Let me thank the Special
Coordinator for his in-depth briefing and Ms. Tania
Hary for sharing her perspective.
We take note of the sobering account of events
on the ground, as well as the measures being taken
to address the main triggers of the conflict and to
prevent their reoccurrence. It is regrettable that the
briefings paint not only a deteriorating security and a
dire humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories, but also a reversal of the goodwill and
momentum that had been achieved after the Aqaba and
Sharm El-Sheikh meetings in February and March. We
encourage further diplomatic and mediation efforts
by friendly countries of the region to stave off the
worrisome tide of violence between Israel and Palestine
and bring the parties to the negotiating table.
We note with regret the escalation of violent clashes
between Israeli security forces and Palestinian groups in
the wake of Israeli military search-and-arrest operations
in places such as the Jenin, Askar and Balata refugee
camps in Nablus, the Aqabat Jabr refugee camp, in the
eastern part of the West Bank, and the Nur Al-Shams
and Tulkarm refugee camps, in the north-western part
of the West Bank. We are concerned that, despite the
fact that the military operations resulted in the seizure
of a number of weapons, including rifles and explosive
devices, they have also exacerbated the humanitarian
crisis in the occupied Palestinian territories and have
aggravated the already-volatile situation on the ground
as a result of the mass arrest of hundreds of Palestinian
youths, the demolition of Palestinian-owned structures
and the displacement of Palestinian families from their
farms and villages.
While noting the legitimate security concerns
of Israel, especially on following Hamas, Palestinian
Islamic Jihad and other Palestinian militants recently
firing rockets and mortar shells from Gaza against

S/PV.9328

its population and at Israeli towns situated along the
border, we urge the Government of Israel to always
weigh the anticipated military advantage against the
expected collateral damage in order to ensure that
attacks are not excessive or disproportionate.
We are saddened by the fact that, between
the period from 2 to 15 May, 45 Palestinians were
killed by Israeli forces and an Israeli was killed by
Palestinians, as set out in the report on the protection
of civilians issued by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs. We convey our deepest and
heartfelt condolences to the families and friends of the
victims and to the Governments of Israel and Palestine
for their loss.
We remain deeply concerned about the recent plans
of the current Government of Israel to advance further
expansion of Jewish settlements in the West Bank,
including the initial approval granted by the Jerusalem
District Planning and Building Committee last week to
pave the way for 400 new homes for Jewish residents
inside the Palestinian neighbourhood of Abu Dis.
We encourage a deliberate policy of restraint by
the senior officials of Israel and Palestine in order to
preserve the viability of the two-State solution.
We acknowledge the importance of upholding the
historic status quo at the holy sites in Jerusalem in word
and practice and stress in that regard the special role of
Jordan as the Custodian of the Holy Sites in Jerusalem.
Visits such as the one recently undertaken by the Israel’s
National Security Minister to the Temple Mount on
Sunday, 21 May could provoke negative reactions and
lead to a destructive path of disengagement.
We remain deeply concerned that the collective
aspirations of the Security Council, the countries in the
Middle East and the international community for Israel
and Palestine to live peacefully side by side as two
sovereign States, with Jerusalem as the shared capital,
continues to be obscured by the highly degenerative
environment witnessed in recent weeks.
We reaffirm our belief that the path for lasting
peace and stability in the Middle East runs through the
two-State solution and urge all stakeholders, especially
senior political leaders on both sides, to refrain from
inflammatory actions and rhetoric, while also renewing
their commitment to pursuing confidence-building
measures and strengthening mutual trust in order to
address outstanding issues through direct dialogue.

23-1465015/17

S/PV.9328

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Ms. Gatt (Malta): I would like to thank Special
Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing and Ms. Hary
for her insightful remarks and recommendations.
At the outset, in the wake of the recent hostilities,
we commend the Egyptian authorities for brokering
a ceasefire and returning the situation to relative
calm. Those events have once more highlighted how
precarious and unsustainable the situation in the Gaza
Strip remains. Gaza is home to some of the highest
levels of humanitarian needs in the world, with 80 per
cent of the population in need of humanitarian aid — a
situation exacerbated by Israel’s continued blockade.
We stress the obligation to ensure unhindered
humanitarian access to Gaza.
As a signatory to the Political Declaration on
Strengthening the Protection of Civilians from the
Humanitarian Consequences Arising from the Use
of Explosive Weapons in Populated Areas, it was
particularly distressing for my country to watch, yet
again, renewed bombing and devastation in Gaza — one
of the most densely populated areas in the world. In that
latest round of fighting, homes have been damaged and
destroyed, and there are reports of partial damage to
several hospitals and health-care facilities.
For Malta, the protection of civilians in conflict,
including children and women, and respect for
international humanitarian law is paramount.
Regrettably, it is too often disregarded in the case of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Malta strongly condemns all acts that result in the
killing of civilians on both sides. We strongly condemn
the indiscriminate rocket fire towards Israel, as well as
all acts of terrorism and incitements to terrorism, which
continue to threaten civilians and result in further
tragic loss of life.
While we reiterate that Israel has the right to selfdefence, the principles of necessity and proportionality
must also be respected. We are concerned that the
frequent, systematic and violent raids by Israeli forces
in the West Bank continue to endanger civilians,
including children.
Echoing the Security Council’s presidential statement
of 20 February (S/PRST/2023/1), Malta reiterates its
strong opposition to unilateral measures that impede
peace. Those include the further expansion of Israeli
settlements — which are illegal under international law
and an obstacle to peace — the retroactive legalisation
16/17

24/05/2023

of settlement outposts, the demolition of Palestinian
homes and the further displacement of Palestinian
civilians. The reports detailing the exploratory attempts
to substantially increase the number of settlers in the
West Bank are also deeply concerning.
We unreservedly condemn the demolitions of
European Union (EU)-funded projects, including the
recent demolition of the EU-funded school in Jubbet
al-Dhib. That unilateral act denied 81 Palestinian
children their inherent right to education.
We are also alarmed by the provocative Israeli flag
march witnessed last week in Jerusalem, which saw
thousands of settlers marching through the Muslim
quarter of the Old City and hundreds storming the
Al-Aqsa Mosque, under the protection of heavy security.
Those acts, coupled with inflammatory hate speech,
push tensions closer to a breaking point. Such measures
deny the Palestinian people’s right to self-determination
and fracture any prospects of a contiguous Palestinian
State, entrenching a one-State reality that runs contrary
to resolution 2334 (2016).
We are also deeply concerned about the dire
financial situation of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
and appeal for the sustained and predictable funding of
its indispensable services, without which there will be
dire humanitarian consequences.
Inter-Palestinian reconciliation is crucial if we are
to move closer to a two-State solution. Malta urges the
Palestinian factions to deliver on the commitments made
in the 2022 Algiers Declaration, including the holding
of democratic and inclusive elections. The rights of
women, including their full, equal and meaningful
participation and leadership, must be central to those
processes and discussions.
Malta underscores the critical need for all the
parties to engage in good-faith dialogue. We encourage
the parties to continue the discussions following-up on
the agreements made in Aqaba and Sharm El-Sheikh
and to establish confidence-building measures and
the constructive implementation of the commitments
made, including the need to cease conflict drivers and
ensure the fiscal stability of the Palestinian economy.
That is necessary to lay the groundwork for a muchneeded peace plan.
Malta remains committed to the realization of
the two-State Solution, in which two democratic
23-14650

24/05/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

States, Israel and Palestine, live side by side in peace
within secure and recognized borders, consistent with
international law and the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Switzerland.
I would like to begin by thanking Special
Coordinator Tor Wennesland for his briefing. Above
all, we commend him for his efforts, as well as Egypt
and Qatar for the role they played, both in negotiating
and supporting respect for the ceasefire reached on
13 May amid the latest hostilities in Gaza and Israel.
The incidents of the past week demonstrate that
tensions and the risk of an escalation of violence remain
very high. The racist slogans and incitement to hatred
against Palestinian residents, as well as the attacks
against journalists, are unacceptable. Switzerland
calls on the leaders of all parties to refrain from any
provocations. The historical status quo of Haram
Al-Sharif/Temple Mount, including Jordan’s role
as Custodian of the Holy Sites, must be respected.
Furthermore, Switzerland considers East Jerusalem
as occupied territory, whose final status, including as
the capital of two States, must be negotiated between
the parties.
We call on the parties to do all in their power
to achieve a lasting de-escalation, in particular by
implementing the commitments made in Aqaba and
Sharm El-Sheikh, which followed the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2023/1) adopted by the Council.
In that regard, we call on Israel to revoke the order
allowing its nationals to settle in Homesh, an outpost
that is illegal under international humanitarian law. We
also deplore the fact that the members of a Palestinian
community had to leave their land in Ein Samia.
Switzerland condemns the deaths of Palestinian
civilians, including children, caused by Israeli air
strikes on the Gaza Strip two weeks ago. We also

S/PV.9328

condemn the indiscriminate firing of rockets from
Gaza into Israel. In the West Bank, more than 100
Palestinians have been killed by Israeli forces this year,
including 19 children. We call on the parties to respect
their obligations under international humanitarian law,
including the principles of distinction, proportionality
and precaution, as well as human rights.
As we heard in the briefing by Ms. Tania Hary,
whom I thank, Gaza has been under blockade for 16
years. The blockade must be lifted. An immediate
easing of restrictions on access and movement of
people between Gaza and Israel is crucial. As the
occupying Power, Israel is obliged under international
humanitarian law to ensure, to the best of its ability,
that the basic needs of the population are met. Open
crossings must therefore remain open.
Finally, the funding of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East is insufficient to cover operations that are essential
to the survival of its beneficiaries. That situation is of
concern. We hope that the annual donors’ conference
in New York, to be held in early June, will alleviate the
financial burden on the Agency.
Developments over the past few days and weeks,
including in connection with various dates of historical
significance, have once again demonstrated the urgency
of resuming a credible political process that addresses
the root causes of the conflict. Switzerland stands
ready, including through its good offices, to facilitate
the resumption of a credible dialogue for a negotiated
two-State solution, in accordance with international
law and internationally agreed parameters, including
Security Council resolutions.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

23-1465017/17
