V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

85

Establishment of a network for the
exl'hange of tel'hnological information

Taking into account resolution 87 (IV) of 30
May 1976 of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development117 concerning strengthening the technological capacity of developing countries,
Bearing in mind its resolution 3507 (XXX) of 15
December 1975 on institutional arrangements in the
field of the transfer of technology, particularly paragraphs 2, 5 and 6 thereof,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 1902
(LVII) of 1 August 1974 on the role of an international technological information system in the transfer
and assessment of technology and in the indigenous
growth of appropriate technologies in developing countries,
Acknowledging that the Economic and Social Councial, in its decision 171 (LXI) of 4 August 1976,
noted with satisfaction the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the establishment of a network for the exchange of technological information, 118 as a first step
in the implementation of General Assembly resolution 3 507 ( XXX) , and decided to transmit the report
to the Assembly for consideration at its thirty-first session,
I. Reaffirms the importance of wider dissemination
of scientific and technological information for the purpose of allowing developing countries access to research findings which are of interest to them as well
as project experience of other developing countries,
thus permitting the selection of technologies essential
for their industrial growth and promoting the development of their own technological capacity;
2. Compliments the Secretary-General on the report
transmitted by the Economic and Social Council and
requests that he convey the thanks of the General
Assembly to members of the Inter-Agency Task Force
on Information Exchange and the Transfer of Technology who have undertaken to prepare the plan for the establishment of a network for the exchange of technological information;
3. Takes note with satisfaction of the report and
its conclusions, 119 especially as they relate to the importance of establishing a network useful to all countries, in particular developing countries;
4. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development and
the Executive Director of the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization, in consultation with the
regional commissions and other appropriate organizations, to intensify their efforts, in their respective fields,
to assist in the establishment in developing countries
of centres for the transfer and development of technology at the national, subregional and regional levels,
in order to provide fundamental elements for the adequate functioning of an international network for the
exchange of technological information, through corresponding national, subregional and regional systems
of information;
5. Also requests the Secretary-General and the
Interagency Task Force to continue their work in accordance with paragraph 6 of General Assembly resolution 3507 (XXX). including the preparation and
publication of the pilot directory of United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974 and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975,

117 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Dcl'elop111ent, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.II.D.10),
part one, sect. A.
11 R E/5839.
1111 Ibid., sect. IV.

31/182.

Preparations for a new international
development strategy

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2626 (XXV) of 24 October 1970 containing the International Development
Strategy for the Second United Nations Development
Decade and 3517 (XXX) of 15 December 1975 on
the mid-term review and appraisal of progress in the
implementation of the Strategy,
Gravely concerned that international economic relations face severe problems and that the economic disparities between the developed and the developing countries have further widened,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
( S-VI) of 1 May 197 4 containing the Declaration
and the Programme of Action on the Establishment
of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX)
of 12 December 1974 containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States and 3362 (S-VII)
of 16 September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation,
Recalling the results achieved at a number of major
United Nations conferences held during the Second
United Nations Development Decade on world economic and social problems,
Conscious of the need to introduce profound changes
in economic relations between the developed and developing countries,
1. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Committee for Development Planning as well
as the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination and
other organs and organizations concerned of the United
Nations system, to collect data and information that
are relevant to the formulation of a new international
development strategy, taking fully into account the
above-mentioned resolutions on the establishment of
a new international economic order and the other
above-mentioned resolutions;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to report on
the information requested above to the General Assembly at its thirty-second session, through the Economic and Social Council at its resumed sixty-third
session, and decides to consider at that time appropriate action for the preparations for a new international development strategy;
3. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure
that research studies and reports in the field of development and economic co-operation, including those that
may be necessary for a new international development
strategy, are in accordance with the objectives of the
above-mentioned resolutions;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to utilize
all appropriate research institutions and expertise, especially those of the developing countries, in the preparation of the above-mentioned studies and reports.
l 06th plenary meeting
21 December 1976
31/183.

86

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

information services mentioned in the report, 120 and
to submit further conclusions and recommendations on
the establishment of a network for the exchange of
technological information to the Assembly at its thirtysecond session;
6. Further requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Interagency Task Force, to provide,
within the eX!i.sting capacity of the Secretariat, the necessary administrative services for carrying out, as far
as is possible at present, the recommendations of the
report;
7. Requests the Secretary-General and the Interagency Task Force to ascertain the availability of
current inventories' of information capabilities at the
national, regional and international levels in terms of
information sources, means of access to information
and information-related services;
8. Urges the Secretary-General and the Interagency
Task Force to identify by means of those inventories
any deficiencies that might inhibit the setting up of
the network and to recommend to the General Assembly at its thirty-second session, through the Economic and Social Council, measures to remedy these
deficiencies;
9. Welcomes the report of the Executive Director
of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization on the establishment of an industrial technological information bank 121 and urges the Industrial
Development Board to take an early decision so that
the Executive Director will be able to take the necessary measures towards making the bank operational,
and to report on the measures taken to the General
Assembly at its thirty-second session through the Economic and Social Council.
106th plenary meeting
21 December 1976
31/184.

United Nations Conference on Science
and Technology for Development

The General Assembly,
Recalling section III, paragraph 7, of its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975, in which
it decided that a United Nations Conference on Science
and Technology for Development should be held in
1978 or 1979,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolutions
1897 (LVII) of 1 August 1974 on the question of
convening a United Nations conference on science and
technology, 2028 (LXI) of 4 August 1976 on the
United Nations Conference on Science and Technology
for Development and 2035 (LXI) of 4 August 1976
on the preparatory period for the Conference,
Recalling further the Declaration and the Programme
of Action on the Establishment of a New International
Economic Order122 and the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States, 123
l. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolutions 2028 (LXI) and 2035 (LXI);
2. Decides to convene the United Nations Conference on Science and Technology for Development
120 Ibid., para. 76 (a).
121 A/31/147.
122 Resolutions 3201 (S-Vl) and 3202 (S-VI).
1211 Resolution 3281 (XXIX).

during 1979, in time for the General Assembly to take
action at its thirty-fourth session in the light of the
results of the Conference;
3. Decides that the Conference should be within
the framework recommended in paragraphs 2 and 3 of
Economic and Social Council resolution 2028 (LXI);
4. Requests the Secretary-General to appoint a
Secretary-General of the Conference at the earliest
possible time, as provided in paragraph 5 of Council
resolution 2028 (LXI), and further requests such appointment to be made at the level of Under-SecretaryGeneral, in order to ensure the appropriate capacity
for co-ordination and interaction with Member States
and within the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system;
5. Decides that the Committee on Science and
Technology for Development shall act as the Preparatory Committee for the United Nations Conference on
Science and Technology for Development, open to the
participation of all States, and further decides that the
Preparatory Committee shall hold its first session early
in 1977 and submit its report to the General Assembly
at its thirty-second session through the Economic and
Social Council at its sixty-third session;
6. Requests the Preparatory Committee to consider, taking into account the time needed for the due
completion of the various stages of preparation for the
Conference. the question of the time-table, sites and
other necessary arrangements for the regional and interregional preparatory meetings and to submit its
proposals to the Economic and Social Council at its
sixty-third session;
1. Also requests the Committee on Science and
Technology for Development to consider, at its meeting in I 977, as the Preparatory Committee, the draft
provisional agenda for its fourth regular session;
8. Decides to take a final decision on the question
of the site of the Conference at its thirty-second session;
9. Invites the specialized agencies, in particular the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, as well as the International Atomic
Energy Agency and the interested organs of the United
Nations, the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization and the regional commissions to
co-operate fully in the preparations for the Conference,
as provided by Economic and Social Council resolution 2028 (LXI);

10. Requests the Committee on Science and Technology for Development to take fully into account, in
the process of preparation for the Conference, the
interrelationship between the scientific/technological
fields and other areas of activity of the United Nations
system, in particular the economic area, so as to create
more favourable conditions for the further promotion
of comprehensive international co-operation;
11. Invites the Secretary-General to request the
Administrative Committee on Co-ordination to promote,
through its Sub-Committee on Science and Technology,
close and permanent contact with the Secretary-General
of the Conference;
12. Decides that, for the preparatory work leading
to the Conference, the Advisory Committee on the Application of Science and Technology to Development
