VIII.

203

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fif'th Committee

or the award of the first recognized degree, whichever
is the earlier";
7. Decides also that expenses incurred by expatriate staff members for the post-secondary studies of
their children in the - country of the parent's duty
station shall be eligible for reimbursement under the
education grant, with effect from the beginning of the
academic year in course of 1 January 1979;
8. Further decides that when, for the purpose of
applying the scale of reimbursements approved for the
education grant, the expenses incurred by a staff member in a currency other than the United States dollar
are converted into dollars, the rate of exchange used
shall be whichever is the higher of that which was in
force at the date when the existing scale of reimbursements carne into effect or that in force at the date
when the reimbursement is made, the same rate being
used in converting the dollar amount of the reimbursement into the currency in which it is to be paid;
9. Approves the extension of the provision of the
education grant to include the reimbursements of the
expenses incurred by staff members for the special
education of their disabled children, upon the terms
and conditions specified in paragraph 246 of the
Commission's report and in the annex to the present
resolution;
10. Invites the Commission to reconsider its intention to extend the assignment allowance from five
to seven years;
11. Approves the amendments to the Staff Regulations of the United Nations necessary to give effect to
the above decisions, as set out in the annex to the
present resolution, and invites the Secretary-General
to make such consequential changes as are necessary
in the Staff Rules and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its thirty-fourth session in accordance
with the provisions of regulation 12.2 of the Staff
Regulations;
12. Decides that the above decisions shall enter
into effect on 1 January 1979, except where otherwise
specified.
88th plenary meeting
19 December 1978
ANNEX
Amendments to the Staff Regulations of the United Nations

Regulation 3.2
In the first paragraph, delete the words "under the age of
twenty-one" from the first sentence and insert the following
text as the second sentence:
"The grant shall be payable in respect of the child up to
the end of the fourth year of post-secondary studies or the
award of the first recognized degree, whichever is the earHer."
Insert the following text as the third paragraph:
"The Secretary•General shall also establish terms and
conditions under which an education grant shall be available
to a staff member whose child is unable, by reason of
physical or mental disability, to attend a normal educational
institution and therefore requires special teaching or training
to prepare him/her for full integration into society or, while
attending a normal educational institution, l'equires special
teaching or training to assist him/her in overcoming the
disability. The amount of this grant per year for each
disabled child shall be equal to 75 per cent of the educa-

tional expenses actually incurred up to $4,000, subject to a
maximum grant of $3,000."

Regulation 3.4
Add the following sentence at the end of paragraph (a):
"The amount of either of these allowances payable in local
currency shall not be less than the local curr,ency equivalent
of the dollar amount at the time it was established or last
revised."
Annex JI/
In the schedule of termination indemnities set out in paragraph (a) of annex III, amend the wording in the Jast column
to read as follows:
"One week for each month of uncompleted service subject
to a minimum of six weeks' and a maximum of three
months' indemnity pay."

33/120.

Report of the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Board

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Board to the General Assembly
and to the member organizations of the United Nations
J oint Staff Pension Fund for 1978 97 and the related
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions, 98
Reatfirming that no change in the pension adjustment system should entail an increase in the present
or future liabilities of Member States,
I
ADJUSTMENT OF BENEFITS IN RESPECT OF
COST-OF-LIVING CHANGES

Decides to revise the system of adjustment of benefits in payment contained in General Assembly resotion 3354 (XXIX) of 18 December 1974 and previous
resolutions on the same subject, with effect from 1
January 1979, in accordance with the recommendations
of the United Nations J oint Staff Pension Board contained in paragraphs 18 to 46 of its report to the
Assembly for 1978 and in annex V thereto;
II
TRANSFER OF PENSION RIGHTS

Concurs in the agreement approved by the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Board with the Govemment of Canada under article 13 of the Regulations
of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund with
respect to continuity of pension rights between that
Govemment and the Fund;
III
EMERGENCY FUND

Authorizes the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Board to supplement the voluntary contributions to
the Emergency Fund, for a further period of one year,
by an amount not exceeding $100,000;
IV
ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES

Approves expenses, chargeable directly to the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund, totalling $3,726,500
(net) for 1979 for the administration of the Fund.
88th plenary meeting
19 December 1978
H1 !bid., Supp/ement No. 9
(A/33/9
A/33/9/ Add.l.
n8 A/33/375.

and Corr.1)

and
