A /76/PV.5

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-sixth session

5th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 22 September 2021, 9 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shahid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Maldives)

The meeting was called to order at 9.05 a.m.
High-level meeting of the General Assembly
to commemorate the twentieth anniversary of
the adoption of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action
Agenda item 72
Elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and followup to the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action

the draft political declaration will be taken following
the opening statements. I will now deliver my opening
statement from the rostrum.
I thank Member States for the opportunity to
address them at this commemoration of the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of the Durban Declaration
and Programme of Action and congratulate the
Permanent Representatives of Portugal and South Africa
on their successful leadership of the consultations on
the political declaration to be adopted today.

The President: I declare open the high-level meeting
of the General Assembly to commemorate the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of the Durban Declaration
and Programme of Action. This meeting is being held in
accordance with General Assembly resolutions 75/237
of 31 December 2020 and 75/320 of 2 September 2021,
and is taking place under sub-item (b) of agenda item
72, entitled “Comprehensive implementation of and
follow-up to the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action”.

The adoption in 2001 of the Durban Declaration
and Programme of Action carried with it an emphasis
on tackling racial discrimination and intolerance.
Sadly, two decades later, we are still working to see
that doctrine fulfilled. That is not to say that the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action has
failed, but rather that we have not done enough. As a
global community, we have not done enough to tackle
the pervasiveness of racism, racial discrimination,
intolerance and xenophobia. Tackling racism in all
its forms is a moral responsibility for justice. Racism
begets violence, displacement and inequity. It lives on
because we allow it to. It penetrates society because we
fail to acknowledge diversity.

I warmly welcome everyone to our high-level
meeting, which will focus on the theme of reparations,
racial justice and equality for people of African
descent. The General Assembly has before it a draft
resolution issued as document A/76/L.2. Before
proceeding further, I would like to remind members
that in accordance with resolution 75/320, action on

The Durban Declaration and Programme of Action
is a comprehensive toolkit for addressing racism. It
makes reference to various groups of people, such as
Africans and people of African descent, Asians and
people of Asian descent, indigenous peoples, minorities,
youth, women and children. Today’s chosen theme of
reparations, racial justice and equality for people of

Draft resolution (A/76/L.2)

In accordance with decision 75/573, and without setting a precedent for mandated high-level
meetings planned for future high-level weeks, the official records of the General Assembly
will be supplemented by annexes containing pre-recorded statements submitted by Heads
of State or other dignitaries, submitted to the President no later than the day on which such
statements are delivered in the Assembly Hall. Submissions in this regard should be made to
estatements@un.org.

21-26073 (E)

*21XXXXX*

A/76/PV.5

African descent is very timely. It serves as a reminder
that in our efforts to recover from the pandemic, there
is a great need to acknowledge the past and address the
ingrained racism in our societies.
My presidency of the General Assembly at its
seventy-sixth session will include five rays of hope,
one of them specifically focused on human rights and
on addressing racism in all its forms. As the United
Nations — with human rights as a founding pillar of the
Organization — we must never lose sight of that core
principle. It must permeate everything we do.
Like so much else, the global pandemic has
exacerbated underlying conditions and exposed fault
lines. The same holds true for racism. We saw, and
still see, the marginalized and vulnerable fall further
behind. Many have been denied equal access to health,
education and security. Those pre-existing structural
weaknesses were a recipe for disaster long before the
coronavirus disease. The pandemic has only made the
divide and injustice starker. There are many lessons
we can take from the pandemic, from seeing who has
been affected and how. Let us be self-aware enough
to recognize those failings and seek racial equality, to
close that divide and build the resilience of those whom
we have sadly left behind. As we do so, we must ensure
that African descendants are adequately represented in
decision-making and policymaking processes. For their
rights to be meaningfully reflected and translated into
doable policies, they must be part of the conversation.
As I stated at the opening of the general debate (see
A/76/PV.3), this moment in time is a turning point. Let
us turn the tide on racism and intolerance. We must
leave no one behind.
In closing, I want to reiterate the importance of
acknowledging the past. Whether in the form of a formal
apology or through other means, we must own up to and
acknowledge what has happened. We cannot move past
what is not addressed. I encourage the international
community, individuals, leaders and stakeholders to
engage in deeper and more honest dialogue to address
this global issue.
I now give the floor to His Excellency SecretaryGeneral António Guterres.
The Secretary-General: At the dawn of this
century, world leaders and human rights advocates
journeyed to Durban determined to banish the hatred
and prejudice that had disfigured previous centuries,
to make this — in the words of the original Durban
2/16

22/09/2021

Declaration and Programme of Action — a century
of human rights, and to eradicate racism in all its
abhorrent forms and manifestations. That journey for
equality and justice did not begin in Durban. The path
was paved by the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and followed in the footsteps of the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination.
Today, two decades on, our journey continues. The
twentieth anniversary of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action offers an important opportunity
to reflect on where we stand and where we need to
go. Racism and racial discrimination still permeate
institutions, social structures and everyday life in every
society. Structural racism and systematic injustice still
deny people their fundamental human rights. Africans
and people of African descent, minority communities,
indigenous peoples, migrants, refugees, displaced
persons and so many others all continue to confront
hatred, stigmatization, scapegoating, discrimination
and violence. Xenophobia, misogyny, hateful
conspiracies, white supremacy and neo-Nazi ideologies
are spreading, amplified in echo chambers of hate.
From glaring infringements to creeping transgressions,
human rights are under assault. Racism is often the
cruel catalyst.
The links between racism and gender inequality
are unmistakable, and we see some of the worst effects
in the overlap and intersections of discrimination
suffered by women from radicalized communities
and minority groups. We are witnessing a troubling
rise in anti-Semitism, a harbinger throughout history
of discrimination against others. We must condemn
without hesitation or reservation the racism and
discrimination of growing anti-Muslim bigotry, the
mistreatment of minority Christians and other forms of
intolerance around the world. Let me be clear. Whoever
uses this process — or any other platform — for
anti-Semitic diatribes, anti-Muslim discourse, hateful
speech or baseless assertions only denigrates our
essential fight against racism.
(spoke in French)
In today’s global landscape a glimmer of hope has
appeared on the horizon. A movement for racial justice
and equality has emerged with unprecedented force,
reach and impact. That new awareness, often led by
women and young people, has created a momentum
that we must seize. The Office of the United Nations
21-26073

22/09/2021

High Commissioner for Human Rights has launched
a transformative agenda to help end systemic racism,
ensure accountability and deliver reparative justice.
The Human Rights Council has established a new
independent mechanism aimed at advancing racial
justice and equality in law enforcement. The Permanent
Forum of People of African Descent, created by the
General Assembly, is another example of meaningful
progress towards a systemic response to systemic
racism. I call on every Member State to take concrete
actions, including through policy measures, legislation
and more granular data collection, in support of
all these efforts at the national and global levels.
Together we must recognize the crimes of the past
that continue to resonate and haunt our present — the
lingering traumas, the suffering across generations, the
structural inequalities so deeply rooted in centuries
of enslavement and colonial exploitation. We must
reverse the consequences of generations of exclusion
and discrimination, including their obvious social
and economic dimensions, through reparative justice
frameworks.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is
damning proof of just how far we still are from righting
past wrongs. In some cases, mortality rates have been
three times higher for marginalized groups. Women
from minority groups have often been the worst off,
facing escalations in gender-based violence, losing
jobs and educational opportunities in greater numbers
than anyone else and benefiting the least from fiscal
stimulus.
(spoke in English)
The Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action was meant to break the vicious cycle in which
discrimination leads to deprivation and poverty
deepens discrimination. We can overcome those
harmful afflictions and heal if we recognize diversity
as richness and if we understand, as Durban did, that
the fight against racism is both a global, universal effort
and a concrete struggle in every society. No country can
claim to be free from it. We can overcome those harmful
afflictions and heal if we act to redress the global
political, economic, and structural power imbalances
rooted in colonial rule, enslavement and exploitation
that continue to blight our present; if we work to ensure
that all of us feel respected in our individual identities
while feeling valued as members of society as a whole;
if we make sure that all of us — regardless of race,
colour, descent, national or ethnic origin, gender,

A/76/PV.5

religion, sexual orientation or other status — can live
lives of dignity and opportunity; if, and only if, we
stand together as one human family, rich in diversity,
equal in dignity and rights and united in solidarity. At a
time when we feel more divided than ever, let us unite
around our common humanity. Let us remember what
Nelson Mandela said: no one is born a racist. People
must learn to hate, and if they can learn to hate, he went
on to say, they can be taught to love, for love comes
more naturally to the human heart than its opposite. Let
us heed his hopeful words today and recommit to that
essential purpose.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement. We will now hear other speakers for the
opening plenary meeting, in accordance with resolution
75/320.
The Assembly will first hear a pre-recorded
statement by Ms. Michelle Bachelet, the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex I and see A/76/335).
The President: I now invite the Minister for
International Relations and Cooperation of the Republic
of South Africa to introduce a statement by her Head of
State.
Mrs. Pandor (South Africa): I am pleased to
introduce a statement by President Matamela Cyril
Ramaphosa of South Africa on this very important
occasion.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (annex II and see A/76/335).
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his participation and would like to inform members that
he has to leave at this time for other engagements.
I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Félix-Antoine Tshisekedi Tshilombo, President
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, who will
speak on behalf of the Group of African States and the
Caribbean Community.
President Tshisekedi Tshilombo (spoke in
French): I have the honour to deliver this statement on
behalf of the Group of African States and the Caribbean
Community (AfCAR), on the subject of reparations,
racial justice and equality for people of African descent.

21-260733/16

A/76/PV.5

I would first of all like to take this opportunity to
commend you, Mr. President, for convening this highlevel plenary meeting to commemorate the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of the Durban Declaration
and Programme of Action. We welcome the theme of
this high-level event because it focuses our attention
on issues of common interest to Africans, including
Africans of the diaspora. It summarizes our urgent need
and our shared aspiration to achieve a just, free and
equitable society that defines our common humanity.
We acknowledge that some progress has been
made in the 20 years since the adoption of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action, but we have
many more obstacles to overcome, because Africans in
general, and Africans of the diaspora in particular, are
still dealing with the problems created by inequalities.
We have noted the alarming increase in racial
discrimination around the world. The coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic has exacerbated that
further. We know that the pandemic has upended lives
and livelihoods around the world. We find ourselves in a
situation where some countries have more than enough
vaccines while other countries like ours, and the least
developed countries and small island developing States
in particular, have access to only minimal quantities of
COVID-19 vaccines and other medical supplies. That
is clearly not a demonstration of equality among the
countries and peoples of this world. We need real effort
if we are to ensure the achievement of the goals and
objectives of the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action.
Nonetheless, we reaffirm our support for the
Declaration every year on 21 March, the International
Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, and
31 August, the International Day for People of African
Descent. We are pleased to note that the International
Day for People of African Descent was celebrated for
the first time this year, during the Assembly’s seventyfifth session. Such events demonstrate the global
commitment to eliminating racism and recognize the
immense contributions made by people of African
descent.
More than five years have passed since the
international community agreed to implement the
International Decade for People of African Descent. We
are aware of the racial prejudices and discrimination
that people of African descent continue to face today
and take due note of the way that the international
community deals with such issues. However, we are
4/16

22/09/2021

pleased with the Governments and Member States
that since the adoption of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action 20 years ago have implemented
progressive legislative and administrative measures
designed to effectively combat racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance.
Even more important and worthy of commendation
are all who appreciate and respect the knowledge and
contributions that people of African descent bring to
their societies, whether in the economy, politics, culture,
education, medicine, innovation, entrepreneurship or
elsewhere.
We would like to express our gratitude to Member
States for the Assembly’s adoption by consensus on
2 August of resolution 75/314, on the establishment of
the Permanent Forum of People of African Descent.
AfCAR welcomes the creation of the Forum, which
will serve both as a consultative mechanism and a
platform for improving the security, quality of life and
livelihoods of people of African descent. We see it as
a demonstration of Member States’ cooperation in and
commitment to a healing process for people of African
descent. We believe firmly that the Forum will have
a significant impact on the quest to bring an end to
race-related iniquities and injustices. We also reaffirm
the International Decade for People of African Descent,
which was implemented in 2015 based on the themes
of recognition, justice and development and which will
end in 2024. AfCAR believes that all of these efforts
and commitments are unique and timely opportunities
to emphasize the important contributions made by
people of African descent to their societies and to
propose tangible measures to promote equality and
combat discrimination in every form.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the Sustainable Development Goals envisage a world
of universal respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all — human dignity, the rule of law,
justice, equality and non-discrimination and respect for
race, ethnicity and cultural diversity, all of which are
central to the pursuit of these Goals. The African Group
and the Caribbean Community believe that empowering
individuals and ensuring inclusion and equality in all
walks of life are obligations for us all, required by
our shared humanity. We affirm that the right of all
citizens to a good-quality education helps contribute to
more inclusive societies and greater equity, including
harmonious relations between nations and individuals,
and can help promote mutual understanding and
21-26073

22/09/2021

respect for cultural diversity and human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all. The Durban Declaration
and Programme of Action also affirms the promotion of
the complete and accurate inclusion of the history and
contribution of people of African descent in educational
curricula, among other things.
AfCAR is of the view that the responsibility to
effectively combat acts of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance is a duty of States.
We affirm that whenever such acts occur they must be
firmly condemned and stopped from happening again,
and we urge everyone, including Member States, to
take preventive steps in that regard, including through
legislative and administrative measures. We therefore
welcome the adoption of legislative measures and
the implementation of specialized mechanisms to
combat racism and all forms of racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance, and we recognize
the importance of mainstreaming gender perspectives
in policies, strategies and programmes aimed at
combating all forms of discrimination.
AfCAR calls on Governments to strengthen
protections against racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance by ensuring that all
people have access to effective and appropriate recourse,
and at the same time have the right to turn to competent
national courts and other just and appropriate national
institutions to request reparations and satisfaction for
all damages resulting from such discrimination.
The African Group supports the countries of the
Caribbean Community in their calls for reparative
justice. We believe that reparations for slavery and
colonialism should encompass not just responsibility
for historic wrongs but also the eradication of the scars
of racial inequality, subordination and discrimination
that were built under slavery, apartheid and colonialism,
as well as debt cancellation. Furthermore, as long as
legacies of slavery and colonialism such as poverty and
inequitable access to education, housing and justice
persist, the call for reparative justice will remain one of
the most critical priorities that people of African descent
have. The African Group and the Caribbean Community
firmly believe that sustainable development, together
with respect for and the promotion and protection of all
human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, as well
as the implementation of international obligations and
commitments in the area of human rights in accordance
with international human rights law, are essential to
the prevention of acts of racism, racial discrimination,

A/76/PV.5

xenophobia and related intolerance. In that respect,
AfCAR welcomes the creation of a new independent
expert mechanism within the Human Rights Council.
We look forward to seeing the transformative nature
of this mechanism, particularly in the areas of racial
justice and equality in the context of the application of
laws at the global level.
In conclusion, we reaffirm the full and effective
implementation of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action in accordance with the Addis
Ababa Action Agenda, and we approve all efforts
devoted to promoting respect for the human rights and
fundamental freedoms of people of African descent in
particular. We believe it is time for all the instruments
that have been adopted to be implemented with dignity,
respect and recognition in accordance with the priorities
that have been agreed with people of African descent
around the world. Their voices must be included on all
questions that affect them and their lives so that no one
is left behind.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia, who will speak on
behalf of the Group of Asia-Pacific States.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia): On behalf of the
Group of Asia-Pacific States, let me begin by expressing
my gratitude to the co-facilitators and experts who have
debated and discussed the scope, modalities, format
and organization of this high-level meeting, as well as
the draft political declaration (A/76/L.2) that will be the
event’s final product. I am certain that the text we will
adopt is balanced and reflects our shared concerns in
the areas of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance.
The international community is gathered here
today to commemorate the twentieth anniversary of
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action,
and to adopt this year’s text by consensus. We have
agreed on a document that reflects the common
and unwavering interest of the world’s nations,
Governments and organizations in a comprehensive
text that proposes concrete measures to combat racism,
racial discrimination and xenophobia.
This year’s draft declaration, which is a
continuation of the Declaration adopted 20 years ago in
South Africa at the World Conference against Racism,
Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related
Intolerance, represents a strong commitment by the
international community to addressing racism, racial

21-260735/16

A/76/PV.5

22/09/2021

discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance. It
acknowledges that racism remains a global concern,
that its eradication requires redoubled international
efforts, and that despite the global community’s efforts
over the past two decades, people continue to suffer
from various forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia, and related intolerance.

First of all, let me express our deep appreciation
to you, Mr. President, for convening this high-level
meeting of the General Assembly to commemorate the
twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action under the theme
of reparations, racial justice and equality for people of
African descent.

Today we are gathered here to draw the world’s
attention to the goals of this meeting and to re-energize
the political commitment to achieving those goals.
It confirms our commitment to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. It also
emphasizes the significance and value of indigenous
peoples’ contributions to the global political, economic,
social and cultural development of our societies, as
well as highlighting the challenges they face and their
efforts to draw international attention to the tragedies
that have left the developing world behind.

Twenty years ago, the international community
took a stand with a view to eliminating the scourge
of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance. Today we are taking stock of the
progress that has been made in achieving the goals
and objectives set forth in the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action. Our member States have sought
to protect the diverse and multicultural nature of their
societies through the adoption of legislation, national
plans and policies aimed at ensuring the protection of
people dealing with multiple and intersecting forms
of discrimination, as well as minorities and groups
in vulnerable situations, together with the creation
of national mechanisms that combat racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance.

Today we recognize the importance of achieving
justice and equal opportunities for all people, as well
as ensuring their enjoyment of their universal and
indivisible rights, including the right to development
and to self-determination and the right to live in peace
and freedom. This is the path to eradicating the world
of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia, and
other forms of intolerance. As we have always done,
we reaffirm our belief in the importance of spreading
a culture of peace and dialogue among civilizations,
highlighting tolerance and respect for diversity. We
want to emphasize the importance of finding common
ground in order to address the challenges facing
humanity that threaten universal human rights, and of
combating racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance through global cooperation,
partnership and inclusion.
In conclusion, we proclaim as a top priority
for our various nations our strong commitment and
determination in the fight against every kind and form
of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance, as well as in the protection of their victims.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States.
Mr. Espinosa Cañizares (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): I have the honour to speak on behalf of
the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States
(GRULAC).
6/16

At the multilateral level, the General Assembly
recently decided through its resolution 75/314 to
establish the Permanent Forum of People of African
Descent as a platform for improving the safety and
quality of life and livelihoods of people of African
descent, and in recognition that people of African
descent have for centuries been victims of racism,
racial discrimination and enslavement and have been
denied many of their rights. The States of the Latin
American and Caribbean region have been supportive
of those and many other related initiatives, and we
have participated actively in the work of promoting
the goals and objectives of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action. However, while we acknowledge
the progress that has been made, we also realize that
much more must be done, especially where the benefit
of indigenous peoples and people of African descent
is concerned, and that we need enhanced international
cooperation in promoting and protecting human rights
and achieving the goals of the fight against racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance. To
that end, we are hopeful that this high-level meeting
will serve as a catalyst for united action to achieve our
objectives and elevate racism as a global concern.
The GRULAC member States condemn in the
strongest terms the ongoing resurgence of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance in
21-26073

22/09/2021

many regions of the world, which are serious obstacles
to people’s full enjoyment of all human rights and
represent a denial of the self-evident truth that all human
beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights.
The member States of GRULAC remain committed to
taking concrete action to prevent and condemn such
phenomena. We remain convinced that intercultural
dialogue, tolerance, education and respect for diversity
are useful approaches for the international community
to combat these scourges. It is vital to address their
root causes and to take a broad range of preventive and
corrective measures to prevent, address and eliminate
acts of racism, discrimination, xenophobia and
intolerance everywhere. Many of the countries of our
region are made up of multi-ethnic, multicultural and
multilingual populations, and composed of a mosaic of
people who represent migrants with ethnic origins from
all over the planet. We acknowledge that the diversity
of our peoples is our strength. Our societies benefit
from the richness of that diversity. We recognize that
encouraging the full participation and contribution
of all our peoples is of vital importance and that
sustainable development cannot be achieved unless it
is achieved for all.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
is one of the greatest global challenges in the history
of the United Nations, and it makes the prospect of
achieving all of the Sustainable Development Goals
more difficult. We need to tackle health inequities
and inequalities within and between countries through
political commitment, policies and international
cooperation, and to counter the rise in discrimination,
hate speech, stigmatization, racism and xenophobia
related to the pandemic as an important part of our
COVID-19 response.
We also call on Member States to uphold human
dignity and equality for the victims of slavery, the slave
trade and colonialism, in particular people of African
descent in the African diaspora; to draw lessons
from manifestations and past experiences of racism
everywhere in the world with a view to preventing
their recurrence; and to address and promote greater
levels of social inclusion, which is essential if we are to
reduce racial discrimination and intolerance.
In conclusion, the member States of GRULAC
reaffirm the Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action and the outcome of the 2009 Durban Review
Conference, as well as our commitment to its full
and effective implementation. We believe firmly that

A/76/PV.5

the Durban process can result in the eradication of all
forms of racism, racial discrimination and xenophobia
and related intolerance, thereby enabling people
everywhere to experience the full enjoyment of their
fundamental human rights and freedoms.
The President: I now introduce a pre-recorded
statement by Ms. Barryl Biekman, Coordinator of the
Monitoring Working Group on the Durban Declaration
and Programme of Action and People of African
Descent at Tiye International and Chair of the African
European Women’s Movement Sophiedela.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in
the General Assembly Hall (annex III and see
A/76/335).
The President: The Assembly will now hear a
statement by Ms. Catherine Labiran, founder of the
Praxis Project.
Ms. Labiran: (Praxis Project): I will not spend too
much time here talking about structural racism and
what it has done and continues to do to Black lives.
I believe that everyone here knows. I do not need to
attempt the impossible task of listing the names of the
lives lost to police brutality. I do not need to explain
what the pandemic has done to Black and brown
communities. I do not need to detail what happens
when a human is placed in a cage, whether it is a jail,
a prison or a detention centre. I do not need to point
out what happens when people do not have access to
clean water, clean air, nutritious food or transportation.
Anyone who belongs to the communities affected by
such atrocities has felt it. It is a haunting that sits in the
subconscious and strikes when one hears sirens, when
loved ones cannot access care at a doctor’s office, when
one has to navigate the oxymoronic situation of being
targeted while simultaneously being made invisible.
And as we commemorate the twentieth anniversary of
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, we
would be remiss if we did not express outrage at the
violence being inflicted on Haitian asylum seekers at
the United States border.
It is exhausting to speak about racism because none
of those issues are new. They are ancient, which lets me
know that the exhaustion that I feel is not only mine, it
is ancestral. So today, for my sake and perhaps for the
sake of some here, I want to talk about blackness and
how intimately it is linked to ingenuity and to care. I
want to talk about blackness beyond the body. I want to
talk about mind and spirit and all the parts of ourselves

21-260737/16

A/76/PV.5

that become neglected when we are referred to solely
as Black bodies. I want to uplift the work of National
Bail Out, a collective that bails out Black mothers and
caregivers from jails and detention centres and provides
them with the resources and care that they deserve. I
want us to reflect on how bailing someone out does
not just transform the life of that individual but has the
potential to radically change the reality of a family and
a community. We saw the same impact of bail-outs last
year, during the uprisings and the immediate response
from our communities to help get freedom fighters
free. We saw similar actions in Ferguson and in the
local and global response from activists who shared
tips and who came and travelled from Palestine. We
saw similar actions with the Lekki toll gate and the
End SARS movement and the widespread response
from the diaspora. There is no institution, Government,
foundation or corporation that can take credit for the
revolutions that we have seen. We must look to our own
hands.
I want to uplift the work of Black parents,
siblings, aunties, uncles, cousins and grandparents
and how they have to re-educate young people in their
families because of the misinformation that is shared
in schools, how they work to interrupt the school-toprison pipeline, how they have to affirm that Black
hair and Black skin are beautiful and that Black
children deserve space to play, laugh and simply be
children. I want to centre Black trans women who are
marginalized, discriminated against and murdered
because of transphobia. I want to acknowledge Black
trans women who are leading movements and are on the
front lines of protests, and I also want to acknowledge
them when they rightly refuse to be made martyrs. I
want to acknowledge Black trans women beyond issues
of oppression, for being trendsetters, influencers and
pushing forward Black culture, despite having their
words, phrases and dances co-opted. I want to ground
us in the reality that liberation is not possible without
their freedom, and that efforts that are not intersectional
are innately ineffective.
I want to acknowledge people who created, supported
and expanded mutual aid networks in the face of the
pandemic. I want to acknowledge how communities
did not just sit with the knowledge that Black and
brown communities were being disproportionately
affected by the pandemic, but instead rose to the
challenge and helped to distribute groceries, personal
protective equipment and other essentials that enabled
8/16

22/09/2021

Black and brown communities to stay afloat. I want to
acknowledge how they have continued to organize and
ensure that restaurants stay open, that sex workers are
supported, that resources are circulated to immigrant
communities, elders, people who are incarcerated and
people who were once behind bars. It is important to
note how these mutual aid networks functioned as
an avenue for relationship and community-building
between neighbours at a time when we had no choice
but to distance ourselves from one another.
I want to acknowledge the works of Black creatives,
people who use their mediums to archive Black stories
and allow us to explore fictional realities of what could
be and the artists who lead us into Black futures and the
world that will exist once our liberation is actualized.
It is through these creative efforts that many of us have
been able to think about racism beyond our experiences
and explore the actions that historically have been
taken to enable us to arrive at this present day. I want to
acknowledge how art heals, transforms and reminds us
that while we are individuals, we are also a collective
and that music and movement have always gone hand
in hand.
I want to acknowledge Black therapists, body
workers and healers who help us cope and heal from
the stresses of racism. I want to acknowledge how
they affirm our wellness and survival and how they
use indigenous practices to show us that Black people
have always been here and always will be. So while it
is important to reflect on what we could be doing, it
is essential that we reflect on all that is being done to
combat racism and its consequences. Those reflections
are important because they allow us to understand
that rather than try to invent new solutions, we simply
need to resource the visions of people who are already
organizing and advocating for justice. We need to stop
treating conversations about reparations as if they are
far-fetched and instead lean into the fact that we can
make them tangible. Institutions such as the United
Nations must address their own structural racism and
be held accountable for it. There needs to be deep
self-awareness, acknowledgement and action, and the
labour of it should not fall on Black women, trans or
non-binary people.
The President: We have heard the last speaker for
the opening plenary of the high-level meeting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on
draft resolution A/76/L.2, entitled “United against
21-26073

22/09/2021

racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft resolution A/76/L.2?
Draft resolution A/76/L.2 was adopted (resolution
76/1).
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Foreign Trade of Jamaica to
speak in explanation of position after adoption.
Ms. Smith (Jamaica): I have the honour to deliver
this statement in explanation of position on behalf of the
Government of Jamaica. We thank the co-facilitators,
South Africa and Portugal, and their teams for their
efforts in the negotiation process to achieve consensus
on the political declaration to commemorate the
twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action (resolution 76/1).
We would also like to take this opportunity to express
our sincere appreciation to Ms. Ahlem Charikhi, of
the Permanent Mission of Algeria, the coordinator for
the Group of 77 and China, for her hard work and able
negotiation skills and for duly representing the Group
throughout the intergovernmental consultations on the
political declaration for this high-level event, playing a
key role in its adoption.

A/76/PV.5

descendants for the injustices, pain, suffering and loss
of life endured during centuries of enslavement and
the legacies of structural underdevelopment that our
people have faced since emancipation. Our actions
complement the mandate given to the Reparations
Commission of the Caribbean Community to prepare
the case for the region’s indigenous and Africandescendant communities, who are victims of crimes
against humanity in the forms of genocide, slavery,
slave trading and racial apartheid.
Mr. Vongnorkeo (Lao People’s Democratic
Republic), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The transatlantic slave trade was the largest forced
migration in human history. The lives of millions of
men, women and children were destroyed in search
of profit. There is an overwhelming moral and
socioeconomic imperative for those victims and their
descendants to have a right to reparative justice. It is for
that reason that the delegation of Jamaica, while joining
in the commemoration of this milestone to mark global
progress towards ending racial discrimination and
inequality, remains disappointed at the omission in the
political declaration of a call to all the relevant States
that have not already done so to dispense reparative
justice, contributing to the development and recognition
of the dignity of the States affected and their peoples.

We have seen that today’s discourse centred on
the issues of reparations, racial justice and equality for
people of African descent, the theme of this political
statement, which all countries of goodwill should
support and embrace. However, as was noted in the
co-facilitators’ explanatory letter, silence was broken on
the final draft of the political declaration due to the lack
of any reference to the issue of reparations in operative
paragraph 5 of the text. In that regard, we want to recall
paragraph 100 of the Durban Declaration, adopted in
2001, which notes that

Jamaica remains committed to the universal
recognition of the imperative for reparative justice, and
with the continued support of nations of goodwill will
continue to call in the General Assembly for that duty
to be internationally recognized as a necessary path to
healing and the restoration of dignity and progress for
people of African descent.

“some States have taken the initiative to apologize
and have paid reparation, where appropriate, for
grave and massive violations committed”.

I would like to express my sincere appreciation to
Ms. Mathu Joyini and Mr. Francisco Duarte Lopes,
the Permanent Representatives of South Africa and
Portugal to the United Nations, who ably and patiently
conducted the discussions and complex negotiations in
the informal consultations on the draft of the political
declaration of the high-level meeting of the General
Assembly to commemorate the twentieth anniversary of
the adoption of the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action. I am sure members of the Assembly join me
in expressing our sincere appreciation to them.

We also want to recall paragraph 101, which calls
on those who have not yet contributed to restoring
the dignity of victims of slavery, the slave trade, the
transatlantic slave trade, apartheid, genocide and past
tragedies to find appropriate ways to do so.
The Government of Jamaica has consistently
pursued reparative justice for those victims and their

The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of position after the adoption of
resolution 76/1.

21-260739/16

A/76/PV.5

As members are aware, pursuant to resolution
75/320, this high-level meeting consists of two
consecutive round tables and a closing plenary meeting.
Round tables 1 and 2 will take place this morning at 11
o’clock and this afternoon at 3 o’clock, respectively, in
the combined conference rooms 1, 2 and 3. The closing
plenary meeting will take place at 6 p.m. in this Hall.
Regarding the Chairs of the two round tables, as
mentioned in a letter from the President of the General
Assembly dated 21 September 2021, the President has
proposed that Her Excellency Mrs. Naledi Pandor,
Minister for International Relations and Cooperation
of the Republic of South Africa, be appointed to chair
round table 1, and His Excellency Mr. Pacôme Moubelet
Boubeya, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Gabonese
Republic, be appointed to chair round table 2.

10/16

22/09/2021

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly, recalling its resolution 75/320, to appoint
Her Excellency Mrs. Naledi Pandor, Minister for
International Relations and Cooperation of the Republic
of South Africa, as the Chair of round table 1, and His
Excellency Mr. Pacôme Moubelet Boubeya, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Gabonese Republic, as the
Chair of round table 2?
It was so decided (decision 76/508).
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 72.
Members are reminded that the 6th plenary
meeting, continuing the general debate, will take place
at 11 a.m. in this Hall.
The meeting rose at 10.25 p.m.

21-26073

22/09/2021

A/76/PV.5

Annex I
Address by Ms. Michelle Bachelet,
Commissioner for Human Rights

United

Nations

High

Excellencies,
Colleagues,
Twenty years ago the international community met in Durban, South Africa to
address racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance.
Eliminating these violations of human dignity, equality and rights was very
clearly a matter of the greatest urgency.
But two decades on, the inequalities and suffering they generate for Africans
and people of African descent; Asians and people of Asian descent; members of ethnic
and religious minorities — including victims of Islamophobia and anti-Semitism;
indigenous peoples and migrants continue to hold back all our societies, and harm
both sustainable development and social cohesion.
It is vital that we rise above past controversies and come together to combat
racism and related discrimination in the world today.
Excellencies,
We have taken steps that have laid a strong foundation for real change.
The proclamation by this Assembly of the International Decade for People of
African Descent; establishment of a new expert mechanism to advance racial justice
in law enforcement, and operationalization of the Permanent Forum on People of
African Descent further strengthen our global anti-racism architecture.
In July, following our comprehensive report on racial discrimination including
in law enforcement, I put forward a four-point Agenda Towards Transformative
Change for Racial Justice and Equality that I believe sets out building blocks for
tangible and sustainable progress.
But millions of people continue to bear the burden of past and contemporary
forms of racism and exclusion, including historical denial of their humanity; the
legacy of colonial exploitation; and the inhuman and criminal enslavement of
generations of women, men and children of African descent.
It is important to address these lasting consequences, including through
appropriate forms of reparations.
Reparations should be broad-based, and need to include measures aimed at
restitution, rehabilitation, satisfaction and guarantees of non-repetition. These may
include formal acknowledgment and apologies, memorialization and institutional and
educational reforms. For reparations to be effective, all these elements are needed.
We should be clear though that these efforts must go beyond symbolism, and
that they do require political, human and financial capital. Such costs should be seen
alongside the enrichment of many economies through enslavement and exploitation —
and recognition of this reality should encourage genuine consideration of substantive
reparations.
21-2607311/16

A/76/PV.5

22/09/2021

As the DDPA recognizes, there is also a need to strengthen and enhance
international cooperation to increase equality of opportunities for trade, economic
growth and sustainable development.
To recognize the past and truly leave no one behind in future, it is essential to
promote equality not only within, but also among countries — transforming our world
towards social, economic and environmental sustainability, and I would encourage
greater international engagement on these issues of reparatory justice.
Excellencies,
We are at an important juncture to take the anti-racism agenda forward.
To effectively tackle racial discrimination and the inequality experienced by
people of African descent requires a comprehensive approach — as set out by the
DDPA and developed in my own Agenda for Transformative Change — with concrete
strategies and actionable, time-bound targets.
It will also be important to address the multiple and intersectional
manifestations of racial discrimination. A woman who is a migrant, who is a person
of African descent, and who is poor starkly faces multiple and intersectional forms of
discrimination — and this recognition of the DDPA of the realities of such multiple
discrimination must be integrated into laws and policies to address and repair the
inequality and racism faced by such victims, including by integrating a gender
perspective.
My Office will continue to support domestic action and international
cooperation to eliminate racial discrimination and achieve racial justice, including in
coordinating the International Decade for people of African Descent.
But the anti-discrimination agenda concerns and belongs to all of us,
irrespective of race, colour, descent, ethnic or national origin, affiliation, religion or
belief. Stronger efforts must be employed by all stakeholders to implement the goals
laid out at Durban.
I pay tribute in particular to the courage and resilience of civil society
organizations combatting racism around the world. Today’s mobilisation of activism
brings further promise that racial justice can be achieved, for people of African
descent and all others suffering racial discrimination.
Thank you.

12/16

21-26073

22/09/2021

A/76/PV.5

Annex II
Address by Mr. Cyril Ramaphosa, President of the Republic of
South Africa
President of the General Assembly, Mr Abdulla Shahid,
Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr António Guterres,
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Michelle Bachelet,
Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
It is 20 years since the world adopted the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action.
And it is 25 years since the people of South Africa adopted a democratic
Constitution.
In that Constitution, we affirmed that as South Africans we are called upon to
build a society based on social justice and fundamental human rights, with a view of
correcting the injustices of our past.
These words ring true for all the injustices that have been committed against
many peoples around the world.
Slavery was one of the darkest periods in the history of humankind and a
crime of unparalleled barbarity.
Its legacy persists in the Americas, the Caribbean, Europe, the Middle East,
and in Africa itself.
Millions of the descendants of Africans who were sold into slavery remain
trapped in lives of underdevelopment, disadvantage, discrimination and poverty.
South Africa calls on the United Nations to put the issue of reparations for
victims of the slave trade on its agenda.
We support the adoption of special measures, including affirmative action
programmes and targeted financial assistance, as restitution to communities whose
ancestors were sold into slavery.
We further support all measures being undertaken to address the historic and
contemporary discrimination against people of African descent.
This includes increasing representation of people of African descent in global
institutions and in positions of leadership.
As we strive to correct the wrongs of the past, we must combat the racism,
sexism and national chauvinism of the present.
Racism directed at ethnic minorities, migrants, refugees, the LGBTQI+
community and other marginalised groups has led to the denial of opportunity, to
institutionalised discrimination, and to violence.
Twenty years ago at the World Conference against Racism, we committed to
an anti-discrimination agenda that would bring new hope and change to the lives
of millions.
21-2607313/16

A/76/PV.5

22/09/2021

Just as we stand united to combat the COVID-19 pandemic, must recommit
ourselves to implement the Durban Declaration and Platform for Action.
We must pursue this objective with energy and goodwill.
Ending racism is a fight in which each of us has a stake.
Let us all allow humanism to be our guide and solidarity be our strongest force.
We are called upon by history to redouble our efforts to build a world free of
racism, to right the wrongs of the past and to restore the human dignity of all.
I thank you.

14/16

21-26073

22/09/2021

A/76/PV.5

Annex III
Address by Ms. Barryl A. Biekman, civil society speaker
Mr. President, Excellencies, Distinguished guest
Greetings,
I feel much honoured to have been selected to deliver the keynote address
on behalf of civil society when the United Nations and all people committed to the
elimination of racism are proudly commemorating the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of the landmark Durban Declaration and Programme of Action. For me
personally it was one of the greatest events in my life to be part of the adoption 20
years ago of the DDPA in Durban in a spirit of solidarity and which gave voice to and
protected the rights of all victims of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related forms.
People of African descent no doubt treasure the DDPA most as our ordeal was
recognized as the first victims group and the transatlantic slave trade and slavery was
recognized as a crime against humanity.
The DDPA is a peoples document based on a thorough preparatory process
and broad participation in the preparatory committee meetings. The twentieth
anniversary of its adoption indeed deserve to be com-memorated.
I wish to take this opportunity to thank the civil society friends from
international NGOs in particular those members of the Global Pan African Coalition
on Durban plus 20 including the December 12th movement who campaigned for the
decision to be taken to hold the third World Conference Against racism.
Mr President, My heart Cries,
And I would like to demonstrate this by using the expression “Truth has the
inherent power to produce the promised effect”. This is to emphasize that we can
only be successful in the fight against all forms of multiple racism if we do what we
have promised. To defend and promote the fully implementation of the DDPA which
is the strongest universal document of the United Nations’ programs to realize the
rights of all victims of racism in intersectional perspective including Afrophobia,
racial discrimination, and reparatory, restorative and climate justice.
Because of the structurally persistent negative campaign to defame and
undermine the DDPA and its implementation as the DDPA in no way shows that it
proclaims racism in particular anti-Semitism. This structural undermining of the
DDPA is a blow in the face of all those who campaigned for the holding of the 3rd
World Conference against Racism (WCAR) by ensuring the adoption of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action through a broad-based democratic process.
Without the DDPA we would not have been as close as we are today in having a
global platform positioned to recognize the unfulfilled rights of Africans and People
of African Descent at the United Nations and global society. But our position is
crystal clear, we will not accept any denial of the DDPA in the name of People of
African Descent neither shall we settle for anything less than our birth right and our
human rights.
Mr. President
While we are assembling to commemorate the 20th anniversary of the adoption
of a great UN Programme we cannot be silent on the undermining and defamation
21-2607315/16

A/76/PV.5

22/09/2021

of the DDPA that has taken place during the past 20 years and now escalated to the
extreme.
We wonder why no senior official of the United Nations has stood up and
spoken out against the disinformation and false propaganda against the DDPA that
has preceded the anniversary and now caused the absence of different countries,
including mine, from the commemoration.
We wonder how many lives could have been saved if the UN General Assembly
resolutions on DDPA information and outreach programme had been implemented
and the DDPA been known in its content to people everywhere.
Mr. President,
I close by saying that my is crying but my heart is smiling too.
Because of the importance of paragraph 1. of the Political Declaration whereby
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action and the outcome document of the
Durban Review Conference, adopted in 2009, as well as the Political Declaration of
the tenth years anniversary of its adoption, has been reaffirmed.
We do think however that a special paragraph should be devoted to ‘Reparations’
as it is already mentioned in the DDPA.
The very heart, soul, spirit and the essence of the WCAR and the DDPA is
the demand for Reparations. Reparations is a very simply payment for a debt that is
owed for crimes against humanity which were committed and, in various degrees and
forms, have continued into the 21st century.
The DDPA embodies the demand of the masses of African people past and
present.
20 years after Durban we will continue to fight. The DDPA will not be
disappeared. Reparations will be received. As we said in 2001:
THEY STOLE US! THEY SOLD US! THEY OWE US! REPA-RATIONS
NOW.!
I thank you for your attention

16/16

21-26073
