S/2010/657

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 December 2010
Original: English

Letter dated 21 December 2010 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey the attached communication dated 16 December
2010, which I have received from the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, Anders Fogh Rasmussen, transmitting the quarterly report on the
operations of the International Security Assistance Force operations in Afghanistan,
covering the period from 1 August to 31 October 2010 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

10-71109 (E) 210111

*1071109*

S/2010/657

Annex
Letter dated 16 December 2010 from the Secretary-General
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization addressed to the
Secretary-General
In accordance with Security Council resolutions 1386 (2001) and 1943 (2010),
I attach a report on the operations of the International Security Assistance Force
covering the period from August to October 2010 (see enclosure). I would
appreciate your making this report available to the Security Council
(Signed) Anders Fogh Rasmussen

2

10-71109

S/2010/657

Enclosure
Quarterly report to the Security Council on the operations of the
International Security Assistance Force
Introduction
1.
The present report, pursuant to the request under Security Council resolution
1943 (2010), informs the United Nations on the progress of the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) mission, covering the period from 1 August to
31 October 2010. As at 25 October 2010, total ISAF strength stood at 130,432
personnel provided by 28 North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) countries and
20 non-NATO countries. This includes the addition of one new country, Tonga,
during the quarter.
2.
Throughout the reporting period, ISAF continued to assist the Government of
Afghanistan in accordance with relevant Security Council resolutions. From
1 August to 31 October 2010, ISAF suffered 2,201 casualties, including 179 killed
in action, 2,007 wounded in action and 15 non-battle-related deaths.
3.
As the preparation process for transition continues, ISAF has extended its
focus on the training and mentorship of various entities within the Afghan National
Security Forces. Recognizing that vital gaps existed, ISAF expanded its capacity
and capabilities to cover its mandate in a more comprehensive manner. Focusing on
the ultimate objective of enabling Afghanistan to become self-reliant and sustainable
in the very near term, NATO/ISAF invites additional United Nations member States
to support this United Nations-mandated mission by providing trainers, mentors and
enablers for the Afghan National Security Forces as well as for the civilian sectors
of governance and development.
Noteworthy points for this reporting period include the following:
(a) As reported in the Independent Election Commission press release of
20 October, the voter turnout for the parliamentary elections, 18 September 2010,
was approximately 44 per cent of all registered Afghans. Afghan-led security
operations before, during and following the elections prevented any major or highprofile insurgent attacks and, therefore, can be considered successful and an
improvement from last year’s presidential election;
(b) The Afghan National Security Forces surpassed their force strength
objective of 243,000 for October 2010, three months ahead of schedule, reaching a
current total of 261,000 personnel;
(c) The necessary follow-up to the endorsement of the Afghanistan Peace
and Reintegration Program was the establishment of the High Peace Council, a body
intended to provide strategic guidance and broad-based political support for peace
and reintegration activities;
(d) In line with the commitment by the Government of Afghanistan to
strengthen its accountability and combat corruption stressed at the Kabul
International Conference on Afghanistan, ISAF established the Combined Joint
Inter-Agency Task Force Shafafiyat (“transparency”) in late August 2010. The
objective of the Task Force is to foster a common understanding of the problem of
corruption in Afghanistan and integrate ISAF support to anti-corruption efforts with
key partners in the Government of Afghanistan and the international community;

10-71109

3

S/2010/657

(e) Presidential Decree No. 62, in which President Hamid Karzai ordered the
disbanding of private security companies, prompted ISAF and the international
community to work closely with the Government of Afghanistan to coordinate the
phased implementation of the decree, ensuring that ISAF and the international
community continue to focus on enhancing security and supporting improvement of
governance and development, while maintaining the necessary security levels for
bases, logistical convoys and development projects;
(f) Following the announcement by President Karzai in July, the Afghan
National Security Council in August approved the establishment of the Afghan
Local Police. The Afghan Local Police is a temporary village-focused programme
working under the Ministry of Interior, aimed at accelerating counter-insurgency
efforts in areas with insufficient Afghan National Security Force presence. The
Afghan Local Police will serve as an early warning and initial village defence
element against insurgent activity. It currently has a cap of 10,000 personnel
designated for 68 sites across the country. At the end of the reporting period, 8 sites
were operational, with more than 1,000 Afghan Local Police personnel assigned,
and an additional 17 were planned for establishment in 2011. ISAF works to
collaborate with and support officials of the Ministry of Interior in the review,
selection and validation of districts designated for the establishment of Afghan
Local Police units. Shuras provide the integrating platform for the Afghan Local
Police programme and local leadership.
Security situation
4.
The Afghan security environment remains complex, with a resilient insurgency
that still retains the capacity to attack the Government of Afghanistan, the Afghan
National Security Forces and the International Security Assistance Force. However,
coalition operations significantly reduced the enemy’s ability to attack in a number
of key terrain districts during the reporting period. Risk still exists as many of the
factors that sustain the insurgency and impede effective counter-insurgency
operations remain. While the Afghan National Security Forces and ISAF operations
have increased pressure on insurgent networks over the past several months, the
insurgency has proven resilient, with sustained logistics capacity and command and
control. Larger and more focused security operations have begun to further increase
pressure on all aspects of the insurgents’ ability to operate, and in particular in their
strongholds. The insurgents are likely to retain some freedom of movement, mainly
in rural areas with less Afghan National Security Forces/International Security
Assistance Force presence, as long as they have access to out-of-country safe
havens and support networks. The strategic goal of the insurgency remains
unchanged: inflict significant losses to ISAF in order to undermine international
support for the mission and prompt a withdrawal of foreign forces from
Afghanistan.
5.

Regionally, the security situation is as follows:

(a) Regional Command Capital. The security situation in Regional
Command Capital was stable, and the insurgents were unable successfully to
execute complex or high profile attacks in Kabul during events with high media
attention (Independence Day on 19 August 2010, and parliamentary elections on
18 September 2010);

4

10-71109

S/2010/657

(b) Regional Command North. Kunduz and Baghlan provinces remain the
most affected areas in this region. There are reports of uncertainty within insurgent
networks, mainly caused by the increase in combined forces (ISAF and Afghan
National Security Forces) and the subsequent increased operational tempo in the
Regional Command North. Additionally, reintegration efforts in Baghlan and Faryab
negatively affected the capabilities of the insurgent networks;
(c) Regional Command West. Successful International Security Assistance
Force/Afghan National Security Forces operations conducted during the previous
period have had a major impact on the insurgent leadership’s ability to keep activity
at a relatively high level. Numerous reintegration opportunities have emerged,
particularly in Badghis and Farah provinces, which could indicate that insurgents’
losses are having a detrimental impact on their morale and willingness to continue
fighting against the Afghan National Security Forces and ISAF.
(d) Regional Command South and Regional Command Southwest. The south
and southwest of the country remain the heart of the insurgency. The Afghan
National Security Forces, in partnership with ISAF, have been conducting major
operations in the region to assert government control. Operations continue and
progress has been made. The city of Kandahar has largely been secured, and
insurgents’ freedom of movement and sanctuaries in both Kandahar and Helmand
provinces have gradually been reduced. On 1 August, the multinational ISAFflagged Combined Team-Uruzgan assumed responsibility for ISAF operations in
Uruzgan province.
(e) Regional Command East. The eastern part of Afghanistan remains a main
focal point for insurgent activities. Although most were ineffective, several complex
attacks against the Afghan National Security Forces and ISAF and officials of the
Government of Afghanistan were conducted in this region during the reporting
period. The threat in the districts bordering Pakistan remains high. Access to out-ofcountry sanctuaries and resupply areas in the border region of Afghanistan and
Pakistan remains a key factor in the insurgents’ ability to attack Afghan National
Security Forces and ISAF units, government officials and civilians.
6.
Improvised explosive device attacks remained the primary cause of casualties
among ISAF, the Afghan National Security Forces and Afghan civilians, with a total
of 2,008 detonations during the reporting period. In the same period, 2,267 devices
were discovered and eliminated, representing 53 per cent of all such events.
Especially towards the end of October 2010, and with increased pressure on the
insurgents, the ratio between detonations and discoveries of the devices shifted
positively towards the latter.
Afghan National Security Forces
7.
The Afghan National Security Forces have a total of approximately 261,000
personnel as of October 2010. Having surpassed October 2010 growth targets for
the Afghan National Army and the Afghan National Police in July, both entities have
continued to expand. ISAF training capacity continues to grow, with approximately
28,000 Afghans currently in various training programmes.
8.
ISAF efforts have been focused on meeting growth targets for Afghan National
Security Force personnel; however, the focus is now on building a more balanced
and self-sustaining force. The Afghan National Security Force training centres and

10-71109

5

S/2010/657

literacy programmes, which provide a basic education level (reading and writing
Dari or Pashtu and mathematics) are a fundamental element of ISAF efforts to
professionalize the Forces.
Afghan National Army
9.
During this quarter the Afghan National Army’s strength grew by
approximately 24,000, expanding the force to just above 144,000, thus exceeding
the October 2010 target of 134,000. The Afghan National Army continues to make
steady progress towards the next growth target of 171,600 by October 2011.
10. The operational effectiveness of the Afghan National Army is progressing
steadily, evidenced by lead responsibility for security during the parliamentary
elections and the progressive increases in Afghan leadership in ongoing security
operations in Kandahar Province. Challenges in operational effectiveness include
leadership, staff planning, tactical command and control, and logistics. The focus
for 2011 is fielding the institutions and organizations that support and sustain the
force. The Afghan National Army’s ability to sustain itself is critical to enable a
successful transition to the Afghan National Security Force lead for security
responsibility starting in early 2011.
11. While aggregate strength numbers are consistently achieved, the Afghan
National Army’s structure is still unbalanced. With mitigation efforts, it is assessed
that the deficit of officers and non-commissioned officers will stabilize in 2011. Two
new training facilities are being established with the capacity to train an additional
6,000 non-commissioned officers annually. Current projections predict that the
deficit of non-commissioned officers will shrink by approximately 4,700 over the
next year.
12. Included in the growth of the Afghan National Army is the commissioning of
29 female Second Lieutenants from officer candidate school, supporting the
objective of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). This is the first such event
since the fall of the Taliban from power, marking a major step towards advancing
gender rights in Afghanistan.
Afghan Air Force
13. The Afghan Air Force continues to make progress, although like other parts of
the Afghan National Security Forces, it still faces some professional challenges. Its
strength has increased by 41 per cent (from 2,797 to 3,964) since November 2009,
with 4,240 airmen projected by November 2010. The inventory of aircraft also
increased, growing by 19 per cent, from 42 to 47 serviceable aircraft. The Afghan
Air Force requirement is a target of 146 airframes and 5,600 airmen by fiscal year
2016.
14. Four Afghan Air Force Mi-17 helicopters provided disaster relief to both
Afghanistan and Pakistan following recent devastating floods. During 27 days,
Afghan Air Force crews executed over 400 sorties, conducted 120 life-saving
rescues, transported 1,904 passengers and delivered 188 tons of critical supplies in
Pakistan.

6

10-71109

S/2010/657

Afghan National Police
15. During this quarter, Afghan National Police strength grew by close to 1,000,
expanding the force to approximately 117,000. Like the Afghan National Army, the
Afghan National Police surpassed the 31 October 2010 target strength of 109,000 in
July, three months ahead of schedule. Overall, the Afghan National Police continued
to make progress towards its future target of 136,000 by October 2011.
16. Although overall Afghan National Police recruiting met monthly goals, the
Afghan National Civil Order Police attrition rate continued to exceed the 1.4 per
cent target. Afghan National Civil Order Police recruiting also remained a
challenge, with too few recruits joining this competent force. The Ministry of
Interior and NATO Training Mission in Afghanistan are looking at ways to mitigate
both of those negative factors.
17. The professionalization of the Afghan National Police continues to be the
highest priority for the Mission, with “leader development” and literacy training
seen as pivotal to the process. As in the previous quarter, the turnover of personnel
continues to place intense demands on the institutional training establishment with
officer and non-commissioned officer growth rates lagging behind overall force
growth. Low literacy rates are extending training requirements and limiting the
output of the training base. Field promotions helped to mitigate non-commissioned
officer shortages, but this will be a continuing problem throughout the next year.
Expansion of the training base is flexible enough to meet current training demands.
18. Afghan National Police operational effectiveness improved slightly this
quarter. Challenges in effectiveness include logistics and leadership. The Ministry of
Interior is working with the Mission to better resource the Afghan National Police
logistically.
Institutional capacity
19. Development of the institutional capabilities of both the Ministry of Defense
and Ministry of Interior has made progress this quarter, but is still assessed as
needing international support. The most recent Ministerial Development Board
projects that the Ministry of Interior will achieve self-sufficiency no earlier than
December 2012. Institutional development lags behind force growth owing to
conscious decisions to expand the combat force at the expense of support personnel.
Rebalancing the force is critical for 2011 to reduce reliance on ISAF and to establish
the links between the fielded force and the governing ministries.
Civilian casualties
20. The significant increase in ISAF troop numbers and the high operational
tempo has not resulted in an increase of civilian casualties caused by ISAF this
quarter when compared to the previous reporting period. ISAF maintains its
commitment to take all necessary steps to shield civilians from harm. The number of
civilian casualties caused by insurgents continued to increase, expanding by
approximately 50 per cent compared to the previous quarter. Ninety per cent of all
casualties suffered by civilians are caused by insurgent activities.

10-71109

7

S/2010/657

Counter-narcotics
21. The drug trade continues to fund the insurgency. ISAF continued to support
the Government of Afghanistan and its specialized units in the conduct of the
overall Afghan counter-narcotics strategy. During the reporting period, ISAF
operations conducted in support of Afghan units (Afghan National Security Forces,
Counter-Narcotics Police) resulted in the seizure of 14 tons of opium, 2.2 tons of
heroin, 2.6 tons of hashish and 70 kg of morphine worth an estimated value of
$9 million. Furthermore, the Combined Joint Inter-Agency Task Force-Nexus
performed information-sharing tasks with the Joint Narcotics Analysis Centre, the
Interagency Operations Coordination Centre, the Drug Enforcement Administration
of the United States of America and the Serious Organised Crime Agency of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to develop a common
operating picture at the regional, strategic and international levels.
Governance
22. To ensure enduring security, ISAF and responsible Afghan ministries
successfully cooperated with the Independent Election Committee in the conduct of
the Afghan parliamentary elections in September 2010.
23. A significant initiative to improve the security environment was the Afghan
peace and reintegration programme, which was endorsed at the Kabul Conference in
July. ISAF has partnered with the Government of Afghanistan to support the
programme’s further development and implementation. ISAF has and will continue
to support the programme’s public awareness activities and assist the Government of
Afghanistan in their outreach to encourage insurgent fighters to lay down their
weapons and peacefully reintegrate into Afghan society. Furthermore, ISAF has
continued its support to enable the Government of Afghanistan to establish
structures at both the national and subnational levels to facilitate effective
reintegration.
24. The gradually improved security environment that the International Security
Assistance Force and the Afghan National Security Forces are delivering in and
around the major population centres has served as a catalyst for local governance.
Although challenges still remain, the following are of note:
(a) The allocation by individual ISAF contributors of Commanders’
Emergency Response Procedures projects in Kandahar Province has been helping
Government of Afghanistan officials from both the short- and long-term
perspectives to respond to pressing community needs. Military commanders and
civilian experts are working in concert with local leaders to lay the foundation for
the delivery of basic services such as clean water, education and health care;
(b) Throughout Helmand Province, efforts have been supporting linking
villages and districts to the provincial government. Daily shuras with village elders
are progressively changing local Afghan perceptions and bridging the gap between
the local and district governments, thereby expanding linkages to the central
Government through the provision of a secure and stable environment;
(c) The first Afghan-run regional development conference, held in Mazar-eSharif with participants from the Government of Afghanistan, the International
Security Assistance Force and the international community, was an important
milestone in the evolution of Afghan governance and development. More

8

10-71109

S/2010/657

importantly, it met the Kabul conference commitment to align national and
subnational governance agendas.
25. Through routine civil-military cooperation performed by the Provincial
Reconstruction Teams in support of other government institutions, ISAF
continuously engaged with Afghan officials at the national, subnational and local
levels.
Development
26. This reporting period, facilitated by an increased ISAF and Afghan National
Security Force presence and operational progress in key population centres in the
south of Afghanistan, there was also a gradual improvement in the coordination of
security and development efforts alongside enhanced outreach by the Government
of Afghanistan in the region. For this reporting period the following are noteworthy:
(a) Operation Hamkari conducted by the Afghan National Security Forces/
ISAF in Kandahar Province delivered improvements in the physical security
infrastructure of Kandahar city. The improved security conditions have enabled new
businesses to open in and around Kandahar city, increased freedom of movement
and enhanced protection of the population. The Government of Afghanistan and
development initiatives by the international community have grown alongside ISAF
and Afghan National Security Force joint security operations — each reinforcing the
gains of the other;
(b) Operation Moshtarak conducted by the Afghan National Security
Forces/ISAF in Helmand Province has shown encouraging indications of the
enabling effects that a steady accumulation of security gains can generate for
governance and development efforts in the area. The improved security situation
allowed voters in Marjah to register and to establish four election polling stations
for the parliamentary elections. In September 2010, Helmand witnessed for the first
time in six years the opening of a high school in Marjah district along with three
other schools.
27. Evidence of slow but steady progress in development was seen by increased
government revenues and small improvements in health, education, the
macroeconomy and infrastructure. Notwithstanding reported signs of progress, the
ability of governance and development to keep pace with security operations still
remains at risk owing to the current limitations of Afghan capabilities and capacities
across the country.
28. The International Security Assistance Force therefore continues to recognize
and stress the importance of recognizing the explicit link between governance,
security and development. Without persistent and successful growth in all three
areas, gains in any one are likely to be unsustainable in the longer term. An increase
in civilian involvement is judged necessary for an irreversible movement towards
transition and the goal outlined by the Government of Afghanistan for the Afghan
National Security Forces to be in the lead for security across the country by the end
of 2014.

10-71109

9
