A/69/674–S/2014/911

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
17 December 2014
Original: English

General Assembly
Sixty-ninth session
Agenda items 13 and 115

Security Council
Sixty-ninth year

Integrated and coordinated implementation of and
follow-up to the outcomes of the major United Nations
conferences and summits in the economic, social and
related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit

Letter dated 15 December 2014 from the President of the
General Assembly and the President of the Security Council
addressed to the Secretary-General
In General Assembly resolution 65/7 and Security Council resolution 1947
(2010), in which the Assembly and the Council, respectively, welcomed the
recommendations of the first five-year review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture, the Assembly and the Council called for a comprehensive review in
2015, five years after the conclusion of the 2010 review.
It is our honour to bring to your attention a proposal (see annex I) on the
scope, terms of reference and modalities for the upcoming 2015 review of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture (the 2015 review). The terms of reference
reflect the outcome of an extensive consultative intergovernmental process within
the framework of the Peacebuilding Commission, consolidated through further
consultations undertaken by our respective Offices.
I also attach a letter dated 25 November 2014 (see annex II) from
H.E. Mr. Antonio de Aguiar Patriota, Permanent Representative of Brazil to the
United Nations and Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, containing the list of
five countries that have agreed to be the subject of the case studies that the terms of
reference call for to underpin the 2015 review.
In view of the above, it is our assessment that the 2015 review of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture should be based on the terms of reference. We
request, on behalf of the General Assembly and Security Council, that you proceed
as proposed therein. The Secretary-General is requested to explore all possible
options for the funding arrangements of the review and rever t to the General
Assembly at the earliest possible time.

15-00061 (E)

070115

*1500061*

A/69/674
S/2014/911

In terms of indicative timeline, and taking into account the need to ensure an
inclusive and consultative process, the first stage as described in the terms of
reference should be completed by the end of June 2015.
The second stage, consisting of nominating two co-facilitators for
intergovernmental consultations which will conclude by submitting an outcome to
the General Assembly and the Security Council for consideration and appropriate
action, should be completed by the end of December 2015.
We would be grateful if you would circulate the present letter as a document of
the Security Council and the General Assembly.
(Signed) Sam Kahamba Kutesa
President of the General Assembly

2/7

(Signed) Mahamat Zene Chérif
President of the Security Council

15-00061

A/69/674
S/2014/911

Annex I
Ten-year review of the peacebuilding architecture, 2015
(31 October 2014)
Proposal for suggested terms of reference
Introduction
1.
Since its establishment in 2005, the Peacebuilding Architecture — comprising
the Peacebuilding Commission, the Peacebuilding Fund and the Peacebuilding
Support Office — has sought to find effective ways of supporting countries
emerging from conflict and to establish a clear understanding of its own rol e in
relation to diverse forms of international engagement with countries emerging from
conflict. In 2010, the Co-Facilitators’ report on the review of the peacebuilding
architecture (A/64/868-S/2010/393) concluded that while the commitment of
Member States to the Peacebuilding Commission remained strong, the Commission
had yet to realize its full potential. Since 2010, the Peacebuilding Commission
organized its annual work programmes in a way that would enable it to address and
measure progress in taking forward relevant recommendations from the 2010
review.
2.
Following the release of the Co-Facilitators’ report, the General Assembly and
Security Council adopted identical resolutions on 29 October 2010 ( Assembly
resolution 65/7 and Council resolution 1947 (2010)) calling “for a further
comprehensive review five years after the adoption of the present resolution ”, i.e.,
in 2015. The 2015 review offers an opportunity to assess the original vision and
purpose behind the establishment of the Peacebuilding Architecture in 2005 with a
view to strengthening it, and enable it to realize its full potential. The review should
examine the continuing relevance of that vision in view of the developments in the
United Nations and the international systems since 2005. Building on
recommendations from the 2010 review and the progress made in its
implementation, the 2015 review should generate recommendations on ways to
reorient and adapt the functions and structures of the Peacebuilding Architecture to
the current and emerging needs of and existing gaps in the United Nations
peacebuilding practice.

Objective
3.
In recommending the establishment of the Peacebuilding Architecture in 2005,
former Secretary-General, Kofi Annan, noted in his report entitled “In larger
freedom: towards development, security and human rights for all ”, that “there is a
gaping hole in the United Nations institutional machinery: no part of the United
Nations system effectively addresses the challenge of helping countries with the
transition from war to lasting peace” (A/59/2005, para. 114). The gaping hole was
further described by the lack of collective and coherent action to address the
complex challenge of sustaining peace, reflecting the need for reinforcement from
the United Nations and other parts of the international system. The Peacebuilding
Architecture was established to address this systemic gap.

15-00061

3/7

A/69/674
S/2014/911

4.
Since then, policies guiding United Nations and international peacebuilding
efforts and engagement in countries emerging from conflict, as well as operational
responses, have evolved. The 2015 review should examine the significance of this
evolution in addressing the elements of the gaping hole defined in 2 005, and their
implications for the role and positioning of the Peacebuilding Architecture and the
operational entities of the United Nations system.
5.
Based on this analysis, the review should propose ways to strengthen the
performance and impact of the Peacebuilding Architecture, with a view to realizing
its full potential. To this end, the review should provide recommendations on the
functioning, resources, and modes of engagement of the Peacebuilding Architecture
and on its links with the United Nations system entities that engage with it.

Key elements of the analysis
6.
In order to meet this objective, the analysis underpinning the review should be
based on the following elements:
(a) The general developments in the policy frameworks and opera tional
responses of the United Nations and international actors since 2005 in support of
peacebuilding efforts and engagement in countries emerging from conflict;
(b) The original vision behind the establishment of the Peacebuilding
Architecture in 2005 and the expectations for its functioning and impact. The
analysis should address whether and how the mandate, resources, structures and
authority given to the Peacebuilding Commission have responded to the vision and
matched these expectations;
(c) The extent to which the diverse membership structure of the
Peacebuilding Commission, including the role of regional actors, was effectively
leveraged in support of broader peacebuilding objectives. The analysis should
explore ways to improve the Peacebuilding Commission working methods and
decision-making in order to allow for greater involvement of its members and to
facilitate inputs from various peacebuilding actors;
(d) The areas of potential complementarity between the Peacebuilding
Commission and relevant United Nations operational entities, considering the
former’s role, orientation and positioning vis-à-vis the latter. The analysis in this
regard should also address the situations and settings that are most suitable for the
Peacebuilding Commission’s engagement and where it can most effectively support
national, regional and international efforts; and the areas of its existing and potential
strengths and limitations.
(e) The continuing and/or emerging gaps and constraints that limit the
effectiveness and ability of the United Nations to prevent the recurrence of conflict.
The analysis should also address the continuing and/or emerging challenges in the
mobilization and coordination of necessary political, technical and financial support
from other international organizations or Member States in support of post -conflict
peacebuilding;
(f) The potential utility and limitations of mutual accountability and
commitments frameworks (including in the context of the Peacebuilding
Commission’s country-specific engagement). The analysis should also address the

4/7

15-00061

A/69/674
S/2014/911

implications of these frameworks for the nature of United Nations support to
countries emerging from conflict;
(g) The implications of the developments and continuing gaps in the
aforementioned areas for the Peacebuilding Commission’s advisory role to its
mandating bodies, the General Assembly and the Security Council, in support of
broader peacebuilding objectives in the countries concerned.

Suggested methodology
7.
The analysis underpinning the 2015 review should be anchored in three to five
country case studies (a combination of Peacebuilding Commission and
non-Peacebuilding Commission agenda countries), from which broader lessons on
progress, effectiveness and failures can be extrapolated. The analysis should also be
undertaken in conjunction and synergy with the upcoming Secretary-General’s
review of peace operations. The case studies will be combined with a broader policy
and institutional review. The analysis should shed light on:
(a) The factors that led to notable progress or relapse of the countries in
question;
(b) The evolution in regional, international and United Nations responses in
post-conflict situations since 2005;
(c) The nature and impact of the Peacebuilding Architecture’s contribution
to these responses, where it was involved.

Suggested modality
Main principles
8.
The selected modality for conducting the review should meet all of the
following main principles:
(a) Adherence to the condition set out in paragraphs 5 of General Assembly
resolution 65/7 and Security Council resolution 1947 (2010), and para. 27 of
Assembly resolution 60/180 and Council resolution 1645 (2005) by ensuring that
the outcome of the process is ultimately the product of an inclusive
intergovernmental process in the General Assembly and the Security Council;
(b) Adherence to and compatibility with the predetermined overall
objectives, terms of reference and methodology;
(c) Integration of views of existing and former government officials, as
appropriate, as well as other national and local stakeholders, in the countries subject
to the case studies; as well as the countries on the agenda of the Peacebuilding
Commission, as the basis for the analysis and recommendations;
(d) Integration of the views and perspectives of the African Union, and other
relevant regional and subregional organizations, United Nations and non-United
Nations stakeholders (e.g., international financial institutions);
(e) Engagement of relevant expertise and experiences from within and
outside the United Nations, including the expertise of former government officials,
in informing the institutional and policy review developed on the basis of country
studies.

15-00061

5/7

A/69/674
S/2014/911

Structure and process
9.

Based on these principles, a two-staged process is proposed whereby:

(a) The country studies and the corresponding analysis undertaken in
accordance with the terms of reference will be carried out by experts/advisers. On
the basis of the information and analyses drawn from the country studies, as w ell as
inputs from within and outside the United Nations that would inform the
institutional and policy review, the experts will prepare a synthesis report of key
findings and actionable recommendations;
(b) The experts/advisers will submit the synthesis report to the General
Assembly and the Security Council. The Presidents of the two principal organs will
jointly initiate an intergovernmental process that will consider the recommendations
submitted by the experts/advisers and generate agreed recommendations for
consideration and final decision by the Assembly and the Council.
10. The General Assembly and the Security Council are requested to set a timeline
for the completion of the two-staged process, in accordance with their respective
calendars in 2015.
11. Accordingly, the following process is recommended to the General Assembly
and the Security Council for consideration:
(a) The General Assembly and the Security Council will request the
Secretary-General to nominate no more than seven experts/advisers that will form
an advisory group. The experts will be of relevant and professional backgrounds and
expertise, following established practice and regulations for hiring external experts.
They will represent a diverse geographic balance, drawing in particu lar on relevant
expertise from Africa. During the process of identifying the members of the
advisory group, the Secretary-General will be expected to consult with Member
States, including with the relevant membership caucuses and groupings in New
York, and with the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, with a view to ensuring
full transparency of the process;
(b) The advisory group will oversee the process of undertaking case studies
and generating findings and recommendations on the basis of the terms of reference
and methodology established by the General Assembly and the Security Council.
The advisory group will be supported by a small secretariat appointed by the
Secretary-General. The Secretary-General will inform the General Assembly and the
Security Council of the financial arrangement to support the work of the group. In
addition to the integration of views and perspectives of actors and stakeholders, as
set out in the “main principles”, the advisory group is expected to consult with
Member States, including with the relevant membership caucuses and groupings in
New York, during the process of developing the synthesis report outlining ke y
findings and recommendations;
(c) The advisory group will submit its findings and recommendations to the
General Assembly and the Security Council;
(d) Upon receipt of the findings and recommendations from the advisory
group, the General Assembly and the Security Council will jointly appoint no more
than two permanent representatives to co-facilitate an inclusive intergovernmental
process that will review the findings and consider the recommendations. The
co-facilitators will subsequently summarize and submit the outcome of the
intergovernmental process for consideration and decision by the General Assembly
and Security Council.

6/7

15-00061

A/69/674
S/2014/911

Annex II
Letter dated 25 November 2014 from the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission addressed to the President of the
General Assembly and the President of the Security Council
I am writing in my capacity as the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission and
as a follow-up to my letter dated 3 November 2014 transmitting the proposed terms
of reference for the 2015 review of the “peacebuilding architecture”.
In that letter, I placed before the General Assembly and the Security Council
an indicative list of countries that may provide an appropriate basis for case studies
that would enable the review to extrapolate broader lessons, analysis and
recommendation for the attention and subsequent consideration of both organs.
After consultations with the representatives of the countries concerned, and
with the Presidencies of the General Assembly and the Security Council, I am
pleased to communicate that the following countries have agreed to be the subject of
the case studies: Burundi, the Central African Republic, Sierra Leone, South Sudan
and Timor-Leste.
(Signed) Antonio de Aguiar Patriota
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission

15-00061

7/7
