S/PV.7917

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7917th meeting

Thursday, 6 April 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Haley. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Wilson
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2017/271)
Letter dated 5 April 2017 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2017/285)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-09288 (E)
*1709288*

S/PV.7917

The situation in Mali

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali (S/2017/271)
Letter dated 5 April 2017 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2017/285)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Mali to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, Minister for Foreign Affairs,
African Integration and International Cooperation of
the Republic of Mali.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting. It is my
pleasure to welcome Mr. Lacroix to the Council for the
first time in his new capacity.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/271, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali, and
document S/2017/285, which contains a letter dated
5 April 2017 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix: I thank you, Madam President, for
welcoming me to the Council for the first time.
(spoke in French)
It is with great pleasure that I address the Security
Council for the first time since my appointment at the
head of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
In this regard, I wish to pay tribute to my predecessor,
Mr. Hervé Ladsous, for his devotion and untiring efforts
to the benefit of peace. Council members may rest
assured that I will take up the challenges that have been
entrusted to me with determination and conviction, and
2/22

06/04/2017

it is with great candour and transparency that I intend
to work with the Security Council.
About two weeks ago, I had the opportunity, together
with Mr. Hervé Ladsous, to visit Mali and speak with
its authorities, including President Ibrahim Boubacar
Keita; the members of the Government, including
Minister Abdoulaye Diop; the international mediation
team, led by Algeria; and the staff of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the United Nations
country team, who are doing remarkable work under
difficult conditions.
As underscored in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2017/271), which was submitted to the
Council last month, positive progress has been made
in the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation. Despite the despicable attack on the
camp of the Operational Coordination Mechanism in
Gao on 18 January, the operationalization of joint patrols
in Gao have been taking place since 20 February. After
Gao, Kidal and Ménaka, the Agreement Monitoring
Committee announced the day before yesterday the
establishment of interim authorities in Taoudenni and
Timbuktu by 13 April. These developments point to
the gradual return of State authority in northern Mali
as a result of interim arrangements, and MINUSMA,
through its good offices, is doing everything in its power
to help parties achieve tangible results on the ground.
We must, however, ensure that the new authorities
and joint units are provided with adequate resources to
fulfil their political and security responsibilities and
that basic services are quickly made available to the
people. In addition, it is key that we clarify the duration
of these interim arrangements in view of their late start,
as well as the status of dissident groups vis-à-vis the
Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad (CMA) and
the Platform within the framework of the monitoring
mechanism. The Malian authorities have indicated to
us that these issues are being discussed.
In this sense, the National Accord Conference,
which ended on Sunday, 2 April, was a unique
opportunity to bring together the various segments of
the Malian population, as well as the signatory parties.
Despite the delayed participation of some key actors,
such as the Coordination of the Azawad Movements and
the political opposition, Malians from various regions
of the country were able to speak to each other for the
first time since the crisis began in 2012. We hope that
17-09288

06/04/2017

The situation in Mali

the progress made during these five days will serve as
a basis for the drafting of a charter for peace, unity and
national reconciliation and will enrich the process of
constitutional review in accordance with the provisions
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation.
However, with the 2018 elections looming on
the horizon and despite of the advances over the past
few months, we cannot ignore the significant delays
sustained and the fragility of the gains that have been
made. Overall, the implementation of the Agreement
is still slow. The national strategy on security sector
reform is also not yet finalized. The criteria for
integrating the combatants from the signatory groups
have not yet been determined and the eight cantonment
sites built by MINUSMA remain empty. Longerterm institutional and security reforms are needed, in
particular with regard to the future of the reconstituted
national army. This lack of clarity in the institutional
framework hampers efforts on the ground and is not
conducive to building a climate of trust between the
parties. This situation is leading to a splintering of the
security and political landscape and further complicates
our work for peace. Therefore, it is more important than
ever for MINUSMA to vigorously pursue its political
role and support the peace process.
The security situation remains worrying. Attacks by
terrorist groups continue and are becoming increasingly
sophisticated. In that regard, I want to pay tribute to
MINUSMA and in particular to the troops who have
lost their lives while serving this operation. I also want
to pay tribute to the memory of the French soldier in
Operation Barkhane, who lost his life yesterday. As the
Council knows, a new partnership, bringing together
the most active terrorist groups in Mali, was created
under the banner of Al-Qaida and under the leadership
of Iyad ag Ghali, the leader of Ansar Eddine. Da’esh,
meanwhile, is slowly making its presence known in
the Sahelo-Saharan strip. This convergence of threats
is particularly alarming in a context in which the
presence of the State is weak and sometimes even
non-existent, and in which the implementation of the
peace agreement still has to be translated into tangible
results on the ground.
In addition, the centre of the country remains the
scene of intense tensions fueled by extremist groups
that, defying the authority of the State, carry out
targeted assassinations and force the closure of schools
in some localities, depriving children of educaiton. In
response to this situation, the Malian authorities have

S/PV.7917

drawn up an integrated security plan for the central
regions, which I welcome. This multidimensional
approach is necessary and welcome, and MINUSMA
will continue to support it.
In the background, cross-border criminal networks
remain very active. The revenue generated by this illicit
trafficking are a financial boon for terrorist groups
operating in northern Mali. The delays in the peace
process and the often insufficient presence of State
authority provide an opportunity for the enemies of
peace to satisfy their economic interests. This situation
is untenable and must cease. Given the cross-border
nature of these networks, a regional approach is needed.
We welcome the efforts of the Group of Five for
the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) to set up a regional force, with
a first step of strengthening cross-border cooperation.
We are exploring how we can effectively support
this initiative so that it contributes positively to the
work of MINUSMA and the French Force Barkhane.
However, let us not lose sight of the need to include
peace-stabilization efforts in the framework of the
peace agreement. Complementarities and opportunities
exist between peacekeeping efforts and the regional
initiative of the G-5 Sahel, and we will try to articulate
them with our partners. In the immediate future,
MINUSMA will strengthen support for the Malian
armed forces and the implementation of the reforms
envisaged in the field of defence and security.
In that context, MINUSMA will continue to play
a major political and security role, particularly as one
of the main providers of stability in the north and part
of the centre of the country. To that end, MINUSMA
is taking the necessary steps to adjust its priorities
and posture according to the stakes and progress made
on the ground, in accordance with its mandate, while
taking into account the security of its staff and the
objective of providing the best possible support.
We are also pursuing our mobilization efforts
with contributing countries, exploring innovative
partnerships and concepts in order to fill our operational
gaps. If we are still unable to deploy the 2,049 military
personnel and 480 police personnel authorized by
resolution 2295 (2016), there are very real prospects
for progress and we are determined to do our all to
ensure that they materialize as quickly as possible. The
deployment of the rapid reaction force of the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire to Mali, originally
planned for February, should take place between May

17-092883/22

S/PV.7917

The situation in Mali

and October. As for the logistics combat battalion, Sri
Lanka will deploy a company in July and Egypt will
deploy three companies between the months of July and
December. We are also continuing our efforts to deploy
other capabilities, including transport and attack
helicopters, among others.
(spoke in English)
In conclusion, there are at this stage three important
points. First is the need to continue to strongly encourage
the parties to redouble their efforts to accelerate
the implementation of the peace agreement and to
clarify the next steps once the interim period expires
in June. Secondly, wе need to address the scourge of
international and transnational organized crime and its
impact on the peace efforts. On this particular aspect,
the Security Council has already expressed its intention
to consider targeted sanctions against spoilers. We
believe that it is time to consider establishing such a
sanctions regime. Finally, in the light of the prevailing
political and security situation, MINUSMA continues
to adjust its priorities and posture, within the existing
mandate, in order to provide the best support. We
will revert in due course if any adjustments to the
MINUSMA mandate are required, in particular in our
next end-of-mandate report.
The President: I thank Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.
I also thank him for his leadership and time. We look
forward to working with him.
Before calling on speakers, I should like on behalf
of us all, extend our condolences to France for the
soldier who was lost in Mali yesterday. We know the
sacrifices our military make when they do this work,
and our hearts and prayers are with the people of
France today.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mali,
His Excellency Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, whose presence is
important for all of us and for our joint efforts in Mali.
I would also like to thank the new Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, for his very enlightening briefing and to take
this opportunity to extend our warmest wishes for
success in his new duties.
4/22

06/04/2017

Almost two years after the signing of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, and despite the
real progress made, Mali is in a difficult situation and
remains subject to the threat of terrorist groups. The
alliance of terrorist groups that was announced a month
ago under Al-Qaida in the Sahel, under the command of
Iyad ag Ghali, reveals a macabre competition between
Da;esh and Al-Qaida in Africa. In that context, it is
more than ever urgent that the Malian parties fully
implement the peace agreement at two levels.
First, at the political level, it is urgent that the
Malian parties fully implement the agreement. After
long months of stagnation, real progress has been
made recently by the Government and the signatory
armed group to fulfil their commitment under the
peace agreement. This includes the installation of
some interim authorities in the north of the country,
the launch of mixed patrols in Gao, and the convening
of the conférence d’entente nationale, bringing together
all the actors concerned. But these achievements
remain fragile and insufficient nearly two years after
the signing of the agreement. On the ground, the
populations of northern Mali have to see any noticeable
improvement in their living conditions. The interim
administrations are not yet operational, the fight against
impunity remains insufficient, and the redeployment of
the Malian State in the north has made little progress, as
has the reintegration of veterans. We ask the signatory
parties to set their mistrust aside and demonstrate their
sincerity in implementing the peace agreement.
In their successive reports on Mali, SecretariesGeneral Ban Ki-moon and Guterres have recommended
to the Security Council to impose sanctions against
those who hinder the implementation of the peace
agreement. We believe this approach to be essential in
order to remove the numerous obstacles of the peace
process and to encourage all the Malian actors on the
ground to choose the side of peace. The creation of a
Security Council sanctions regime should also target
those, be they signatories to the agreement or not, who
engage in trafficking and block any peace that may be
contrary to their interests.
In a complementary way, the international
community must reinforce its mobilization in support
of the implementation of the peace agreement. France
reiterates in particular its full support for the good
offices of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Mali, Mr. Annadif. We also welcome the
17-09288

06/04/2017

The situation in Mali

role played by Algeria as leader of the international
mediation and support his unwavering commitment.
At the security level, it is urgent that the Malian
parties also fully implement the peace agreement.
The time squandered by the Malian signatories to the
agreement is time won by the terrorist groups. The
spread of terrorist attacks in central Mali is proof of
that. Contrarily, the redeployment of the presence of the
Malian State in the north, as provided for in the peace
agreement, would restore the people’s hope for peace.
The concrete implementation of the peace agreement
must demonstrate to all, and especially to unemployed
youth in the north, that the voice of terrorism and
narcotraffickers is a dead end.
In the meanwhile, the repeated attacks against the
Malian security forces in the north places the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and Operation Barkhane
on the front line against terrorist groups. On behalf of
France, I would like to salute the courage of the Blue
Helmets in Mali, who are carrying out their work in
very difficult conditions. MINUSMA, which is the
only United Nations peacekeeping operation facing
a terrorism environment, needs to be strengthened.
MINUSMA must urgently have the staff and equipment
approved by the Security Council last June in resolution
2295 (2016). We hope that new troop-contributing
countries will commit to Mali during the upcoming
special meeting on MINUSMA force generation, which
is to take place in New York on 8 May.
With its robust mandate and unprecedented
technological mans, MINUSMA is a groundbreaking
operation for the United Nations. Without the presence
of MINUSMA and Operation Barkhane to support
Mali, terrorist groups would be able to reconstitute a
safe haven that could host terrorists from throughout
the world. On its part, the French Operation Barkhane
continues to provide support to MINUSMA in instances
when peacekeepers are severely threatened. Launched
in 2014 at the request of the States of the Sahel, Operation
Barkhane is now deployed over territory larger than the
territory of Europe from Lisbon to Moscow. It includes
4,000 military personnel, drones, aircraft, helicopters
and hundreds of vehicles. One hundred and fifty
terrorists have been put out of operation, with several
tons of munitions and weapons seized or destroyed by
Operation Barkhane in 2016.

S/PV.7917

France welcomes the initiative of the Five States
for the Sahel to set up a joint force in order to counter
the expansion of the terrorist threat at the regional
level — for the first time with a focus on securing
border areas. We also welcome the support that the
Secretary-General intends to accord to that project,
in coordination with the States of the region and the
African Union. This counter-terrorism force is to
become part of the overall peace process in Mali. Only
the full implementation by the Malian parties of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali will
ensure lasting peace. In addition, the force should
complement the efforts of MINUSMA. Since the Group
of Five for the Sahel was established (G-5 Sahel), armed
forces from Mali, the Niger, Chad and Burkina Faso
have regularly carried out joint cross-border military
operations, for which Operation Barkhane has provided
operational support.
As you have recalled, Madam President, for which I
am personally grateful, a French soldier died yesterday
in Mali in the course of just such an operation close
to the border with Burkina Faso. He is the nineteenth
French soldier to die in the Sahel since January 2013.
Our determination remains intact — and I would say
even stronger than ever — in helping the countries
of the Sahel to build up their capacity to counter the
terrorist threat. We hope that the Security Council will
support the G-5 Sahel in their undertakings.
The Malian parties have a historic responsibility so
that the people of Mali can at last enjoy lasting peace.
For its part, the Security Council must step up its effort
to resolve the crisis, which threatens international
peace and security. Peace in Mali is a crucial challenge
for us all.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Madam President, for convening this meeting
on the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). I warmly
welcome the presence here today of His Excellency
Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, Minister for Foreign Affairs,
International Cooperation and African Integration of
the Republic of Mali.
First and foremost, through the French delegation,
I should like to express my condolences to the people
and the Government of France in connection with the
death of one of its soldiers in Operation Barkhane, who
gave his life fighting for freedom and stability in Mali.

17-092885/22

S/PV.7917

The situation in Mali

The Security Council’s consideration of the
report (S/2017/271) of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali in line with resolution 2295 (2016) is
yet another chance for us to assess the progress made
in the implementation of the Algiers Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, which we in Senegal
consider to be the sole road map for moving forward.
The briefing given us by the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
whom I heartily congratulate on assuming his new
post, clearly illustrated that there is still some way to
go. We welcome the appointment of Mr. Lacroix and
assure him of the Senegalese delegation’s full support
for the success of his undertaking.
It is clear that the commitment of the Government
of Mali to sparing no effort in effectively implementing
the peace agreement — a commitment that I am sure
Minister Diop will shortly reiterate — gives us a reason
to believe that, along with the resolute determination and
the mutual trust among the signatories, this will serve as
the sole measure for successful, lasting reconciliation.
We believe that the recently held conference for national
harmony is a positive step in that regard. Less than two
months from the end of the interim period provided for
under the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation, and
given the slow pace of implementing various elements
of the agreement, the Senegalese delegation would like
to highlight the following points.
First, there is a need to effectively enact the interim
measures in all the areas concerned. In that regard, we
welcome the appointment of interim authorities in Gao,
Kidal and Ménaka. We hope that the same will soon be
done in Taoudenni and Timbuktu.
Secondly, beginning joint patrols is another
requirement in confronting the security challenges in
the north and centre of the country. In that regard, the
areas of Kidal and Timbuktu should follow the example
of Gao, where such patrols are already taking place.
Thirdly, it is also important to speed up the
institutional reform process, especially in the area
of security. That will make it possible to facilitate
the restructuring of the Malian armed forces, whose
effective presence in the north will help ensure
the restoration of State authority in that part of the
country, where there is growing insecurity and all
types of trafficking.The presence of MINUSMA and
Operation Barkhane in the area is already reassuring.
But they must be reinforced with a national army with
6/22

06/04/2017

the primary responsibility for providing security and
safety for its citizens. Throughout that entire process,
therefore, Senegal insists on the need for training and
equipping personnel, especially given the new law on
military planning adopted by the National Assembly.
Fourthly, with respect to the deployment of the
quick-reaction force, and without prejudice to the
force-generation meeting to be held here on 8 May, I
can confirm that that will take place as soon as possible.
Senegal is now taking the appropriate measures in
that connection. I should also like to announce that,
two weeks from now, an assessment mission will be
conducted to determine how we can specifically ensure
the deployment of helicopters.
MINUSMA’s mandate will come to an end on
30 June. With a view to its renewal, the continuing
hostile environment in which the Mission operates
must be taken into account. Given its multidimensional
character, it is clear that MINUSMA cannot be
considered a classic peacekeeping operation. Boosting
its operational capacities is clearly needed. In that
regard, I should like to recall the provisions of
resolution 2295 (2016). In paragraph 19 (d), the Council
asks MINUSMA
“to anticipate and deter threats and to take robust
and active steps to counter asymmetric attacks
against civilians or United Nations personnel, to
ensure prompt and effective responses to threats
of violence”.
Senegal therefore continues to call for MINUSMA to
be adequately equipped.
I will conclude with a reminder that my country has
deployed a 425-unit reserve battalion to MINUSMA,
along with a 140-unit engineering company, two
140-unit police companies totalling 280 persons and, as
I just mentioned, the deployment of the quick-reaction
force is well under way. And I would like to reiterate
to the Foreign Minister that Mali has the full support
of the Senegalese delegation in its quest for peace
and reconciliation.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would first like to warmly
welcome Under-Secretary-General Lacroix to his first
meeting of the Security Council. We are very much
looking forward to working with him.
17-09288

06/04/2017

The situation in Mali

(spoke in French)
We also welcome Foreign Minister Diop back to
the Council.
(spoke in English)
I would also like to express our condolences to
France on the loss of yet another French peacekeeper
in Mali.
Despite positive developments, the situation in
Mali continues to warrant our attention. We commend
the progress that has been made on establishing interim
authorities and launching mixed patrols, but with only
three months of the interim period remaining, making
progress on implementation is even more pressing,
and numerous actions still have to be completed. We
therefore encourage the Government to redouble its
efforts to deliver on the December benchmarks and the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali so that
Malians can reap the peace dividend. We also call on all
actors to acknowledge that time will be needed beyond
the expiration of the interim period to consolidate
progress, not least where the interim authorities are
concerned. Algeria’s sustained commitment to the
process will be crucial.
All Malians must feel a sense of ownership in
the country’s future. The Government should make
every effort to ensure that inclusive consultations and
channels for interaction between citizens and the State
form part of the constitutional review process. That
will include addressing the crucial issue of relations
between the centre and the periphery, and the essential
provisions of the peace agreement. We were encouraged
by the broad participation of women in the Conférence
d’entente nationale last week, and we emphasize
the importance of ensuring women’s full and active
participation and leadership at all levels of the peace
process. We encourage the Secretary-General to take
further stock of progress in that area in his next report.
It is urgent that we address the dire security
situation in Mali’s central regions. That should to be
taken into account in the next mandate for the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). The revised mandate
should strengthen the enabling capacity of the United
Nations and its ability to use its good offices to promote
security. The Government’s aspiration to re-establish
State authority throughout the country, particularly
in Mopti and Ségou, must go beyond mere physical

S/PV.7917

presence and be built on a people-centred approach to
governance. It is important to build confidence in the
legitimacy of State functions, including by providing
basic social services. We welcome the Government’s
development of a multidimensional strategy for the
region and encourage its swift implementation. A
trustworthy, community-oriented and human rightsfocused police service, along with a clear vision for
security-sector reform, will be essential.
Later today, the Council will hold a debate on
peacekeeping. We will underline how important we
believe it is that peacekeeping operations be seen as
part of a broader peace strategy. In Mali, as elsewhere,
the primacy of politics should be a guiding principle for
United Nations engagement. That also means that we
must invest in the right resources for making sure that
we can provide adequate support to political solutions.
For that reason, in the lead-up to mandate renewals,
we encourage the Secretariat, working with the wider
United Nations system, to provide conflict and political
analysis that is context-sensitive. Such analysis should
form the basis for action-oriented Council discussions,
including on greater coherence between civilian and
military components.
We welcome the steps that the Secretariat has
already taken to enhance transparency, predictability
and efficiency in MINUSMA’s force-generation process,
as was called for at the troop- and police-contributing
countries’ meeting in January (see S/PV.7874). In
order to address the long-standing capability gaps in
MINUSMA, we urge the troop- and police-contributing
countries to make use of that initiative, particularly
during the upcoming force-generation conference in
May. Sweden would also like to emphasize our shared
responsibility for increasing the number of women in
all types of posts and at all levels within MINUSMA.
Lastly, the joint force of the Group of Five for
the Sahel is a positive step in addressing the regional
dimension of the challenges in Mali. A number of issues
should be addressed before it becomes operational,
particularly its relationship with MINUSMA and
its rules of engagement. Ensuring cooperation
and interoperability with other security actors and
guaranteeing differentiation between humanitarian
actors and the military, as well as between the military
and the police, should be priorities. In that regard, we
also underline the need for making progress in the areas
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
security-sector reform, including by accelerating the

17-092887/22

S/PV.7917

The situation in Mali

efforts to establish the criteria for reintegration, so as
to ensure a truly reformed national army.
The commitment of the signatories to the peace
agreement to moving forward in a way that benefits all
Malians should be welcomed. However, we still need all
parties to make an intensified effort if the agreement’s
full potential is to be realized. MINUSMA has proved
to be a critical tool for those efforts. Sweden remains
fully committed to supporting it, not least through
our considerable contribution to MINUSMA and our
extensive cooperation on development.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to join you,
Madam President, and others before me in expressing
my deep condolences to the family of the victim and to
the Government of France for their loss.
We are pleased to welcome His Excellency
Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, Foreign Minister of Mali, to the
Council. I would also like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix for his informative briefing and to
welcome him to his new post. This is an important and
challenging time for United Nations peacekeeping, and
we look forward to working closely with him. I would
like to assure him of our full support.
As the current mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA)enters its final months, the Council
must correctly assess the severity of the situation we
face in Mali. The picture is not good. More than a year
ago, the Council visited Mali and reiterated its call
for concrete progress in implementing the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. Unfortunately,
most of the key observations that we made during our
mission are still valid now — the slow implementation
of the agreement; the lack of inclusiveness, especially
of women and young people; the concerns about the
lack of decentralization and the state of the interim
authorities in the North; and the minimal progress
in security sector reform and the extension of State
authority. Since then, the security situation has
worsened and become more complex, with continuous
attacks by violent extremist and terrorist groups and
intercommunal clashes erupting in central Mali.
As we consider MINUSMA’s future mandate, we
should ask ourselves how the United Nations can better
support the overriding goal of implementing the peace
agreement. It has 20 chapters, with annexes, and its
mutually reinforcing elements must be implemented
in a balanced manner. We would like to emphasize the
8/22

06/04/2017

need for further progress in security-sector reform;
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration;
cantonment; and the redeployment of the Malian
defence and security forces. That is crucial to building
confidence in the northern and central regions. Japan
appreciates the initiative of the Group of Five for the
Sahel to establish a new joint force, which represents
African States’ ownership of the effort to counter
terrorism in the region. The Council should study
its proposal closely to see how it would interact
with MINUSMA.
MINUSMA’s mandate is multidimensional, and
its strategic priority is supporting the signatory parties
in implementing the agreement, particularly the
provisions related to the restoration and extension of
State authority. Political and institutional reforms are
desperately needed, and all five interim authorities in
the north must be effective in providing the people with
tangible benefits. The time is right for the Council to
seriously discuss how MINUSMA can best be positioned
to support both the political and institution-building
needs arising from the peace process. Japan looks
forward to contributing actively to this difficult but
necessary discussion.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
for his briefing on the situation in Mali. We also
welcome the presence at our meeting of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Mali, Mr. Abdoulaye Diop.
We have been consistently of the opinion that
a stable settlement of the situation in Mali is can be
accomplished only through the rigorous implementation
by all parties in Mali of the provisions contained in
the 2015 Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali. In that regard, we note the positive trend in
its implementation. We welcome the launch of the
proccess to establish the interim authorities in the five
northern regions of the country, as well as the launch
of the mixed patrols. We think that this could end the
current stagnation and call upon countries to build on
that progress. We also note the great significance of
the National Accord Conference, which was conducted
on the initiative of the Government. We believe that
this will also provide an impetus to the peace process
in Mali.
We are concerned about the remaining security
issues in Mali. The attacks by jihadists on civilian
17-09288

06/04/2017

The situation in Mali

facilities, the Malian military and United Nations
peacekeepers continue. We are also concerned by the
fact that terrorist activity — including, unfortunately,
by Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb — is spreading to
the central part of the country and growing increasingly
sophisticated. We welcome the political resolve of the
Malian parties that made it possible to implement the
Algiers Agreement in spite of the barbarous attack on
18 January on the camp of the Operational Coordination
Mechanism. Given the situation, we are convinced that
it would be appropriate to fully support the parties to
the Agreement rather than use the threat of sanctions.
Security measures should be strengthened by taking
effective steps to resolve serious socioeconomic issues
in the north. In that regard we expect the development
strategy for the northern regions to be passed. We know
that Bamako is actively working on that right now.
Despite international and regional efforts,
terrorism in the Sahelo-Saharan region remains the
main threat to the security and stability of that part
of the continent. The international terrorists there are
increasing their activities. They are trying to broaden
their geographical scope, and we are witnessing the
emergence of new groups and leaders. There was a
recent terrorist attack against the French forces, and we
extend our condolences to the French in the wake of the
death of a French soldier.
The security situation is also influenced negatively
by the porous borders open to international criminal
groups, drug trafficking, illicit weapons trafficking and
other smuggling. We recall that terrorism and violent
extremism in Mali and the Sahel came from outside.
The radicals in the region appeared after the situation in
Libya was destabilized. Without progress in the Libyan
settlement, it will be impossible to definitively resolve
the issue of terrorism in the Sahel. We are convinced
that coordinated steps, both by the Africans and the
international community, will continue to be important
to fighting this development. We note in that regard the
initiative of the Group of Five for the Sahel to create
a regional force. However, it is becoming increasingly
obvious that military measures will not be enough. The
extremist ideology must be countered effectively.
We also need to eliminate its breeding ground by
finding more effective solutions to the socioeconomic
issues in the region and strengthening State institutions.
In that regard, the consistent implementation of the
United Nations comprehensive strategy for the Sahel
is becoming increasingly topical. We need to make

S/PV.7917

sure that this mechanism gives increasingly efficient
yield. Given the opinion of Mali’s partners, we
supported resolution 2295 (2016), which extended and
strengthened the mandate of the Mission. We believe
that its full implementation will help ensure the safety
of the peacekeepers, increase the effectiveness and role
of the Mission in stabilizing the northern areas of Mali,
and help the peace process as a whole.
We are concerned by the fact that the numbers of the
military and police components of the Mission are very
far from the levels planned. We call on the Secretariat
to become more actively involved in ensuring that the
Mission reaches the needed parameters and that there
is the necessary rotation of contingents. We should
not put on the back burner efforts to ensure that the
peacekeepers have all the necessary basic services and
means of protection. The safety of Mission personnel
should remain our absolute priority.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to begin by thanking the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
for his briefing. Since this is his first time taking the
floor before the Security Council, I would like to
convey to him my wishes for his success and to assure
him of the support of my delegation. I would also like
to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs, International
Corporation and African integration of the Republic of
Mali, Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, for his presence here today.
I thank the United States presidency for promoting
transparency in the work of the Security Council by
holding most of our meetings this month as open public
briefings. Of course, Uruguay has underscored in
previous closed consultations on the situation in Mali
that little or nothing of what was discussed was actually
conveyed to the Malian authorities. We have very
willingly attended these quarterly meetings and believe
that this is a good opportunity for the positions of the
various Council members to be directly conveyed to the
Government of Mali and other countries interested in
the evolution of the conflict. We regret that the situation
in the Republic of Mali continues to deteriorate, largely
due to the actions of terrorist and extremist groups that
are enemies of the peace and reconciliation process.
We note with satisfaction the statement of the
Under-Secretary-General with respect to the interim
measures that have enabled the establishment and
formation of authorities and mixed patrols during
the month of April. Uruguay wishes to reiterate and

17-092889/22

S/PV.7917

The situation in Mali

underscore that the main responsibility for order and
the protection of the population in the Republic of
Mali lies with the Malian authorities. The international
community, in particular the United Nations, has
been assisting the Government in its efforts to fulfil
the responsibilities vested in it as a sovereign nation.
In fact, the international community has been
supporting Mali in its efforts to achieve peace in the
country in various ways. It has been making financial
contributions for the implementation of projects in the
north of the country; establishing and strengthening
the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA);
and implementing peacebuilding projects thanks to the
Peacebuilding Fund. The Secretary-General and the
Security Council mission also made visits a year ago.
I would like to highlight the conclusions of the recent
high-level meeting held at Headquarters in September
to provide new impetus to the implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
co-chaired by Algeria, Mali and the United Nations.
That notwithstanding, the achievement of peace in
Mali will require the firm and determined commitment
of the State, which must seek real and lasting political
solutions across its political spectrum to then be able to
tackle the terrorist threat.
I agree with what was said by the Under-SecretaryGeneral that we must identify a set of priorities geared
first towards implementing the peace agreement
between the three signatory parties. Then, once
the Government of Mali has achieved political and
institutional stability, it will be able to tackle the
security problem through effective strategies, with the
support of the international community. We cannot
lose sight of the fact that the entire Malian population
must feel as if they are part of a single State. To that
end, the State must make its presence felt across the
entire territory, providing basic services to the entire
population. We reiterate once again that any territory
abandoned by the State becomes fertile ground for the
operation of terrorist groups, which take advantage of
the vulnerability of the people there.
Uruguay wishes to express its extreme concern
over the violations of human rights committed by the
defence and security forces of Mali, as described by
the Secretary-General in his report (S/2017/271). The
institutions entrusted with ensuring law and order
should act in strict conformity with constitutional
10/22

06/04/2017

norms, protecting and providing guarantees to the
civilian population.
Much has been said about the need to optimize
resources for peacekeeping operations, and Uruguay
certainly believes that that it is necessary. On this
point, it is necessary to highlight the role of the host
State in optimizing the results and effectiveness of the
operations in the field.
In connection with the possibility of imposing
sanctions, as raised in resolution 2295 (2016) and in the
latest report of the Secretary-General, Uruguay would
be interested in analysing what would be the real impact
and scope of such measures, and, most important of all,
the position of the Malian Government in that regard.
We see the potential imposition of sanctions only as
a means to achieve the ultimate goal of the effective
implementation of the peace agreement.
In conclusion, Uruguay wishes to reiterate once
again that the current mandate of MINUSMA exceeds
that generally affodred to a peacekeeping operation, in
that it includes possible activities to combat terrorism.
Uruguay voted in favour of resolution 2295 (2016),
as it considers that the security situation in Mali is
extraordinary, but such actions should not be replicated
in future peacekeeping mandates. In brief, we shall
continue to work to establish stability in Mali and to
ensure that MINUSMA is no longer considered the
most dangerous peacekeeping operation in the world.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I want to start
by congratulating Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix on
assuming the office of Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations.
(spoke in French)
I thank him for his very clear detailed briefing.
(spoke in English)
I also want to join in your words of condolence,
Madam, to the French delegation. The memories of
Council members are still fresh from visiting the
headquarters of Operation Barkhane in N’Djamena
as part of their journey to the Lake Chad basin, where
we were able to fully appreciate the role played by
the Operation’s soldiers in the region, and in Mali
in particular.
Allow me to highlight three points: the security
situation, the political process and the activities of
17-09288

06/04/2017

The situation in Mali

S/PV.7917

the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).

The Mission will not be able to effectively carry out its
mandate unless the capability gaps are addressed.

First, my delegation is extremely concerned by the
deteriorating security situation in Mali. The scale of
terrorist attacks in central and northern parts of Mali has
reached an unprecedented level, turning MINUSMA
into one of the most dangerous peacekeeping missions
in the world. This underlines the urgent need for the
parties to uphold their commitments in the security
sector. The launch of mixed patrols in Gao is a longawaited and positive step forward. We should encourage
the Government of Mali and the signatory armed groups
to expedite the work of launching the mixed patrols in
Kidal and Timbuktu, too. The redeployment of Malian
the defence and security forces throughout the country
is equally crucial for taking control of security. We
also support the initiative of the Group of Five for the
Sahel countries to establish a regional force, which
will contribute to fighting the spread of terrorism and
violent extremism in Mali and the region.

As an active United Nations troop- and police­
contributing country, in particular in Africa, Ukraine
is exploring ways of doing its share to this end.

My second point concerns the political process. As
the transitional period comes to an end, progress on the
political track has remained limited. We believe that
the parties should redouble their efforts to complete
the installation of the interim administrations in the
north and to engage in inclusive national consultations
aimed at resolving existing differences in light of the
upcoming constitutional review and its referendum.
The ultimate goal of these efforts should be the
comprehensive reform of national institutions, which
will help to address the root causes of the conflict and
bring real peace dividends to the Malian people.
This leads me to my third and last point. We believe
that sustainable peace in Mali cannot be achieved
without the support of MINUSMA. Ukraine commends
the courage and dedication of the men and women of
the Mission, who continue to operate under extremely
difficult and dangerous conditions. Given the fact that
MINUSMA remains the primary target of terrorist
attacks, we are convinced that particular attention
should be paid to the enhancement of the safety and
security of its personnel.
Another issue of concern is the significant gap in
MINUSMA capabilities. As the Secretary-General’s
latest report (S/2017/271) notes, despite the adoption
of resolution 2295 (2016), none of the additional
authorized military and police personnel and none of the
additional military assets authored has been deployed.

Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes Mr. Lacroix in his new role us UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations and
thanks him for his briefing.
We welcome the participation of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Mali, Mr. Diop, and thank the
international mediation team, including Algeria, for its
good offices.
We extend our deepest condolences for the death of
a French peacekeeper.
China supports efforts of the people and the
Government of Mali to promote the peace process. We
commend the resolve and action of the Government
of Mali in applying the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. The establishment of interim
authorities in northern Mali has seen progress recently.
The joint patrols by the signatory parties to the peace
ageement have begun, and the National Accord
Conference was successfully held and adopted its final
report, all of which China welcomes.
At the same time, the Mali peace process faces
difficulties. Terrorist activities continue to spread,
posing challenges to the political and security situation
in Mali. The international community should actively
support the peace and reconciliation process in order
to achieve security, stability and social development. I
should like to make the following points.
First, we must support Mali in accelerating the
implementation of the peace agreement. We welcome
the promise of the signatory parties to the peace
agreement that they will continue promoting the peace
process. We hope that all parties will consolidate their
achievements to date and actively advance inclusive
political dialogue that encompasses all regions and
ethnic groups, and accelerate their implementation
of the provisions of the agreement so that peace and
reconciliation can be realized as soon as possible. The
international community should provide constructive
support to peace and development in Mali. The Council’s
actions should be conducive to maintaining the existing
results of the peace process and mutual trust among all
parties. China commends the work of the international

17-0928811/22

S/PV.7917

The situation in Mali

mediation teams in promoting peace talks among all
parties in Mali, and hopes that the team will continue to
play a positive role in the political process.
Secondly, we must help Mali to strengthen
its security and counter-terrorism capacities. The
international community should continue to assist
Mali’s security forces so that they may strengthen
their presence in the northern and central regions
and gradually assume the responsibility to maintain
national security. All parties should, upon request
from the Malian Government, provide assistance in the
areas of intelligence-collection, military training and
ammunition and weapons management.
Terrorist activities in Mali are rampant and highly
mobile across borders. This issue requires an integrated
approach based on regional cooperation. China
welcomes the decision of the Heads of State of the Group
of Five for the Sahel countries to create joint counterterrorism forces for regional security. We call on the
international community to support that decision. We
support Africa in resolving African issues in African
ways and jointly addressing the threat of terrorism.
Thirdly, we support the work of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA). China commends MINUSMA’s
unwavering efforts to achieve peace and reconciliation
in Mali. We will continue to support MINUSMA. We
hope that the Mission will pursue its coordination
and cooperation with the host country and help Mali
to strengthen capacity-building in the area of security
and facilitate disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration.
MINUSMA is deployed in a complex and
dangerous environment; the security situation is very
serious and there is a severe shortage of resources,
including equipment. We hope that MINUSMA will
continue to strengthen security for personnel and
communication with troop-contributing countries and
assistance providers. We must ensure that MINUSMA
has the equipment and resources required to carry out
its mandate and defend itself.
China firmly honours its commitment to the Mali
peace process. At present, there are some 400 Chinese
peacekeepers in MINUSMA. China is ready to work
with the international community as a whole to continue
to support the peace and reconciliation process in Mali
and make our due contribution to lasting peace and
stability and economic and social development in Mali.
12/22

06/04/2017

Mr. Cardi (Italy) (spoke in French): I acknowledge
Mr. Diop’s presence at today’s meeting. I would also
like to welcome Mr. Lacroix and thank him for his
briefing. I wish him every success in his new post.
We note that there has been ongoing progress in
Mali’s political arena. The holding of the National
Accord Conference, new joint patrols in Gao and further
steps in the setting up of interim authorities in Kidal,
Gao and Ménaka are encouraging signs. However, the
deteriorating security situation and the ongoing terrorist
threat in the region reminds us that more must be done,
and rapidly, to stabilize the country. The solution lies
in the implementation of the Algiers agreement. Its
implementation and the constitutional reform process
under way should be a key component in the process
towards inclusive stability that fosters dialogue among
the parties in the country. That dialogue must continue
beyond the interim period.
Stability in the Sahel depends, to a large extent,
on stability in Mali. We share the Secretary-General’s
concerns about growing ties between terrorism,
transnational organized crime and trafficking in drugs
and in persons. Such scourges are major hurdles in
the peace process in Mali and in the wider region. In
partnership with the Secretariat and other members of
the Security Council, we will continue our efforts to
develop solutions and stem those threats. In that regard,
we will also continue to provide bilateral assistance.
I should like to recall that the protection of cultural
heritage is part of the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA). The Council has demonstrated its
commitment to that subject by adopting resolution 2347
(2017), which was put forward by France and Italy. The
International Criminal Court handed down a historic
ruling in the Al-Madhi case about the destruction of
cultural heritage in Timbuktu.
With regard to regional efforts, we welcome the
initiative of the Group of Five for the Sahel to establish a
counter-terrorism brigade and we encourage those same
countries and MINUSMA to coordinate their efforts in
the region. In more general terms, we believe that it
is useful to have a high level of coordination among
all international partners working in the security sector
in Mali, in particular with the European Union (EU)
and its EU Training Mission and the EUCAP Sahel
Mali mission. In addition, we recall the importance of
relaunching the United Nations integrated strategy for
17-09288

06/04/2017

The situation in Mali

the Sahel, which, we believe, is a central platform for
addressing challenges throughout the region.
MINUSMA continues to face major challenges
and we cannot forget the price that it has already paid
in human lives. However, MINUSMA’s mandate has
already shown its ability to include several innovative
principles, in spite of logistical constraints and the
shortage of equipment. I would like to commend the
Mission, troop-contributing countries and the French
Operation Barkhane for their efforts. In that regard, I
should like to extend condolences to France and to the
family of the French soldier from Operation Barkhane,
who was killed last night during a mission in the southeast of the country. That serves as a sad reminder of the
growing terrorist threat in the region.
In conclusion, I would like to commend the efforts
of the Secretariat to ensure MINUSMA’s effectiveness,
as illustrated by the force generation conference to be
held in May. I am also pleased to share information
about Italy’s contribution to the Mission’s Trust Fund.
The aim of the Fund is to support Malian security
forces in their policing and border-control activities in
the centre and east of the country.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to start by
greeting and welcoming the Foreign Minister of Mali,
His Excellency Mr. Abdoulaye Diop. I would also like
to extend condolences to France and to our colleagues
following the loss of one of their compatriots, who was
part of peacekeeping efforts in Mali — a country whose
people have done so much for Africa.
I wish to thank Mr. Lacroix for his comprehensive
briefing on the situation in Mali and on the activities
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali over the past three months.
Let me take this opportunity to congratulate him on
his appointment as the new Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations and wish him all the very
best in the effective discharge of his responsibilities. It
was clear to us from our very first encounter with him
in Paris a few weeks ago that he has all it takes to hit
the ground running at the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, even at such an unprecedented and
complex time.
We are encouraged by the recent progress in the
implementation of the June 2015 Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali. We note the holding of
the high-level meeting of the Agreement Monitoring
Committee, which has facilitated renewed efforts for

S/PV.7917

the establishment of interim administrations in three
areas for the launch of joint security patrols. We
appreciate the efforts of the international mediation
team in convening that meeting and the parties for
demonstrating commitment to making progress in
the implementation of important aspects of the peace
agreement. We also welcome the National Accord
Conference, held in Bamako from 27 March to 2 April,
as part of the implementation of the peace agreement
to address the root causes of the conflict and ensure
greater inclusiveness in the peace process. We note the
outcome of the Conference, which brought together
the signatory parties and different sections of Malian
society and concluded with the adoption of a National
Charter For Unity, Peace And Reconciliation. Those
recent developments have injected some momentum in
the implementation of the agreement; they need to be
further consolidated. The support of the international
community, including countries of the region, the
Economic Community of West African States, the
African Union and the United Nations needs to
be sustained.
As other colleagues have stated, with only three
months left before the end of the interim period, the
implementation of the agreement, no doubt, still faces
a number of hurdles and the country continues to
confront enormous peace and security challenges. The
need for the restoration of inclusive State authority in
the central and northern regions of Mali remains critical
but continued insecurity in those regions poses serious
challenges that prevent the effective deployment of State
officials and, in some instances, forces those who have
already started their duties to leave the area. Terrorism
and violent extremism, transnational organized crime
and illicit trafficking continue to pose serious security
threats in Mali. The targeting of signatory parties
by terrorists and violent extremists to obstruct the
implementation of the peace agreement and perpetrate
insecurity in the north is a matter of serious concern.
The recent announcement of a merger by armed and
terrorist groups in Mali underscores the seriousness
of the threat. The efforts of Mali and the countries
of the Group of Five for the Sahel region to fight the
resurgence of violent extremists and terrorist networks,
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons, and
other forms of transnational organized crimes need to
be supported. In that regard, we note the decision of the
countries of the Group of Five for the Sahel to deploy a
5,000-strong joint force.

17-0928813/22

S/PV.7917

The situation in Mali

We appreciate the civilian and military personnel
of MINUSMA who are operating under extremely
difficult circumstances. We understand the enormous
challenge faced by the Mission and recall the meeting
of the MINUSMA troop- and police-contributing
countries held in January (see S/PV.7874) to discuss
the ways and means of enhancing the capacity of the
Mission to enable it to effectively carry out its mandated
tasks. There is a need to follow up on the outcome of
that meeting in order to provide the Mission with the
necessary logistical support. We hope that next mandate
renewal of the Mission will afford us an opportunity to
address some of these issues.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me,
at the outset, to welcome His Excellency Mr. Abdoulaye
Diop, Minister for Foreign Affairs, International
Cooperation and African Integration of the Republic
of Mali. I would also like to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix for his briefing and congratulate him on taking
over the leadership of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations. I assure him that Egypt will support him
and his Department out of our belief that peacekeepers
are very important for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
As one of the major troop-contribution countries in
the Organization, I would like to extend my condolences
to the Government of France for the recent loss of the
French soldier in Mali.
The situation in Mali has direct repercussions
on regional stability in the Sahel region. These
repercussions spill over into North Africa and
South Europe. Restoring stability and security in
Mali is therefore a local priority with regional and
international dimensions.
Mali has had to face difficulties and challenges
since the beginning of the crisis, despite earnest and
sincere efforts by the Malian parties and the widespread
international and regional support for those efforts.
However, the achievements on the ground today fall
short of fulfilling the aspirations of the Malian people
to achieve peace, security and sustainable development
and end human suffering.
It is very important to push for the implementation
of the provisions of the Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali as a comprehensive framework
for parties that really yearn for peace. The accelerated
implementation of the Agreement will unite all
14/22

06/04/2017

these parties against their common enemy, namely,
terrorist groups.
We cannot underestimate the role of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) in providing assistance
to Mali and protecting civilians. I would like now to pay
tribute to the personnel of the Mission for the courage
they have shown and the sacrifices they have made.
The Malian defence and security forces is the entity
that bears the primary responsibility for maintaining
peace, security and stability in Mali. It is vital that
the Malian forces be restructured and their capacity
built up.
The points I have just made are self-evident, and all
delegations and stakeholders should agree with them.
There is consensus on what the difficulties, challenges
and even the solutions are. However, what remains
pending is the implementation mechanism.
As the interim period draws to an end for the
implementation of the provisions of the Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement next June, the Security
Council shoulders the responsibility under the
Charter of the United Nations to realistically deal
with the situation in Mali based on learning from the
shortcomings and building on the points of strength in
the Council’s previous resolutions and policies on Mali
and taking practical steps in that regard. It is important
to understand the available tools and optimize their use
in striving to fulfil MINUSMA’s mandate.
MINUSMA is a crucial, indispensable element
in the achievement of stability, which is a goal that is
clearly within the mandate stipulated in the relevant
Security Council resolutions and within the parameters
of peacekeeping mandates in general. Any attempt
to go beyond this mandate would involve conceptual
and operational complexities that would not be in the
interest of MINUSMA’s forces, nor would it serve the
purpose of their deployment.
The States of the Group of Five for the Sahel have
taken steps to deploy regional forces to tackle the
situation in the Sahel. Those steps must enjoy clear and
direct support from the Council and the international
community. Regional forces, if they have the necessary
technical training capacity, would be in the best position
to deal with the challenges in the region. Building the
capacity of regional forces would be the best guarantee
of sustainable peace and security in the region.
17-09288

06/04/2017

The situation in Mali

With respect to the political track, an objective and
impartial assessment of the achievements made thus
far is needed in order to chart a path for future work
that would deal with the shortcomings and maximize
the progress achieved. We can look into adopting an
assessment tool that would not interfere with existing
mechanisms that are successfully working. We
appreciate the work of these mechanisms; they should
not be undermined.
In conclusion, Egypt reaffirms that it will cooperate
with Council members and at the bilateral level with
Mr. Diop to provide him with all the support to that his
country and fraternal people need so that we can bring
stability and security to the entire territory of Mali.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): It is good to see His
Excellency the Foreign Minister Diop of Mali joining
us in New York once more. We look forward to hearing
from him, given how much is at stake in his country.
The death of a French soldier yesterday is another
stark reminder of how dangerous this environment is,
and I pay tribute to him for his sacrifice.
I also want to thank Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix for his very clear briefing. And I would like
to welcome him. We really look forward to working
closely with him as he takes up his critical job.
We are encouraged by recent moves in Mali to
implement the terms of the Peace Agreement. As the
French Permanent Representative and others have just
said, the establishment of interim authorities in three
of the five northern regions is a positive step, as is the
launching of some mixed patrols that include northern
groups and the Malian armed forces. It is also welcome
that the National Reconciliation Conference has taken
place, which reflected the healthy cross-section of civil
society in Mali, including women’s organizations, youth
groups, non-governmental organizations, business
leaders and former combatants. The United Kingdom
has consistently pushed for better inclusion of women
in the peace process, which, as the representative of
Sweden already pointed out, is a critical driver for
success. It is therefore good that debate was inclusive,
positive and focused on the future of the country.
Nevertheless, I think I should be as frank in public
as we are in private consultations. We remain seriously
concerned about the apparent lack of political will
among the signatories to really implement the Algiers

S/PV.7917

peace accord. Progress is too slow. It is unpredictable
and it is slender. Now is the opportunity to change that.
It is in that context that the human rights situation
in Mali needs close attention. The Secretary-General’s
latest report (S/2017/271) details consistent human
rights violations, including summary executions and
enforced disappearances by members of the Malian
defence and security forces and the Platform and the
Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad. There
cannot be an excuse for such actions, and perpetrators
of those abuses must be held accountable. Addressing
impunity is an essential component of reconciliation
and of peace. In that regard, I also think that, more
broadly, the link between human rights and peace and
security could not be more clear or stark, as we will be
debating in this Chamber next week.
With regard to security, that continues to be a
significant concern. Despite some improvements,
there is a real danger of reversing previous gains.
The challenges facing the country are numerous and
clear. The secretary General’s latest report details the
porous nature of Mali’s borders and indicates that both
violent extremist groups and organized criminal gangs
continue to exploit the ungoverned space of the country.
To add to the historic presence of Al-Qaidaaligned organizations in Mali, there is now a new threat
from Islamic State-affiliated groups along the border
between Mali and the Niger, which is fuelled by the lack
of a State presence. Both the representatives of France
and Italy have already set out the strategic context of
the threat. Should it continue unchecked, the impact on
Mali and the wider region could be grave.
I would like to pay tribute to the ongoing work of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
Mali, Mr. Annadif. Both the military and the civilian
components of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
are operating in challenging circumstances. The threat
to United Nations personnel from spoilers intent
on disrupting the peace process continues to grow.
Nevertheless, the staff of MINUSMA and the French
forces of Operation Barkhane continue to do their
utmost for the people of Mali and the region in general.
As others have mentioned, that task is made more
difficult by the continued shortfall of troop numbers
and equipment. It is clear that air cover, reconnaissance
capability and armoured personnel carriers in particular
are urgently required. We therefore call on potential

17-0928815/22

S/PV.7917

The situation in Mali

contributing countries to follow up on the offers
that they made to join the Mission, and we welcome
Senegal’s substantial offer of helicopters.
As I said at the beginning of my statement,
political reform is the key to halting the instability.
It is unacceptable that MINUSMA should work hard,
at a great cost in terms of human life and financial
commitment, to maintain a stable environment in which
peace can take root if the parties to the Agreement do
not take advantage of that and deliver on their promises.
Our central message therefore — to be absolutely
clear — is that we urge the Government of Mali and
opposition groups to seize the opportunities, build on
recent progress and press on with implementing the
Peace Agreement. MINUSMA is helping to establish
the conditions for peace, the only people who can make
that peace are the parties themselves.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, Bolivia expresses its appreciation for the
presence of His Excellency Mr. Abdoulaye Diop,
Minister for Foreign Affairs, African Integration and
International Cooperation of the Republic of Mali.
We also join our colleagues in offering our
condolences to the Government and the people of
France and the family of the the French army soldier
who lost his life in the line of duty.
We also express our appreciation for the presentation
of the Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/271) by the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Jean-Pierre Lacroix, and take this opportunity to wish
him success in his work.
Bolivia commends the work of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) and the efforts made in stabilizing
the Republic of Mali through fulfilling its mandate.
We regret that its mandate has been undermined by the
incursion of extremist and terrorist elements affiliated
with Al-Qaida and what is known as the Islamic State,
in particular in the north and centre of the country. We
are concerned about the persistent situation of violence
caused by those groups, which continues today, thereby
undermining the goals of the legitimate Government
of Mali, the United Nations, partner countries and
regional and international organizations that have
reaffirmed their commitment to the peace process
and constructive dialogue so as to definitively achieve
stabilization in Mali.
16/22

06/04/2017

We condemn the attacks carried out by irregular
and terrorist groups against the Malian defence
and security forces as well as MINUSMA through
increasingly sophisticated, complex and lethal means
that collaterally affect civilians, thereby resulting in
deaths and leading to the displacement and movement
of people to neighbouring countries. We also strongly
condemn the use of anti-personnel mines and similar
types of weapons, which continue to jeopardize the
entire civilian population and the defence and security
forces of the Malian Government.
For its part, Bolivia expresses its concern about
violence directed against civilians. According to the
latest report of the Secretary-General, irregular groups
have committed crimes, including sexual abuse directed
against women, girls and boys, and there have been
reports of summary executions, forced disappearances,
the recruitment of children and attacks against
personnel of the United Nations peacekeeping mission.
We demand that the armed groups lay down
their weapons and demobilize. We also urge them to
put aside whatever sectarian differences they might
have that stand in the way of constructive dialogue,
and to solidify previous agreements so as to end the
conflict. Moreover, we value and stress the importance
of the Government of Mali’s tireless search for a
process leading to reconciliation, pacification and
understanding through inclusive dialogue that will lay
the foundations for stability. We call on MINUSMA
to continue to work with the Government of Mali to
achieve those goals and in greater coordination with
it in the framework of respect for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Mali.
Finally, Bolivia is aware of the difficult process that
the brotherly country of Mali is going through, which
has not led to the stability and peace that it needs. We
therefore urge donor countries, regional organizations
and the international community, in general, to continue
to actively contribute to finding the appropriate means
necessary to achieve the disarmament, demobilization
and definitive reintegration of armed groups through
political initiatives, pacification and support for a final
reconciliation process for the Malian people.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Allow me first
to express our sincere condolences to our French
colleagues on the loss of the soldier who was engaged
in peacekeeping operations in Mali.
17-09288

06/04/2017

The situation in Mali

We welcome the presence of His Excellency
Mr. Abdoulaye Diop in the Chamber. We congratulate
Jean-Pierre Lacroix on his new appointment and wish
him every success in discharging his duties and offer
him our support. We thank him for his update based on
his visit to Mali.
I would like to raise several key priorities given that
the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
is scheduled to end in three months.
Kazakhstan notes the efforts taken by the Malian
Government in implementing the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, signed in June
2015. However, since tensions continue to prevail, we
encourage continued dialogue so as to reduce tensions
among armed groups and the consequent instability
that they cause. It is therefore necessary to engage
them in the peace process so as to integrate them in
State structures.
In particular, the mixed patrols by Malian security
forces and insurgents in Gao that have taken place since
23 February could gradually be extended. Similarly, the
work of the interim administration in the three cities
of Kidal, Gao and Timbuktu needs to be reinforced
to advance the Peace Agreement. Attempts by armed
groups to derail the peace process must be prevented by
vigorously implementing the process of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration.
Our country stands in full agreement with the
opinion of the African Union (AU), the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
United Nations and the European Union, as it was
expressed in their joint statement of 7 March, that
putting the Peace Agreement within the framework of
the Algiers process is the only way to establish lasting
peace. The commendable mediation role of Algeria
must be fully supported with a focus on furthering the
political settlement as the ultimate solution.
Kazakhstan reiterates its support for the efforts of
the AU, ECOWAS and the countries of the Sahara and
Sahel region to strengthen border security and regional
cooperation. A regional strategy is the most effective
means of achieving the latter. We therefore encourage
the States members of the Group of Five for the
Sahel — Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania and the
Niger — to proceed with the establishment of a regional
force to combat terrorism and transnational crime.

S/PV.7917

We join others in strongly condemning the
violent attacks perpetrated by terrorist groups against
civilians, humanitarian workers, Malian security
forces, MINUSMA and French personnel. The
emergence of five jihadi entities under the Group for
the Support of Islam and Muslims has significantly
increased the terrorist threat in the country and in the
region. As Chair of the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011)
and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da’esh) Al-Qaida
and associated individuals groups undertakings and
entities, Kazakhstan strongly urges international
security forces and the Malian armed forces to upgrade
their anti-terrorist capabilities.
Such a destabilizing situation means that the
international community must find ways to strengthen
the Malian security forces with financial and technical
assistance. The recent decision of the European Union
to extend its Capacity Building Mission in Mali until
18 January 2018 is hailed as a prudent strategy. The
Mission greatly contributes to security sector reform.
The fragile security situation with an increase
in inter-ethnic violence has led to the deterioration
of human rights, which should be addressed by the
Council. Addressing the grievances and frustrations
of different communities, and especially the youth at
risk that are not benefiting from the peace agreement in
their daily lives, including those who could be recruited
by violent groups, is a related issue.
We pay tribute to the brave men and women of
MINUSMA for their sacrifice, and we thank the troopand police-contributing countries for their personnel, as
well as the countries that have provided much-needed
military-technical equipment, such as helicopters and
armoured personnel carriers.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his
briefing, and Minister for Foreign Affairs Diop for
coming here today. Mali’s support for the objectives
of United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) is essential.
We appreciate his interest in personally sharing his
Government’s views with us.
Later today, the Security Council will hear a
briefing from the Secretary General on United Nations
peacekeeping. My message will be that we need to

17-0928817/22

S/PV.7917

The situation in Mali

give peacekeeping missions mandates that they can
actually achieve. We need to see host Governments and
peacekeepers working together to make life safer for
people on the ground. We need to make sure that we
have the backs of peacekeepers when they cannot do
their jobs. And we need to make sure missions have
benchmarks for accountability.
We will have a lot more to say this afternoon
about peacekeeping, but the Mission in Mali is a
key example of where the United States believes the
Security Council needs to take a hard look. This is the
world’s most dangerous peacekeeping mission. We are
putting troops in harm’s way, asking them to patrol
deserts where Al-Qaida thrives. The United States is
deeply grateful to the courageous troop contributors,
and we condemn, in the strongest terms, the cowards
who continue to threaten them.
But the Mission today faces two critical problems.
The first is that in far too many parts of Mali there
is no peace for the Blue Helmets to keep. It has been
almost two years since the Government and armed
groups signed a peace agreement. The United States
welcomes the installation of three of the five interim
authorities in Mali’s northern regions, but we still see
delay after delay in actually implementing the peace
agreement. The Government is absent from many parts
of the country, thus providing few services despite the
humanitarian needs of Mali’s people. Violence is getting
worse, armed groups are not laying down their arms
and terrorist groups are deepening their cooperation
with each other. We therefore have peacekeepers on
the ground to support a peace agreement that is not
gaining traction.
The second problem is that the Mission’s equipment
is simply not up to standard. The force has a mandate
to make its presence felt to counter the influence of
extremist and armed groups, but chronic equipment
shortages force the peacekeepers in Mali to curtail
their operations. Consider these examples. Even as the
threat from improvised explosive devices grows, the
force is operating with just 62 per cent of the armoured
personnel carriers it is supposed to have deployed.
Without enough carriers, the peacekeepers cannot
patrol much beyond their bases in the places where
Mali’s people are most desperate for the help of the
United Nations. In the second half of 2016 just 10 per
cent of patrols in the Mission’s dangerous western
sector were medium- or long-range patrols. That means
18/22

06/04/2017

peacekeepers in Mali are not able to be present in areas
where the extremists thrive.
Another problem is the Mission’s helicopter
shortages. Many of the force’s bases are in very remote
areas. Without helicopters, peacekeepers in Mali must
rely on treacherous roads to reach those bases. The lack
of helicopters means medical evacuation response times
are far too high when peacekeepers get into trouble.
That is a dangerous situation but, if we act urgently,
there is hope. We can and we must do better. We need to
start with the political process. That is why I appreciate
the Foreign Minister’s presence here today. The United
States knows that Mali’s Government can do more to
implement the peace agreement.
We call on the Government to immediately focus
on extending the authority of the State, and for all
three signatory parties to the accord to live up to their
commitments to stop the violence. That will make
Mali safer and more stable. We can also work harder
to address the Mission’s shortfalls. The resources are
out there. While peacekeepers in Mali are desperate for
additional armoured personnel carriers, peacekeepers
in southern Lebanon have many times more than Mali,
with much less need. Countries have pledged more
equipment to Mali’s peacekeepers. The United States
urges those countries to follow through as quickly as
possible. The Mission’s troop contributors must also
live up to their commitments to give their troops the
necessary training and equipment to operate in those
tough conditions.
Finally, our conversations in the Security Council
about the peacekeeping Mission in Mali cannot be only
about equipment. The Mission’s mandate has to be
reasonable and achievable. That is why, in the coming
months, the United States will be taking a careful look
at the force’s mandated tasks and the distribution of its
personnel. I am sure that the Council can agree that
peacekeepers in Mali need to be prepared to succeed.
We want a mandate that helps the Mission play a
more effective role. Peacekeepers in Mali operate in
very challenging circumstances, but their mission is
essential. They put their lives on the line every day to
help Mali’s people. By working together, the Council,
troop contributors and supporters in the international
community can help this peacekeeping operation make
real progress towards supporting peace in Mali. We
have no time to waste.
17-09288

06/04/2017

The situation in Mali

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
International Cooperation and African Integration of
the Republic of Mali.
Mr. Diop (Mali) (spoke in French): It is always with
renewed pleasure that I address the Security Council
for the review of the quarterly report (S/2017/271) of
the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali. With me
here today is Mr. Mohammed El Mokhtar, Minister for
National Reconciliation and of the Diplomatic Council
of the President of the Republic of Mali .
Mali’s delegation takes note of the report of the
Secretary-General and thanks Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations Lacroix for his
presentation of the report.
Since the Council’s review of the SecretaryGeneral’s previous report (S/2016/1137) on the situation
in Mali, in January (see S/PV.7864), significant
progress has been made in the areas of policy, security,
the restoration of State authority throughout the
country, the protection of human rights, development
and humanitarian action. I am pleased that the report
underlines that progress and acknowledges the efforts
made by the Government in that regard — under the
leadership and firm commitment of Mr. Ibrahim
Boubacar Keita, President and Head of State of the
Republic of Mali.
In his New Year’s address to the nation, the
President announced important measures for 2017,
within the framework of the implementation of the
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
Today I am pleased to confirm to the Council that
in addition to the many institutional measures under
way, the conference for national harmony, which took
place from the 27 March to 2 April in Bamako, has
concluded successfully. This was an opportunity for the
children of Mali to come together, and the conference
lived up to its promise: it was fully inclusive, as all
Mali stakeholders were able to set out together on the
path to peace and national reconciliation, including the
Government of Mali, the Coordination des mouvements
de l’Azawad, the Platform coalition of armed groups,
the majority and opposition political parties, and all of
the active forces in the country. Discussions were frank,
open and in-depth, in a spirit of complete of freedom of
speech, in keeping with article 5 of the agreement, and

S/PV.7917

resulted in relevant recommendations that will form the
foundation for the elaboration, under the auspices of the
President of the Republic, of a charter for peace, unity
and national reconciliation.
Another major step in the implementation of the
agreement was the compromise reached by the parties
at the high-level meeting of the Agreement Monitoring
Committee held on 10 February to establish interim
authorities for all regions in the north of Mali. The
interim authorities were already effectively put in place
on 28 February in Kidal and on 2 March in Gao and
Ménaka. Pursuant to the consultations conducted by
the high representative of the President of the Republic
in charge of the implementation of the agreement, we
hope to see the establishment of interim authorities in
Timbuktu and Taoudenni on 13 April, God willing.
In the area of defence and security, the Government
of Mali has taken the necessary measures to
operationalize mixed patrols. The terrorist attack
against the Operational Coordination Mechanism in Gao
on 18 January, as terrible as it was, in no way weakened
the resolve of the Malian parties to ensure a successful
outcome to the process. Security-sector reform is also
under way, as are the cantonment and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) processes.
In parallel, the process of reviewing the Constitution
is also under way. The goal here is to focus on the
relevant provisions of the peace agreement, in particular
through the establishment of a second chamber in
Parliament. The Government has already forwarded to
the National Assembly a draft law on this issue, which,
once adopted by the national representation, will then
be submitted to the people of Mali via referendum by
the end of the year.
Above and beyond these measures, the Government
is continuing its development efforts on the ground, when
security conditions allow, through such programmes
as the emergency programme for development in the
north of the country and the programme for economic
reconstruction and recovery.
These progress that I have just described was made
possible, as I mentioned earlier, thanks to the leadership
and the resolute personal commitment of the President
of the Republic of Mali and by the gradual rebuilding
of trust among the stakeholders in Mali. Nonetheless,
these still-fragile accomplishments should not make
us lose sight of the many challenges still facing the
process. These include issues related to the mobilization

17-0928819/22

S/PV.7917

The situation in Mali

of resources for the effective implementation of the
agreement and for the cantonment and DDR processes;
the restoration of State authority throughout the territory
of Mali, as Council members have just mentioned,
which is a strategic objective of very high importance
for the Government of my country; and the provision
of a peace dividend to the people who live in regions
affected by the crisis, basically all of the Malian people,
who are suffering from the effects of the crisis.
The security situation in central Mali is also a
source of concern for the Malian authorities. In order
to rise to the challenge, we have taken the following
three measures.
The first measure is the adoption of an integrated
security plan for these regions aimed at ensuring the
presence and operationalization of public administration
at all levels as well as basic social services, and to
enable us to combat the proliferation of light weapons as
well as coordinate, monitor and assess the strategy for
fighting insecurity and terrorism in the central region.
The second measure aims to operationalize
traditional mechanisms for conflict prevention and
management, and the third is the creation of a team of
judges who will work with traditional leaders in the
framework of transitional justice. The implementation
of these measures will require substantial support from
all of the members of the Council and all partners.
Ten months after the adoption of resolution 2295
(2016), I wish to note that that the relevant provisions
of the resolution are, unfortunately, still difficult to
implement on the ground, in particular because of
the gaps that Council members have just underscored
related to the operational capacities that the Mission
requires in order to properly discharge its mandate.
Here I would like to underscore the need for the
Council to provide the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
with the means necessary for it to fully carry out its
stabilization mandate in Mali and also to help the
Government in its efforts to gradually establish State
authority throughout the country’s territory.
In this regard, we welcome the announcement made
by Ambassador Seck of Senegal of the deployment of
the rapid-reaction force within MINUSMA, made up
of a Senegalese contingent. I also wish to underscore,
as several Council members, including China, Egypt,
Kazakhstan and Senegal, have done, the need to
20/22

06/04/2017

strengthen the capacity of the Malian security and
defence forces. Indeed, regardless of the nature of the
mandate, it is the Government of Mali and the Malian
defence and security forces, which face no limitations
in terms of mandate or timeline, that must accomplish
the work on the ground. Today our forces are the ones
on the front lines of the fight against terrorism and the
ones suffering the highest casualties, so it is extremely
important to view this issue in parallel with that of the
strengthening of the Mission itself.
I wish also here to reiterate our appeal to all partners
to honour the commitments they have undertaken in
order to promote the peace process in Mali.
One of the major challenges facing the
implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali remains the upsurge of attacks by
terrorist groups, violent extremists and drug traffickers
against the civilian population; against the Malian
defence and security forces, as I just mentioned; against
the international forces; and, most recently, against the
signatory movements, which are increasingly becoming
targets for terrorists.
We are confronting the terrorist challenge along
with the countries of the Sahel region and the rest
of the world, as this challenge and threat is global in
nature. The Security Council is well informed, as was
mentioned by an eminent member of the Council, about
the situation in Libya and the threat that this presents
for the Sahel region. The Council last month visited
the Lake Chad basin region and witnessed the gravity
of the situation in Cameroon, Nigeria, the Niger and
in Chad owing to the activities of the Boko Haram
terrorist organization.
To deal with this worrisome security challenge, the
Heads of State of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5
Sahel) decided, during their second ordinary summit
held in Bamako on 6 February, to create a joint force
to fight terrorism, transnational organized crime and
illegal immigration throughout the G-5 Sahel territory.
In its capacity as current Chair of the G-5 Sahel, Mali is
coordinating this process in order to establish this force
as quickly as possible. Its strategic concept of operations
will be considered during the week of 13 April by the
African Union Peace and Security Council, which will
then submit it to the Security Council for approval.
Once the Security Council receives the concept of
operations, I strongly hope it will quickly address this
issue and authorize without delay the deployment of
17-09288

06/04/2017

The situation in Mali

this joint G-5 Sahel force, with the financial support
of the United Nations and partners of Mali, which is
necessary for its functioning. I welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s support for the establishment of the force,
which will work in close coordination, in perfect
harmony and in full complementarity with MINUSMA,
the Barkhane force and all the countries, institutions
and partners involved in the region. I would also like to
say that the goal of the Heads of State of the G-5 Sahel
is not to become involved in an endless war. We believe
that, by engaging in this fight against terrorism, we are
creating an environment that will be more conducive
to the success of MINUSMA in carrying out its work.
By doing this, we are fully aware that we are becoming
part and parcel of the implementation of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. The force,
therefore, can only create the conditions for better
implementation of all the commitments undertaken by
the all the parties.
With regard to the human rights situation referred
to in paragraphs 33 to 40 of the report of the SecretaryGeneral, the Government of Mali took note of the
statistics provided. It should be recalled that the majority
of cases of alleged violations that have been documented
and attributed to the Government have been carried out
in areas in which judicial and investigative units are
absent owing to the lack of security. In any event, I
reiterate the determination of the Malian authorities to
take all necessary measures to prevent and, if necessary,
punish proven cases of human rights violations. In that
regard, I should say that, at this stage, we are dealing
only with leads and only an investigation on the ground
can allow us to establish the facts and gradually bring
the perpetrators to justice.
I would not want to conclude without conveying the
warm congratulations of the Government of Mali to the
delegation of the United States of America on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council. We wish you,
Madam President, every success as you preside over
the Council. My congratulations also go to the United
Kingdom for its outstanding steering of the work of
the Security Council during the past month, one of the
highlights of which was the adoption of resolution 2347
(2017), on the protection of cultural heritage. Mali,
which has been a victim of the destruction of part of its
cultural heritage during the occupation of its northern
regions, of course became co-author of that resolution,
which was initiated by France and Italy, to whom I
pay tribute.

S/PV.7917

I would also like to commend the work carried out by
Mr. Hervé Ladsous, former Under-Secretary-General,
during the six long years in which he led the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations. At the same time, I would
like to congratulate Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix on the
trust placed in him by the Secretary-General when he
was put at the head of Department of Peacekeeping
Operations. I would like to assure him of the full
cooperation of the delegation of Mali in the carrying
out his mission. I am pleased to express, once again,
the gratitude of the people and Government of Mali to
the United Nations; the countries and institutions that
are members of the Agreement Monitoring Committee,
presided by Algeria; the troop-contributing countries;
and the international community for the sacrifices they
have made in order to reach a definitive settlement of
the Malian crisis.
I would also like to pay tribute to all the victims
of this crisis — civilian and military, foreigners and
Malians — who died with honour on the battlefield.
Allow me to recall Julien Barbé, a French solider who
lost his life yesterday while carrying out a mission
in Mali. I would like to express to the Council, to
President of France François Hollande and the people
of France the deepest condolences of the President of
the Republic of Mali and all the people of Mali. This is
a tragedy and it once again reminds us of the sacrifices
made by France and many other countries to bring
about stability in our country. We hope that this soldier
will not have died in vain.
Finally, I welcome the efforts of the French
Barkhane forces and the excellent work of the men and
women of MINUSMA, with Special Representative
Annadif Mahamat Saleh at its head, with whom the
Government of Mali has an excellent cooperative
working relationship.
Before concluding, I would like to say that I have
listened to Council members and I understand the
expectations that have been expressed at this table
by members. I also understand the impatience that
every member feels and which is reflected by that of
the people of Mali on the ground, who also want us to
move much more quickly in ensuring the security of
our country, protecting it and ensuring its stability. I
have heard that message loudly and clearly and I will
convey it to the highest authorities in Mali.
I am convinced that we will do everything we can
to continue enjoying the trust that has been placed in

17-0928821/22

S/PV.7917

The situation in Mali

my country and my people by the Council. We hope
that, with God’s help, in the upcoming months and
weeks, we will be able to bring a new dynamism to the
peace process in Mali in order to ensure that peace and
stability spread throughout the region.

22/22

06/04/2017

The President: I would like to thank His
Excellency Mr. Diop for his statement. His presence is
very appreciated, as we all needed to hear his thoughts.
We also want again to congratulate Mr. Lacroix. We all
look forward to working with him as well.
The meeting rose at noon.

17-09288
