UNITED NA nONS

r

!'!

I

NA nONS UNIES

SECURITY

<8i)
~jt?

COUNCIL

OFFICIAl. RECORDS
THIRTEENTH

,

827

YEAR

th MEETISC: 15 JULY 1958
- - ; - - - - - - -

eme SEANCE: 15 JUILLET 1958
TRE1ZIEME

ANNEE

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
DOCUMENTS o FFICIELS
NEW

•

YORK

I

1
TABLE

OF

CONTENTS

Provisional agenda (SjAgenda/827)
,
, . .. . ..
.
Point of order raised by the repre~entaLive of the USSR concerning the cre·
.
dentials of the representative of Iraq .. ,..... .
,
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
Adoption of the agenda
,
letter dated 22 May 1958 irom the representative of Lebanon Lo the Presidclll
of the Security Council concerning " Complaint by J .eounon in respect
of a giluation arising from the interventioll of tlIe United Arab Republic.
in the internal aITairs of Lebanon, the continuance of which is likely to
endanger the maintenance of international peace and securiLy "(S/4007)

TABLE

DES

1

5
()

G

MA T IERES
Page

Ordre du jour provisoire (S/Agenda/827)
"
.
Question d'ordre sOlllevee pDl' le representant de I'URSS et relative aux pouvoirs du representant de I'Irak
, ..
Remerciements au President lSortant
" . .. . .. .. . ..
..
Adoption de l'ordre du jour
'"
, . ". .. ..
Lettre, en date du 22 mni 1958, adressee au President du Conseil de sccurite
pRr le representant du Liball, c.oncernant la question suivante : (( Plainte
du LibaIl; touch ant nne. sitl~ati0J.l creee par Yintervention dl? la Repll.blique
arabe ume dans les a:iTlmes mlerIeures du Llban. et dont la prolongl.lLlOo es
susceptible dE menacer le mahtien de la p£l.ix ct de la seCllrite interna·
tionales » (S/4007)
,
,
,

( 24 p. )

t
5
6

6

S/PV.827

Relevant documents not reproduced in full in the record:; of the meetings
of the Security Council are published in quarterly supplements to the Official
Uecords.
.
.S·ymbol.~ 01 United NatiollS documents are composed 01 capitalieliers combined
with figures. Mention 01 .wch a symbol indicates a reference to a Unifed Nations
document.

•••
Les documents perlinents qui ne sont pas reproduits in extenso daus les
comptes rendus des seances du Conseil de securite sont publies daus des supplements trimestriels aUK Documents ofli-ciels.
Les cotes des documents de i'Organisation des Nations Unies se composent de
lettres majusr,ules et de chiflres. La simple mention d'une cote dans un texte signifie
qu'it s'agit d'un doctunent de i'Organisation.

r

,
)

,

,

,

EIGHT HUNDRED AND TWENTY-SEVENTH MEETING
Held in New Y{)rk, OD Tuesday, 15 July 1958. at 10 a.D!.

I

HillT CENT VINGT-SEPTrEME SEANCE

I

Tenne l1. New-York, le mardi 15 juillet 1958. 8 10 hcureB.

!

lI
,
i

Pre~'idelJl:

President : M. A. ARAUJO (Colombie).

lVIr. A. ARAUJO (Colombia).

Present: The representatives of the following countries: Canada, China, Colombia, France, Iraq, Japan,
Panama, Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist He-pUblics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.

Pn!senL~ : Les reprcsentants des pays suivants :
Canada, Chine, Colombie. France, Irak, Japan, Panama,
Suede, Union des Republiques ~ucialistes sovittiques,
Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagne et d'Irlande du
Nord, Ihats~Unis d'Amerique.

Pl'ovisiousl agenda (S/Agenda{827)

Ordre (Iu jour provisoire (S/Agentlll/827)

.,

,
(
r
f•

1.

Adoption of the agenda.

1.

Adoption de l'ordre du jour.

2,

Letter dated 22 May 1958 from (he representative
of Lebanon to the President of the Security Council
concerning "Complaint by LebanOll in respect of
a situation arising [rom LIte intervention of the
United Arab Republic ill the internat affairs of
Lebanon, the continuance of which h likely 1:0
endanger the maintenance of international peace
and security" (S/4007).

2.

Lettre, en dale du 22 mai Hl58, adressee au President du Consoil de securite par le representant du
Liban, concemant la question suivante : !l Plainte
dll Liban touchaut unc sLtuahon creee par l'intcrvention de la R~.publique arabe unie dans 1es
affaires interieures du Liban, et dont la prolongation est slIsceptible de menaCer le maintien de
la paix et de In secllnM ioternatiollales u (Sf4007).

[

i
)

Question d 'ord.,c soulev6e pal' le representaDl de
l'URSS et I'dative nux pOllvoiril du ft.pr68entant
lie l'Irak

Point of order raised by the representative of the USSR
concerning the ercdential~ of the representative of

Iraq

1

\

I

r

r

I.

1. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I call
upon the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Hepublics on 11 point of order.

1. Le PRESIDENT (ltuduil de l'espagnoJ) : La parole
est all representant de l'Un!oD de.'! Repuhli<IUClI socia~
liste~ sovietiques, qui desire presenter une motion
d'ordre,

2, Mr, SOBOLEV (Union of SDviel- Socialist Hepublies) (lranslaferl from Russian): Before the Council
proceeds to adopt its agenda, I should like to clarify
lhe ql,estion of the Iraqi representative's credential.s.

2. M. SOBOLEV (Union des Republiqlles socialisres
sovictiques) (lraduil du russe] : Avnnt que le Conseil
n'aborde la question de I'adoption de l'ordre rlu jour,
je voudrais elucider la question des pOl1voirs du representant de l' hak.

:~.
It is my understanding that there is Q communication to the dTect that the revolutionary Government
of Iraq has recalled the present representative and has
appointed a new Iraqi re-presentative to Ule United
Nations and to the Security Council I SllOUld like
to have some clarification on this matter.

3, Pour autant que .ie sache, il existe une communication indiquant que le gouvernement revolutionnaire
irakien a rappeJe le representant actuel et nOnlme un
nouveau representant tie l'Irak auprcs de l'Organisation des Nations Unies et du COllscil d~ securite. Je
voudrais obtenil' des precisions sur cc point.

4. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): According to the rules of procedure, questions relating
to the credentiala of members of lhc Council are a
matter for the Secretarv-General of the Organization. I
accordingly call upon the Secretary-General.

4. Le PRESIDENT (lraduil de l'espagnol) : D'apw
le reglement, 1131; questions relatives aux pouvoirs des
memhrf'.~ an Conseil re1cvent dn Sccretaire general de
l'Organisation. En consequence, je donne 111 parole au
Secretaire general.

1

5.

The SECHL:TAHyMGENEHAL: It is COlTect that
wc received (\ communication :ltis mortling regarding
the questio::t of credentials. However, I want to submit
for your consideration the following observations.

5. Le SECRJ<:TAIRE GENERAL (traduil d't l'anMais) : n est exact que n01:S avaIlS re~u ce rnatin une
communication au sujet des pOl:voirs. Je vQudraiscependnnt VOllS soumettre les observations suivant~s ;

G.

The communication is sigmd "!\'Ii:1ister of Poreign
Affairs "j it is not signed by any person. In the second
place, I, as Secretary~Gencral, only have information
which stems from Baghdad Radio concerning thc establishment of II new cabinet. The third point to which
I wish to draw attentiuJ~ i:i that, according to article 5
of the ratified ConstitUlion of the Arab Union: "The
King 01 Iraq shall be the Head of the Union and, in
his absence, the King of Jordan shall be the Head,"

6. La communication est signee « \1inistre des afTail'cs
etrflngere.s ~ -- ell,.; ne parte aucun nom en signature.
Ensuite, en ma qualite de Secre.t8ire general, ie u'ai
re~u d'autres renseignements que ceux que :=tadinBagdad a diffuses touchant la constitution d'un llO\1Veau
cabinet. Enfin, je crois desoil' attirel· l'attention dll
Conseil sur le fait que, aux tennes de l'article G de III
Constitution ratiflee de l'Union arabe, « le roi d'lrnk
est le chef de l'Unioll, ~11 5.on absence, le roi de JOl'danie
le remplace. »

7. We have nOled Lhe dedaraLions made by King
Hussein of Jordan regarding the Government which
at present daims to be the Government in Baghdad,

7, Nons avollS pris note des declarations faites par
le roi I-lnssein de Jordanie Uti sujet dlt gouvcTl1~ment
qui pretend actuellement etre le gouvernement de
Bagdlld.

8. In Lhese circumstances, I have not 1('.It that this
eatle was ir. order as crdentiak

8. Dans ces conditions, il r.e m'a pa~ scmhle que le
telCgramme que nOllS avons re~u con5tiLuait des pouvoirs valahles.
9, .l\I. SDBOLEV (Union des Republiqucs sociaHstcs
sovietiques) [lraduil du russc] : Jc l'cgrctte de ne pouvoir
me declarer entierement cl'accord avec cc que le Secretalre general vielLt de dire au sujet des pouvob du
re:)i(~sentant de l'Irak, Je consLaLe que le Secretaire
general a confirme qu'iI existait une communication
relative :i la designation, pur le Gouverncmcnt irak.iclI,
d'un nouveau representant au Couseit dc se-Cllrite.
]'estime que le ConseiJ de securite devrait examiner
ces nouveaux Jlouvoirs ct les agreer 3elon la procedure
habituelle. Or, le Secreta ire general no us Iournit de.'l
precisions qui, a mon avis, ne corrc.~pondent pas a la
sibation juridique reelle. L'Iwk est un Etat independant, qui n'a aueun rapport avec la Jordanie, et
le roi de Jordanie n'a nul1emcnt le droit de donncr des
instructions au Gouvernement de l'Irak, et a plus
forte r~ison all nOllveau gouvcrncment irakien, qui.
a ueclare qu'iJ avait r~tlverse l'ancien regime pauni
et institue une nouvelle autorite, un gouvernemcnt
tout a fait dillerent de celui qui existait il y a quelqucs
joms seulernent.
10. II va de soi qu'aucune instruction emanant du
roi de Jordanie au sujet de la representation de l'Irak
ne saurait etre valable pour le Conseil de securiM ni
pOt:r 1'0rganisCltic)Q des Nations Unies, lcrsqu'il s'agit
de la representation de l'lrak, regulierement eh: au
Consdl de securite par I'Assemblee generale. La [-lace
de l'lrak au CcnseB de sccuri~e ne peut eke occupee
que par le representant legitime de ce pays, designe
par son gouvernement legitime, qui est en l'occurrence
le gouvernement r6volutionnaire iral{ien, Celui~ci nous
a ullllUflce qu'il avail retlre les pouvoirs au represen:allt
actuel et designe un nouveau representant dont il a
commnnique le nom a l'Organisation des Nat:ons Unies.
Aux termes du reglement interieur, aux tcrmes de la
Charte des Nations Unies, le nOUVc3U representant
desigue I-Jtlr le guuvernement revolutionnaire ira:den
eBt le s.cu) qui puisse sieger au Conseil de securite.
11. Sir Pierson DIXON (Royaume-Uni) [lraduii de
l'anglais] : Pour autant que jc saehe, les pouvoirs de
M, Abbas l'accreditant comme repre~entant df', l'lrak
au Conseil de securite ont eH dument presente.s au

9. Mr. SOBOLEV (Union of Soviet Socialist Hepub~
lies) ([m.nslall'd from Rus,~ian): 1 am afraid that I
cannot entirely agree with what the SEcretary-General
has sai.d hEre cor.ceming the Iraqi represClltativE's
credentials. I note that the Secretary-General has
confirmed the existence of a communication concerning
the Iraqi Government's appointment of a n('w representative to the Security Council. ] think that it
would be appropriate {or the Security Council to exaM
mine these new credentiah and duly to confirm them,
On tlte other hand t)lC Secretary-General has given
us explanations which. in my opinion, do not accorn
with the legal situation. lraq is an independent State,
having no relation to ,Jordan, and the King ot Jordan
has no right to give instructions to the Government
of Iraq, especially to the new Government of that
country, which has dedarcd that it has overthrown
the old, rotten regime and set up a ncw authority and
which has quite a different composition from that
of the Government ill pDwer only a few days ago.

to. It is sclf-evided that neither the Security Council,
nor tile United Nations can regard as valid any instruc~
tions from tbe King of Jordan conecrning the repre-.
sentation of Iraq, a country which has legally been
elected by the General Assembly to the Security
Council. lraq'~ senl; in the Security Council can b~
occupied only by the legal representative of that country, appointed by the legal Government of Iraq, At
the present l.~me, tIle legal Government is the revolu~
tionary Iraqi Government. Tt has declared that it
has withdrawn the credentials of the present representative, it has appoinLed a new representative and it
has scnt his name to the UnitcJ Nations. Ir. accor~
dance with the rules of procedure and with the United
Nations Charter, only the new Iraqi representative,
appointcd by the r()volutionary Government of Iraq,
is entitled to take his place in the Security Council.
11. Sir Pienon D IXON (United Kingdom): I: is my
understanding that the credentials of Mr, Abbas as
the representative of Iraq in the Security Council
have been duly presented to the ~ceretary.General.
2

£

There is no doubt that the Government which bsued
these credentials was the legitimate Government of
Iraq. In the ,iew of my Government and my delegation, therefore, Mr. Abbas became fully entitled
under rule 16 of our rules of procedure to h.ke his seat

in t.he Council with the same rights as other representatives. He has taken his seat under the authortty
of this rule. and it is quite clear to me that under rule
17 he may continue to sit unless objection to his credentials has been sustained by a vole of this Council.
That seems to me to be the position.

,,
•

i

- ,

,
f'

,

.
•

.\',....

--

r
I,

ir

a

12. The representative of the Soviet Union has objected
on the ground that the lawful Government of Iraq
was overthrown ycsterdBy by revolution. Firm information is awaited about tIle situation in Iraq, but
my Government does not recognize any other authority
as lhe lawful Government in Iraq with the right to
appoint a representative to the Council. In our view,
therefore, the objection :0 the represenlative of Irar;'s
eredelltials should not be upheld nor should we pursue
the question 01 the alleged credentials of the alleged
representative of the revolutionary government.

12. Le representant de l'Union sovietique a objecte
que le gouvenement irakien legitime avait et6 renverse
hier par In revolution. Nous atlendons des renseignemenLs deflnitifs sur la situation en lrak, mais mon
gouverncmen: ne rccollnait 2ucune autre autorite
comme gouvernement irakien legitime ayant le droit
de llommer un representant au ConseiJ. A notre avis,
par consequent, le ConseL! ne dOLt lli appuyer les
objections soulevees contre les pouvoirs du representant
de l'Irak ni poursuivre l'examen des pretendus pouvoirs
du pretendu representant du gonvernemellt revolutionnaire.

13. Mr. ILLUECA (Panama) (translated from Spani.5h):
In the opinion of my de]~gation, the Secretary-General
has set forth very clearly the position with regard t.o
the credentials I)f the representative of the Government
of Iraq.
H. In connexion with the observations made by tIle
representative of the Soviet Union, I would like to
comment briefly on the position confronting the representatives here present. My delegation considers that
the change of government in Iraq was r.ot brought
about by constitutional means. TlIat fact has been
stated very clearly by n.e Soviet Union representatiYe.
The new Government is a revolutionary government,
n'de facto government, a government whicll has not
been July recoguized, I believe, by any of the governments represented here. In the circumstances, no
objection to the creder.tials of the representative of
Iraq can validly be made at this stage. 1 would like
to place on recDrd the pDsition of my delegation, which
f~els bound to consider the present representative of
Iraq as the legitimate rcpresentative of the Iraqi
Government.

13. M. ILLUECA (Panama) [t1'aduil de l'espagnal] :
De I'avis de ma dclCgation, le Secretaire general a
expose en terrnes clairs la situation en ce qui concerne
les pOllvoirs du representant du GOllveraement iralden.
14. Je voudrais donner un bref aperr,:u, en reponse
aux observations du representant de I'Ullion sovietique,
de la posil:ion des deIegntions ici presentcs. MDn gouvernement estillle que le changement de gouvem<::HIJ.tml
qui ;;'est opere en lrak ne s'est pas fait selon un processus
constitutionnel. C'est ce qu'a dit sans ambigulte le
representant de l'Union sovh3Lique. Il s'agit d'un gouvernement rl!volutionnaire, d'un gDuverncment de fait,
qui n'a ete do'ment recounu par aucun, je crois, des
gouvernements id repre:r.entes. Dans ces conditions,
Ies pouvoirs du representant de l'Irak ne peuvent
valablement etre contestes. Je tiens a dire que ma
delegation m ~al.lrajt cUllsiderer comme reprt~scrttant
legitime du Gouvernement iralden que I'actuel repre·
sentant de l' [rak.

15. M. SOBOLEV (Union des ReplJbliques socialistes
sovietiques) [lraduil du rassel : Nous avons entendu
certaines delegations emettre des doutes sur le point
de savoir si le nouveau f:(ouvernement irakien a designe
un Ilouveau representant tt I'Organisation des Nations
Unies. Alin qu'aucun cloute r.e subsiste, je me permcttrai de donner lecture d'une communication que
possedent certainemcllt aussi taus les autres membres
du Conseil de securite. Celte communication emane
de Beyrouth et cUe est datee de cc jour. EUe est ainsi
conr,:ue :
(( Le nouveau gouvernemellt de l'Irak a demande
que la seance d'urgenee du Conseil de securite des
Nations Unies preVlle pour Cl'. jour soit renvuyee
j.lsqu'a cc qu'un nouveau representant de l'lrak
puisse arriver a New-York.
~ One eXlission de la radio de Bagdad a annonce
que le guuvernement revolutionnnire avait decide

15. Mr. SOBOLEV (UniDn of Soviet Socialist Repcblics) (translaid from Russian): Douuts have been
expressed here that the new Iraqi Government has
appoiuted a new rcpresentative to the United Nntlous.
In order to dlsyel these doubts, I shall take the liberty
of reading a communication which, r am sure, all the
other members of the Security Council have also received. This is a communication of ti)day's date
from Beirut and it reads as follows:

I

.-"

Secretaire general. Il ne fait aueun doute que le gouverncment de qui emanent ees pouvoirs Hait le gouvernement irakien legitime. ·Mon gouvernement et ma
delegation estiment done: que M. Abbas etait pleinement
en droit, eOnformement a I'article 16 du reglement
interieur, de venir sieger an CanseL! avec les me-mes
droits que leg autres reprcseutan1.':;. Il a occupe son
siege en vertu de cet article et il est tout it fait evident,
roes yeux, qu'en vertu de l'article 17 il peut contb.uer
a ~ieger si Ies objections soulevecs contre ses pouvoirs
ne sont pas confirmee5 par un vote du Conseil. Telle
me ,emble etrc la situation.

.' The new Government of Iraq asked for a postponement of today'~ scheduled emergency United
Nations Security Council meeting until a new Iraqi
delegate can arrive in New York.
" A Baghdad radio broadcast said the revolutionary
Government had decided to recall Abdul-Majid

3

AbbilS, the IJI'eSell[ Iraqi LJliled Natiolls ddegatt'.
who represents t\le King Faisal Government, and
Lo send Hashim .Jawad to :'!ew York instead." 1

de l'appeler Abdlll-i\Iajid Abbas, le rcprcsentanl
aciuel de rIral{ 3upres de l'Organisatioll des Natiom
Unies, qui representait le gouvernement du l'oi Faisal,
et d'envoyer Hashim Jawad a New-York u sa
place 1. ))

Hi. '11111s it is perfectly clear from this communication,
which was to some extent confirmed by the SecretaryGeneral, that the Jrflqi Government Ik'lS taken such
action and that it would be appropriatll for th~ Security
Council [:0 give that action dUi: conside.ration,

16. 11 ressort donc clain:ment de eelte eomlllunicatiull.
qui, d'ailleurs, a ete conlirmee en qllelquc sortc par k
Secretaire general, qu'une telle mesurc a etlS Ilrise par ItGouvernement irakiel\, IlL It:: COllseil de st\:urUl\ ser:lit
donc bien inspire en cOllSacrant a ceLLe aclioll llu GUll-vernement irakien l'atLention qu'cJle mcrite.

17. It is ~clf~evidcnt that neither the Sccl'~lfJ.ry­
General, nor the Security Council, nor the King of
Jordan nre entitled 1:0 ~peak on behalf of the Iraqi
people or the Iraqi Government. Only the Iraqi
people and the Iraqi Government have the right to
appoint or recall their representatives la organs of
the United Nations and, in this case, to tile Security
COllncil.

17. Jl va de soi que ni le Sccn\tairc gcncrnl, ni 11Conseil de sceurite, ni le roi de Jordftnie, n'rmt le droit
de parler au nom du peuple Oll Ull gouvernemcnt de
l'Irak. Seuls le peuple et le gouvcrnement d'Irak oul
le droit de designer ou de rappeler leurs representants
aupres des organes des Nations Unies et, notllmmcal,
du Conseil de securite.

18, Doubts have also been ex.pressed here concerning
the fact that the new Iraqi Government has not yet
been reco!4nized by many other Governments. As you
fire aWl1rc this is not unusual in the case of revolutionary governments; some time elapses before they
can obtain the recognition they deserve. The repre~
selltativc of Panama must know this from the experience of many Latin American StAle", where governments are quite often changed by revolutionary means
or by means which do not always correspond with
the constitutiafi8 of the States in question,

18. Certains doutes cxprimcs id out cglllclllcnt {ill:
motives par le fait que le nouveau gOllvernement irakicll
n'a pas encore ete reconnu par un grand nomlJre
d'autres gouvemements. On sait qu'il en est souveni
ainsi dans le cas de gouvernements revulutionnaires.
Un eerlain temps s'ecoule avant que ees gouv[~rnemenL~
soient d-ument reconnl1S. Le representant du Panama
le sait probablement d'apres l'expcrience de nombreux:
Etals de l'Amerique latine OU les gouvcrnemellls
changent assez souvent par les voks revolutjonnaire,~
ou par d'autres moyens qui ne sont pas toujours
conformes a la constitutioll des Etats en question.

19. It is perfectly clearly established in international
law that a Government does not require recognition
from any given State to function in its Qwn territory.
It has the sovereign right to decide who should represent it in any organ or in any organization.

19. Le droit international stipule de. falion p<lrf:litemcnt
claire que, pour s'acquitter de ses fonctions sur SOIl
propre territoirc, aucun gouvernement n'a besoin d'etTl\
reconllu par tel ou tel autre gou vernement. Un gouvernement a le droit souverain de decider qui le reprcsentera aupres de tel ou tel org:lne ou de telle ou telle
organisation.

20. I think it would be advisable for the Security
Council in this case also to act in accordance with the
Charter and in accordance with the recognized usages
and norm~ of international law.

20. Je pense que le Conseil de securite dcvrait ell
l'occllrrcnce agir conformement a la Charte, nux usage5
admis et aux regles etabHes du droit international.

21. The Soviet delegation considers that the creDentials of the Iraqi representative who is naw sitting
at the Security Council table are invalid and tllat
Mr. Abbas has no right to represent Iraq in the Security
Council.

21. La delegation sovietique estime que Ics pouvoirs
du representant de l'Irak qui siege actuellement a la
table du Conseil de seeurite ne sont plus valables el
que M. Abbas n'a pas le droit de representer l'Irak au
Conseil de sccurite.

22. Mr. ILLUECA (Panama) (translated from Spanish):
The representative of the Soviet Union has made
certain comments which call for a brief reply on my
part. His remarks on the Latin American democracies arf indeed true, but the peoples o[ Latin America are conducting an intensive struggle to forge their
own destiny and they are able to effect popular changes
of government which, fortunately for our hemisphere,
are not drenched with blood by foreign interve.ntion..

22. M..ILLUECA (Panama) [Iraduil de l'espagnol] :
Le representant de rUnion sovietique a formulc
quel9ues observations qui appeUent une reponse
s~ccmcte. de notre part. L'allusion qu'il a faite aux
de~ocratles lutino-americaincs e~l Lout it, fait justifiee,
malS les peuples d'Amerique latine s'empldcmt a
f~rger lenr propre destin, et il leur est possible de ren~
h~er des changements gui, heureusement pour notre
hemIsphEre, ne se tradwsent pas par des effusions de
sang, resultat d'interventions etrangeres.

t

The spellker nad the qUlltation in English.

I Texte cite en auglais par l'orateuL

4

=

•
•

•

·

'.

,.'

•

•
•
. ,

•

'.
I

.-,

...

43. I would, however, like La refer spec:ili!jally to Llle
matter of the credentials attd say that my deleg~tion
is nnxiollS to sec due processes of law observed.

23. Mai~ je voudrais ell venll' :l la question pl'eci!ic
des pouvoirs, et declarer que ma dcleg<ltion suubaite
vivement qnc ron se conforrnc a la procedure juridiqu('
normale.

24. The Soviet Union representative referred in his
statement to various points, of which l would like to
mention twu, He referred in the first [llnee to a COlllw
lnllnication fmm the revolutionary Government in
Iraq requesting Q postponement uf two days. Tllere
is obviously no need to enter [It Lhis stage into a diseussion un the question of credentials, silll~e the two-dflY
postp01H'.ment has nut been granted and the COI\l1cil
lm'i to follow thl' normal procedure ulld proceed with
it~ meeting.

24. Des diverses questions que' le representant de
l'Unioll sovietique a soulevces dans SOll intervention,
j'en l'eliendrai deux. D'une part, il a fait etat cl'une
communication cmanant du gouV!'.rn.ement revolutionnaire d'[rak et dClllandant un Mlai de deux jour!;.
II est evident <ill'a l'lleure acluelle il n'y a nhsolument
aUCllne raison d'entamer un tIcbat sur la qllestion des
pOllvoirs, aim's que Cl'. delai de deux jours a ete refuse
et que le Conseil dail, scion la procedure normale,
poursuivre ses travau:,:,

25. The other point Lo which tlie Soviet Cnion representative rcferrec!, in very clear terms. was the fact
thaL, in general, when a non-collstitutional or revolutionary change of government tal,es place, foreign
governments have a rt[lsonable waiLing period in which
Lo recognize Lhc new government. Why has it beeolll~
accepted international practiee for all governments Lo
allow this reasonable waiting period to elapse? Th..;
ptlrpose is to enable the new government wilieh has
taken over power by revolutionary and non-constitutional means, to demonstrate that it is in a position
to fulfil its international obligatiolls and to maiuhin
order in it~ territory.

25. D' atttre part, le representant de l' Union sovictiquc
a declare nettement qtle, lorsqll'il se prodllit un changement de gouvemement s~lon une procedure non
prevue dans la constitution, un changement revolutionnaire, 0<1 laissc /:il~llcl'alemCnl s'ecouler un certain
laps de temps pour permettre aux gouvcrnements
etrangers de recunnaltre le nouveuu gOllvernemcnt.
Ponrquoi c~ del ai, que - les faits le montrent - tous
les gouvernernents obscrvcnt? Paree qu'il faut que le.
nouveau gouvernement, qUi a pris le pouvoir selon
un processus revolutionnaire, donc non conforme a la
constitution, pruuve au monde qu'il est ~ meme dc
remplir ses engagemcnLs internationaux et dc maintenir
l'ordre sur SOil territoire.

26. Since this period has nol elapsed and since no
clear rclevant information is available, it would seem
that Mr. Soholcv is asking the Conncil to take up a
matter which is OlLt of order.

2U. Cc delai n'est pas ecollle, et ron ne dispose d'aucull
renseignement ~Qr et precis, Il sembie donc que M. Sobolev jnvitc le Con~ci! a se ccnS<lcrcr a l'examen d'unc
question qui sort du cadre de la discussion.

27. I wonld tllcrefore ask the President to rule that
wc continut' with the consideratioll of our agenda, for
the very statement of the So\,jet Union representative
shows clearly that no positive results can be achieved
at thi", meeting as there can at present be no question
of senting any other representativlO.

27. C'est pourquoi je voudrais prier le Presjdenl dc
decider de poursuivre l'examen de l'ordre dn jour, car
iI re880rt d~s paroles m~mes du representant de l'Union
sovietiquc q\te nous ne par.,,'iendrons a ll\lcune conclusion positive an CaUl's de ceUe seance: il n'est nullement
question, it neure actuelle, d 'acClleillir ici un autre
representant.

'lB. The PRESIDENT (/ranslated jrnm Spanish): In
view of the report submitted by the SecreLary-General
and in accordance with rule 17 of the provisional rules
of procedure of tlle Security Council, I consider that
we should continue with our agenda for the meeting,
unless any member of the Council wishes the qllestion
of credentials raised by the Sovkt Union representative
to be put to the vote.

28. Le PHESIDENT (lraduil de l'cspagnol) : Compte
tenn dll rapport du Sccretaire general et confol'memcnt
a l'm'licle 17 d\l reglemenL du Conseil, j'esUme que
nails devons poursuivre l'cxamen de I'ordre du jour,
it mains qll'lln memhre du Conseil ne juge opportun
de mettrc aux voix la question des potlvoirs soulevec
par le representant de I'Union sovietique.

2G. Since there is no objection, I ass\tme that the
Council agrees to proeeed with the examination of its
agenda.
II WQS so decided.

29, En I'absence d'objectioll, je considererai que le
Conseil est d'accord pour passeI' a l'examen de son
ordre du jour.
Il en esl ainsi decide.

Expression of thanks to the retiring PI'csidcnt

Remereicments IlU Prisident 80rtant

The PRESlDENT (framlaled !mm ,Spanish):
the Council proceeds with the examination of
the agenda of the present meeting, I should like to
take this opportunity of thanking and eongratlllaling
lhe representative of China, Mr. Tsiang, for the exceptional ability, autllOrity and intelligence with which
he presided over the Council debates during the month
when he was President.

Le PHESIDENT (lraduit de l'cspagIlQl) : AvanL
meme qClc le Conseil ne passe a l'examell de l'ordre dl\
jour de la presente seance, je saisis l'occasion de rendre
hommage et u'rxprimer ma re.COllllaissance au representant de la Chine, M. Tsiang, qui, pendant le mois
au eours duquel il a preside les debaLs du Conseil, a
fait preuve d'une ponderation, d'ulle intelligence et
d'une clairvoyauce remarquables,

:30.

30,

Befor~

5

lIIrmzlll·. .,.

,,
,,

Mr. KIANG (China): Mr. President, I will see to
it that your kind words are conveyed to Mr. Tsiang as
soon as he returns from Washington today. 1 am sure
he will be very grateful for your graciou~ remarks.

31. M. KIANG (Chine) [tradllil de l'anglais] : Monsieur
le Presldent, je veillerai a ce que vos aimables paroles
soient transmiscs a M. Tsiang itl1jourd'hui meme, a.
son retcmr de Washington. Je suis Lertain qu'il y sera
extr~mement sensible.

Adoption of the agcDlla

AdoptiAo de I'ordre du jour

31.

L'OJdre du ;01l1' est adopte.

The agenda wus udopted.
Letter {Iated 22 May 1958 from the representative of
Lebanon to the President of the Secmity Council
concerning .. Complaint by Lebanon in respect of
a l;!ilQluiun nrUiiog from the io.tervention of the
United Arab Republic in the internal affairs uf
Lebanon, the continuance of which is likely to
endmtger the mainremtnce of international peace
and security 1O (Sj40l}7)

Lettre, en Ilate du 22 rnl\i L958, adL'essee au President
du CflQseil de securit6 paL' le repreeentllot do Lihan,
concel'oant la IInestion suivllnte : « Plainte .Iu
Liban touchtlOt one situation creee par I'interven~
lion de la Repulllique w:sbe uwe dan.'! lee affaires
interieul'CS du Liban, et dont la prolongation es:t
susceptible de rnenacer le maintien de la paix et
de J. securite interuationales» (8/4,007)

At the invitation oJ the Presidenl, .'lJr. Karim Azkotll,
represenlative of Lebanon, and Mr. Dmar £olll(l, representative of the United ,tr<l~ RepubU.~, look pllJLes allhr
Council table,

Sur i'invitation dll President, M. Karim Azkoul.
representant du Liban, et M. Omar Loutfi, representant
de la Republique arabe unie, prennent place a la table
du Comeif.

32. Mr. LODGE (United States of Auu;;rica): The
Council meets today to confront difficulties as serious
as any in its history. The territoria: integrity of Lebanon is increasingly threatened by insurrection stimlllated alld assisted from outside. Plots against the
T<ingdom of Jordan which have be:lomc evident over
the past few months are another sign of serious instability in the relations between nations in the Middle
East. And now comes the overthrow in an cxcerr
tionally brutnl and revolting manner of the legally
establi:.hed Government of Iraq.

32. M. LODGE (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) [traduil de
l'anglais] : Le Conseil se reunit aujo'.lfd'hui pour examiner d~s problemes qui SO:lt parmi les plus graves de
ceux dont il a eu a connattre jusqu'iei. L'inh~grile
territoriale du Liban est menacee de plus en plus
serieuselnent par une insurrection encouragee et aidee
par l'etranger. L~s complots contre le Royaume de
Jordanie, qui, au cours de ces derniers fiois, :;ont
devenus evidents, constituent un autre signe de la
grave instabilite des relations entre les nations du
Moyen-Ori.cnt, Et maintenant, voilA que le gall verneffiBllt lraltien Jegalement constitne est rellverse cl'une
maniere exceptionnellement brutale et revoltante.

33. I have just heard this mornbg, before coming
over here, of the murder of our esteemed and popular
colleague from Iraq here in the United Nations,
Mr. Mollf.lmmed Fadhil Al Jamali. Only a few weeks
ago, he was here with us. We heard his voice, we
rejoiced in his humour, we were heartened by his fellowship. Now we learn that he was not only murdered,
but thBt his hody was actually dragged through the
streets of Baghdad. Decent people throughout the
world wherever they may be will recoil at this mow
strosity.

33. Je 'liens d'apprendre <.:e matin, avant de me rendre
au Conseil, l'assa.ssinat de nolre collegue, M. Mohammed
Fadhil Al Jamali, qui fut representant de I'Irak a
l'Organi~ation des Nations Dnies, ou it jouissait d'une
grande estime et cl'une grande popularite. nya quelques
semaines encore, il etait au milieu de nous. Nous entendions sa voix, nons go\)tions son sens de l'humour.
nous etions reconfortes par son amitie, A present,
nous apprenons non sculement gu'il a et~ assassine,
mais que son corps a ete traine dans les rues de Bagdad.
Dans le monde enticr, les etres humains dignes de ce
nom auront un mouvement d'horreur devant cettc
mOllshuosite,

34. In all these circumstances, the President of
Lebanon has asked, with the unanimous authorization
of the Lebanese Government, for the help of Iriendly
Governments so as to preserve Lebanon's integrity
and independence. The United States has responded
positively and affirmatively to this request ill the light
of the need for immediate action, and we wish the
Security Council to be officially advi~ed hereby of this
fact. !rr addition, the Urlited States Government has
under active considerati.oll ~C<.Inomic assistance to help
Lebanon revive its economy.

34. Etant donne ces diverses circonstances, le President du Liball a demande, avec l'autorisation unanime
du GOlwernement libanais, l'aide de gouvernements
amis afm de preserver l'integrite et t'independ&nf,e du
Liban. Les Etats-Unis ont donne une rcponse ferme et
affirmative
cette demande, en prenant en consideration la necessite d'une action immediate. et nous
tenons it ce que le Conseil de securite en soit officiellement informe. En outre, le Gouvernement des EtatsUnis examine de trcs pres la possibilite d'accorder
une aide ceonomique au Liban pour l'aider a ranimer
son economie.

35. Onr purpose in coming to the assistance of Lebanon
is perfectly clear. As President F.i.~enhower explained
this morning, eur forces are not there to engage in

35. Le but que nous poursuivons en decidant d'apporter notre aide nu Liban est parfaitement <:lair. Comme
le president Eisenhower l'a explique ce matin, nouS

a

6

',- .,

•

'.

.'
"
,.'
,

10

.'

'.

, ~-

.
,

'

....

hostilities of any kind, much less to fight a war. Their
presence is designed for the sole purpose of helping
the Government of Lebanon at its request in its efforts
to stabilize the situation brought on by the threats
from outside, until sucll time as the United Nations
can take the steps necessary to protect the independence
and political integrity of Lebanon. They will afTord
security to the several thousand Americans who reside
in that country. That is the total scope and objective
of the United Slates assistance.

n'nvons pas envoye nos forces au Liban pour qu'eHes
participent a des hostibLes quelconques. et encore
mains pour qu'elles prennent part a nne guerre. Lenr
presence est uniquement destinee a alder le Gouvernement libanais, sur sa demande, a stabiliser la situation
creee par les menaces de I'exterieur, en attendant que
l'Organisation des Nations Unies puisse faire le nccessaire pour proteger l'independance et l'inMgrite politique du Liban. Nos troupes assureront la securite de
plusieurs milHers d' Americains qui resident dans co
pays. Tels sont le but et la portce de I'assistance
accordee par les Etats-Unis.

36. Now] need scarcely say that we are the fir"t to
admit that the dispatch of Unitcd States forces to
Lebanon is not an ideal way to solve present problems,
and they will be withdrawn as soon as the United
Nations can lake over. In fact, the United States
Government hopes that the United Nations itself will
soon be able to assume these responsibilities. We
intend to consult with the Secretary~Generaland with
other delegations urgently on a resolution to achieve
these objectives. Until then, the presence of United
States troops in Lebanon will be a constructive contribution to the objectives the Security Council had in
mind when it passed the 11 June resolution dealing
with this problem [S{4023].

30. Mais nous sommes les premiers a admettre, ai~ie
besoin de le dire, que renvoi de forces des Etats~Unis
au Liban n'est pas la solution idCale du probleme
actuel; CBS troupes seTOnt retiree~ des que l'Organi~
sation des Nations Unies sera en mesure d'assurer la
releve. En fait, le Gouvernement des Etats-Unis espere
que l'Organisation pourra bientot assumer elle-m~me
ces responsabilites. Nous nollS propOSOlls de proceder
d'urgence EL des consultations avec leSecretairegeneral
et avec d'autres delegations au sujet d'nne resolution
qui permettrait d'aboutir EL ces resultats. D'ici la, la
presence au Liban de troupes des Etats-Unis dolt servir
positivement les fins que le Conseil de securite avait en
vue lorsqu'il a adopte sa resolution du 11 juin [S{4023].

37, Let me now review the recent history of this
situation. A little over a month ago, the Government
of Lebanon presented a complaint to the Security
Council involving: "a situatioll arising from the intervention of the United Arab Republic in the internal
affairs of Lebanon, the continuance of which is likely
to endanger the maintenance of international peace
and security" [5{4007J.

37. le voudrais a present passer brievement en revue
les faits recents, It y a un peu plus d'un mois, le Gouvernement libanais a depose anpres du Conseil de
securite une plainte touchant 11 une situation creee par
l'intervention de la Republique arabe unie dans les
afIaires iIlterieurcs du Lib~U1, et dont la prolongation
est susceptible de menacer le maintien de la paix et
de la securite internationales), [8{400'7].

38. At that time, various members of the Council
drew special attention to Article 2, paragraph 4 of the
Charter of the United Nations which enjoins all Members to .. refrain in their international relations from
the threal or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any state . . ,"
This was one of the fundamental considerations behind
the resolution adopted by the Council on 11 June
which called for the urgent dispatch of an observation
group to proceed to Lebanoil so as to ensure that there
was no illegal infiltration of personnel or supply of
arms or other matenel across the Lebanese borders.

38. A cette epoque, divers representants ant attire
tout specialement I'attention du Canseil sur le paragraplle 4 de l'Art1cle 2 de la Charte deg Nations Unies.
qui prescrit a tOllS les Membres de l'Organisation de
s'abstenir, [dans leurs relationE; internationales, de
recounr a la menace ou a l'emploi de la force [... ] contre
l'integrite territoriale ou l'independance politique -de
toul Etat l>. C'est la une des considerations esscntielles
qui avaient inspire la resolution du 11 jllin dernier,
dans laquelle le Conseil demandait renvoi d'l1Tgence
d'un groupe d'observation au Liban de fayon qu'ancune
infiltration illegale de personnel ni aucun envoi illegal
d'armes ou d'autre matericl n'aient lieu a travers les
frontieres libanaiscs.

39. The United Nations Observer Group has thus
far been able to achieve limited success. Wc hope
that it will pursue its work in lhe most effective fllld
energetic way possible. Our forces lire being instructed
to co-operate with it Rnd to establish liaison immediately upon arrival.

39. Le Grou~ d'observation des Nations Unies a
obtenu jllsqu'a pr6sent un succes restreint. Nous
esperons qu'il poursuivra son travail aussi efHcacement
et aussi cncrgiquement que possible. Nos troupes ont
pour instructions de cooperer avec lui et d'etablir la
liaison avec lui des leur arrivee.

40. This United Nations Group has helped to reduce
interference from across the border. We learn now,
however, that with the outbreak of the revolt in Iraq,
the infiltration of arms and personnel into Lebanon
from the United Arab Hepublic in an effort to subvert
the legally constituted Government has suddenly
become much more alarming. 1'his development, coupled with persistent efforts over the past months to
subvert the Government of Jordan, must be a cause

40, Le Groupe d'observation des Nations Unies a
contribue a lillliter les intrusions qui se produisaient
a travers la frontiere. Cependant. nous apprenons
maintenar.t qu'avec la revolte d'!rak les infJItrations
au Liban d'armes et de personnel provenant de la
Republique arabe unie et vis ant a renvcrser le gouver~
nernent legalcment constitu€ ant soudain pris des
proportions be.aucoup plus alarmantes. Ce nouvel aspect
de la situation, joint aux: efforts persistan.ts faits ccs

7

j

,1
1

,

1

'I

-l

_J

of grave concern to us all. 'TIley plac~ in jeopardy both
the independence of LebanoJ and Ghat of any Middle
Eastern State which seeks to maintain its national
integrity fne from outside influences and pressures.

derniers mois pour renverser le Gouvernement jordanien,
ne peuvent etre pour nous tous qu'une cause de graves
preoccupations. L'independance du Liban, COlllme cellede tout Etat du Moyen-Orient qui cherche a preserver
son integrite nationale des influences et des pressions de
l'exterieur, se trouve compromise.

1]. It is too early to tell what the outcome of thc
revolt in Iraq may be. But one thing is clear: the
events in both Lebanon and Iraq present grave threats
to the integrity of free and independent countries.
They demonstrate a rnthlessr.esS of aggressive purposes
which tiny Lebanon cannot combat without ~upport
from friendly nations.

11. 11 est trop tot pour dire ce qui n~sultent de la
revolte irakienne. Mals une chose est claire : les cvenemen~s du Liban comme ceu"- d'Irak menacenl
gravement l'integrite de pays libres et independants.
Us temoignent d'une volante d'agression inflexible
contre laquelle le petit Etat libanais ne pe ut lutter
sans l'appui de nations amies.

42. Observing the course of events in Lebanon and
in Iraq, one is constrained tD conclude that there are
powers at work in the Middle East .seeking, ill total
disregard for national sovereignty and independence,
to substitute lorce or the threat of force for law. If
these powers are left unchecked, free to pursue their
lawless course, the people of the Middle East wiU have
tlenled Lhe sol~mn guarantees written into the United
Nations Charter, and mankind's age~long quest for
peace will have been ~hec}{ed and the world wilt have
been plnnged into anarchy,

42.

Now we confront here a situation involving outside
involvement in an internal re.volt against the autho~
rities of the legitimate Government of Lebanon. Under
these conditions, the request from the Government of
Lebanon to aODther Member of the United Nations to
come to its assistance is entirely consistent with the
provisions and purposes of the United Nations Charter.
In this situation, therefore, we are proceeding in accordance with the traditional rules of international law,
none of which in any way inhibits action of a character
which the lJnited States is undertaking in Lebanon.

43. Nous nous trouvonS aujourd'hui places devant
ane situation caracterisee par des ingerances etrangeres
dans une rev,)lte interieure contre le Gouvernement
libanai~ legitime. Oaus ceo. conditions, la demande du
Gouvernement Iibanais priant un fiutre Rtat Membre
des Nations Vnies de venir a son aide est absolument
conforme aux dispositions et aux huts de la Cham des
Nations Unies. eela Hant, nous agissons conformement
aux regles traditionneltes du droit international, dont
aucllne ne s'oppose en quoi quo co soit a une action
de la nature d~ celle que les Etats-Unis entreprennent
au liban.

44. The United States is acting pursuant to what the
United Nations Charter regards as an inherent right.
the right of all nations to work together to preserve
their independence, The Council should take note
that United States forces went to Lebanon at the specific request of the duly constituted Government of
Lebanon, Let me also emphasize I'Igl'lin what I have
said before, that these forces wilt remain there only
until the United Nations itself is able to assume the
necessary responsibility for ensuring the continued
ir.dependence of Leban~m.

44·. Leo. Etats--Unis agissent en vertu de ce que la
Charte des Nations Unies considcrc comrnc un droit
naturel, le droit de toutes les nations de travailter en
commun a preserver leur independance, Le Conseil
doit prendre note du fait que les troupes americaines
se sont rendues au Liban a la demallde exprcsse du
Gouverr;ement libanais regulieremeut constitue. Et je
tiens a repeter que ces troupes resteront au Liban seulement jusqu'au moment ou l'Organisation des Nations
Duies elle-m~me sera en mesure d'assumer la respDnsabitite necessaire pour assurer le maintien de t'independance du Liban.

45, There is one further fact which must be recognized:
if the United Nations is to succeed in its efforts to
maintain international peace and se~urity, it should
support the efforts of thc legitimate and democratically
elected Government to protect itself from aggression
from without, even if that aggression is indirect,

45, Un fait encore doit etre reconnu : si l'Organisation
des Nations Unies vent voir se5 efforts visant amailltenir
la paix ~t la securite internationales reussir, elle doit
a?puyer l'action que le gouvernement legitime. elu
selon les principes democratiques, mene pour se proteger contre J'agression exterieure, meme si cette
agression e~t indirecte.

46. The United Nations must be particularly alert in
prCltecting the se:;urity oj small States from interference
by those whose resources and power are larger, This
is a principle which has been supported here in this
very hall in the past and which should be 5upported
today regardless of who the offender may be.

46. L'Organisation doH veiller avec une diligence
particuliere a defendre la securite des petits Etats
contre touic ingerence d'Etats plus puiss3nts et plus
riches, C'est la un principe qui, dans cette enceinte
meme, a ete dHendu par le passe et qui doit. l'~tre
aujourd'hui, quel que sait I'agresseur.

Si ['on observe le COlLrs des evenements au Liban
et en Irak, on est force de conclure que des puissances
souL a l'ceuvre au Moyen-Orient qui cherchent, au
mepris total de la sDuverainete et de l'independance
nalionales, a substituer la force all la :nenace de la
force au droit. Laisser ccs puissances libres de poursuivre sans obstacle le cours de leurs activites illegales,
ce serait denier aux peuples du Moyen~Orient les
garanties salennelles inscritl':s dans la Charte des Nations
Unies, entraver la quete seculaire de la paix par l'humanite, et plonger le monde dans l'anarchie.

43,

8

•

'....-.

•

a

.

,

•

•

<
,

,

I...

,
';r

.>

".~ "

'.

"

•

,

..

47. Lebanon is a. Charter Member of the United
Nations and has loyally contributed to its work over
the past decade. It would be unthinkable now to
permit the lawfully constit.uted Government of Lebanon
to fall prey to outside forces which seek to substitute
a Government which would serve their purposes in
defiance of the principles of the Charter.

47. Le Liban est Membre de ['Organisation des Nations
Unics depnis la fondation de celle-ci, et il a loyalement
participe 2 5es travaux au cours des 10 dernieres annees.
11 serait impensable de permettre aujourd'hui que le
GOl1vernement libanais legalement constitue devienne
la proie de forces exterieures cJJeTchant A lui substituer
un gouvernement qui servirait leurs fins au mepris

des principcs de la Charte.
48.

There can be no hope for peace in the world
unless the United Nations shows this dedication to
the Charter's basic principles. All nations, large and
small alike, are entitled to have their political inde~
pendence and territorial integrity respected and maintained. If we vaeillate with regard to this proposition,
we will open the floodgates to direct and indirect aggression all over the world.

n ne saurait y avail' d'espoir de paix dans le
mande si Ies Nations Unies ne montrent pa~ leur
complet attachemenl aux principes fondamentaux de
la Cllarte. Toutes les nations, grandes ou petites, ont
le droit d'exiger le respect et le maintien de leur indeM
pendance politique et de leur integrite territoriale. Si
nous ne nous montrons pas fermes sur ce point, nous
ouvrirolls toute grande la porte a J'agresaion, directe
ou indirecte, dans le monde entier.

49, The overthrow of another State by subversion and
the fomenting of internal strife is more difficult for
the world to combat than is direct military aggression,
because the fomenting of internal strife is harder to
see with your eyes. But this is not the first time that
the United Nations has faced such a problem. The
United Nations faced such a problem successfully in
Greece in 1946, when Soviet~sponsored insurrection
threatened to overwhelm the Greek Government. The
United Nations did so unsuccessfully in 1948 when
the Communist coup was perpetrated in Czechoslovakia.

49. Il est plus difftcile pour le monde de s'opposer
au renversement d'nn gouvernement par la subversion
et !'incitation a la guerre civile que de lutter contre
une agression militaire directe, paree qu'il est plus
malaise de distinguer l'incitation a La guerre civile.
Mais Ce n'est pas la premiere fois que l'Organisation
des Nations Unies se trouve en presence de cette
difficulte. En 1946, elle l'a surmontee dans le cas de
la Grece, alors qu'une insurrection inspiree par l'Union
sovietiqlle mena~ait de renverscr le Gouvernement
grec. En 1948, elle a echoue au moment du putsch
commnniste en Tchecoslovaquie.

50. The United Nations sought to provide means for
dealing with such aggressive developments in the
future when, on 1 December 1949 and 17 November 1950
respectively, the General Assembly adopted the " Essen~
tials of peace" and ., Peace through deeds" resolutions
[resolutions 290 (IV) and 380 (V)I. If the Council
will forgive a personal note, I particularly recall the
" Peace through deeds" resolution because I actively
worked to obtain its adoption the rust time 1 was a
member of the United States Delegation to the United
Nations in 1950. I would like to quote one paragraph
from the statement I made at that time on behalf or
the United States:

L'Organisation a essaye de prevail' les moyens
de faire face a des situations semblnbles Lorsque, le
l cr decembre 1949 et le 17 novembre 1950, !'Assemblcc
generale a adopte ses resolutions intitulees Cl Elements
essentiels de la paix 11 [resolution 290 (IV)] et , ( La
paix par les actes» [resolution 380 (V)]. Si le Comeil
veut bien me pardonner cette consideration d'ordre
personnel, j'evoquerai plus particulierement le deuxieme
de ces textes parce que j'ai travaille aetivement a son
adoption alors que, pour la premiere fois, en 1950, je
faisais parLie de la delegfltion des Etats~Unis a l'Organisation des Nations Unies. Je voudrais citeI' le paragraphe suivant de la declaration que j'ai faite a cette
epoque au nom des EtaLs-lInis :
" La resolution des huit puissances non seulement
reaifume que, queUe que soit l'arme utiIisee, toute
agression constituc le plus grave de tous les crimes
contre la paix et la securite du monde, mais elle
rafraichit, modernise, met a jour et rend plus complet
notre concept de l'agression en y comprenant de
manicre specifique la forme la plus nouvelle d'agression, cene qui consiste it encourager et a fomenter
la guerre civile. 1I

48.

50.

"The eightMPower resolution nOl only reaffirms
that whalever the weapons used, any aggression is
the g,avest of all crimes agflinst peace and security
in the world. et also freshens, modernizes, brings
up to date, and makes more complete our concept
of aggression by specifically including the latest
form of aggression, to wit, fomenting civil strife."

51, Let me now quote some of the provisions of this
resolution whieh was adopted here in the General
Assembly in 1950. It is very short.
[" The General Assembly,]

51. Permettez~moi maintenant de citeI' certaines des
dispositions de cette resolution, que l'Assemblee generale a adoptee en 1950. 11 s'agit d'un passage tres hrei.
~ [L'Assemblee flenerale.]

" Condemning the intervention of a State in the
internal affairs of another State [or the purpose of
changing its legally establislled government by the
threat or use of force,
.. 1. Solemnly reaffirms that, whatever the wea~
pons used, any aggression, whether committed openly,
or by fomenting civil sll'i[e in the interest Df a foreign

«Condamllanl l'intervention d'un Etat dans les
affaires interieures d'un autre Etat aux fins d'en
changer, en recourant a la menace ou a l'emploi
de la force, le gOl1vernement legalement constituc,
( L Reaf{irme solennellement que, quelles que
soient les armes utilisecs, toute agrcssion, qu'elle
soit perpctrec ouvertement, qu'elIe prcnne la l'orm~

9

i

J

d'unr. incitation a la guerre civile dans l'inten~t
d'une puissance etrangere, ou qu'elle se produise
de toure autre maniere, est le plus grave de tollS les
crimes contre la paix et la se(';urite du monde tout
enber;
~ 2. Proclame q'L1e, pour realiser une paix et une
s~curite durables, il est indispensable:
u 1)
Qu'une action conjuguee et rapide soit
entreprise pour repondre a toute agression, oil qu'elle
se produise. "
La prend fin le passage de la resolution de 1950 qui, a
mon avis, s'applique tres precisement a la situation en
face de Iaquelle nous nous trouvons aujourd'hui.

Power, or otherwise, is tile gravest of nil crimes
against peace and security throughout the world;

"2. Delermine!> that for the realization of lasting
peace and s~curity it is indispensnbl~:
"(1) That prompt united action be taken to meet
aggrcs~ion wherever it "Irises; "

That is the end of th~ quotation from the resobLion
of 1950 which I submit applies very definitely to the
situation which confronts us today.

52. Remember that the Government of Lebanon wa!>
a co-sponsor of this resolution and that the present
Foreign Minister of Lebanon was its spokesman.
Remember that the first representative in the General
Assembly to raise the issue of subversion and civil
strife was the representative of Greece, which was just
then overcoming the effects of communist suhversion.
Remember that the first language for a resolution was
introduced on that occasion by the representative or
Bolivia. Remember, too, that the draft resolution in
its final form wns sponsored by France, Lebanon,
Mexico, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, the
United States, Bolivia and India. 2. Remember, fmally,
that the text, condemning the fomenting of civil strife
in the interests of a foreign power, as thut is what
it did, was adopted by a vote of 50 to 5, the Soviet bloc
being significantly against it. Those are good things to
think about today.

52. Souvenez-vous que le Gouvernement libanais a
ete I'un des coauteurs de ceUe resolution et que l'actuel
Ministre des affaires etrangeres du Liban a ete son
porte-parole. Souvenez-vous que le premier it soulever
devant I' Assemblee generale la question de la subversion
et de la guerre civile a ete. le representant de la Grece,
dont le gouvernement commeuiYait sculement a surmonter les effets de la subversion communiste. Souvenez-vous que le premier it suggerer a cette occasion
un projet de resolution a ete le representant de la
Bolivie. Souvenez-vous egalement que le projet de
resolution, sous sa' forme definitive, a eu pour auteurs
la [<ranee, le Liban, le Mexique, les Pays-Bas, le
Royanme-Uni, les Etats-Unis, la Bolivie et l'Inde~.
Souvenez-vous enfin que ce texte qui condamne I'inci~
tation it la guerre civile dans I'inten~t d'une puissance
etrangere - car c'etait bien la son objet - a ere
adopte par 50 voix contre 5, le bloc sovietique ayant, et
eela est significatif, vote contre. Ce sont la des faits
auxquels il convient de penser aujourd'hui.

53. In solemnly amrming that any aggression which
foments civil strife in the interests of a foreign Power
was one of the gravest of all crimes against peace and
security throughout the world, the General Assembly
clearly had in mind just such a situation as that Wllich
we face. The integrity and independence of a mltion
is as precious when it is ntLacked from outside by sub~
version and erosion as when it is attacked in the Held
by military action.

En affirman! solennellement que toute agression
consistant en une incitation a la guerre civile dans
I'inter~t d'une puissance etrangere est run des plus
graves de tous les crimes contre la paix et la securite
du monde tout entier, l'As~mblee gen~.rale songeait
evidemment a une situation identique a celle en face
de laquelle nous nous trouvons. L'integrite et l'inde~
pendance d'une nation sont aussi precieuses lorsqu'elle
subit de I'exterieur une attaque prcnant la forme de
la subversion et d'un travail de sape que lorsqu'elle doit
faire face Et une action militaire menee sur le champ
de bataille.
54. Pour conclure, je voudrais rappeler un fait encore.
Les membres de la Societe des Nations ont, au cours
des annees H130, to16re t'agression directe et indirecte
en Europe, en Asie et en Afrique, ce qui a eu comme
tragique resultat de renforcer et de stimuler Ies forces
d'agression, de telle maniere que la deuxieme guerre
mondiale est devenue inevitable.
53.

54. I conclude now, and I do so by saying to my
colleagues of the Security Council to remember this
one more fact. The members of the League of Nations
tolerated direct and indirect aggression in Europe, in
Asia and in Africa during the 1930s, and the tragic
result was to strengthen and stimulate aggressive
forces in such a way that World War If became inevitable.
55. The United States, for its part, is determined that
history shall not now be repeated. We hope and believe
that the action which we are taking will bring stability
and that United States forces now being sent into
Lebanon at the request of its Government can be
promptly withdrawn. We must, however, be prepared

esperons et nous croyons qlLe les mesures que nous
avons decide. de prendre auront un eifet stabilisatcur,
et que les forces des Etats-Unis envoyees all Liban it
la demande du gouvernement de Cl'. pays pourront

~ Official Records of tile General ASl;embly, Fifth Session,
Anmxes, agenda item 69, document A!C.1J597/Rev.2.

2 Documenls olficiels de [,Assemblet glnl!rale, cinquU.mt
session, Annexes, point 69 de l'ordre du jour, docu-

55.

Les Etats-Unis, pour Leur part, sont determines

a ne pas laisser a present I'histoire se repUer. Nous

ment A/C.1f597fRev.2.

10

.,

a
to meet the situation whatever the consequences
may be.

retirees sous peu, Nons devons cependant etre
a faire face a la situation, queUes qu'en soient les
cDnsequences.

56. We strive for a world in which nations great and

56. Nous luttons pour un monde dans lequel les

small can preserve their independence, This is all
ideal which is close to tbC', hp.art of every American and
we believe that it is clnsfl to the hearts of all free mell.

nations, grandes DU petites, pourront conserver leur
independanee. C'C3t 11l. un ideal qui est chP:r au coour
ue taut Americain, et, crayons-nous, au creur dc tout
homme libre, N DUS pensons que la decision prise par
lcs Etals-Uni" est conbrme ::lUX principes et aux buts
des Nations Unies et servira la came de la paix mondiale.

~tre

pr~ts

,

'.

We believe that the aetirm which the United States is
uow taking is consistent with the principles and pur-

•

,•

•

".

.'

57, Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'espagno[) : Plusieurs orateurs sout illscnts sur ma tiste. Le premier
est le Secr,Haire ge,neral. Les autres orateurs souhaiteiJ.t
que nOl:S suivions l'ordre de cette liste. Jc dotme done
la parole au Secretaire general.

57. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): There
are several speakers on my list. The first is the Secretary-GeneraL The other speakers have signifIed to mo
their agreement that the order on the list should be
maintained. I therefore call upon the Secretary-

,,

,•

poses of the United Nations a.nd will promote the cause
.of world peace.

General.

58. The SECRETARY-GENERAL: Ai the Security
Council today resumes the ccnsideratioll of t.he complaint of Lebanon, I consider that I owe it to the
Council, at this first meeting after 11 JUlle [8Z51h meetingj, to give it an account of how I have acted under
the mandate given to me in the resolution passed on
that date [814023]. I find an added reason for doing
so at this time in the references of the represontative
of the United States to the present efforts of the United
Nations in Lebanon. I shall naturally leave aside all
questions of substance and also the question of the
future role and status of the observation operation.

59. Having heard the charges oi the representative
of Lebanun l;oncerning interference by the lhited
Arab Republic in the internal affairs of Lebanon and
the reply of the representative of the United Arab
Republic, we recall that the Security Council passed,
on t 1 June, a resolution in which it decided to" dispatch
urgently an observation group to proceed to Lebanon ",
and autllO,ized the Secret81l'-Getleral te takc the
necessary steps for implementaticn of the resolution.
In the resolution the Security Council stated that the
aim of the step it was taking Via~ .. to ensure that
there is no illegal infiltration of personnel or supply
of arms or other materiel across the Lebanese border ".

"

60. I have in my actions regarding the Lebanese case
acted solely ",ith that purpose in view. I have used
the tool created for this purpose in the resolution. I
have also relied on the authority that the SecretaryGeneral is recognized as having under the Charter.
61. My actions have had no relation to developments
which must be considered as the internal affairs of
Lebanon. Nor have I, in my implementation of Lhe
resolution, or actitlg under the Charter, concerned
myself with wider international aspects of the problem
than those referred to in the resolution. The SecretaryGeneral in this situation obviously is neither an arbiter
nor a mpdiator. However, even with these important
restrictio'J.s, there has been wide scope for action for
the purposes o[ the resolution, strictly in keeping with
United Nations principles and rules.

58. Le SECRETAIRE GENERAL (lraduit de l'ano!nis) : Au moment oil le Conseil de securite reprend
l'examen de la plainte du Liban, j'es-time qu'a cette
reunion, la premiffe depuis celle du 11 juin [82.5 e seance],

il est. de mon deVuir de rendre compte au Conseil de la

maniere dont je me suis acquitte du mandat qui m'avait
ete donne par la resolution adoptee a celte date
[3140231. Ce qll'a dit le representant des Eta,ts-Unis de
l'action que poursuit actuellement I'Organisation des
Nations Unies au Liban me donne une raison supplement!lirc de le faire d{o.~ main tenant. Je laisserai
naturcllement de cote toutcs les qllestions de fond
ainsi que la question du role et du statut futurs du
groupe d'observation.
59. Apres avoir entendu les accusations du repre.
sentant du Liban relatives a une intervention de la
Repuhlique arabe unie dans les affaires inUrieures du
Liban et la reponse du representant de la Republique
arabe- unie-.• le Conseil de securiLe a, vous vous le rappelez, adopte, le 11 jLin, tine resolution par laquclle it
decidait « d'envoyer d'urgence un groupe d'observation
nu Liban » et autorisait le Secretaire general Cl a prcndre
les mesures necessaires a cet efiet ll. Dans cette rne:ne
resoltltion, le Coasei! de securite declarait que le but
de eette mesure etair de. I( fa.ire en sorte qu'aucune
infiltration ilMgale de personnel nf aucull cnvoi Htegat
d'armes ou d'autre materiel n'aient lieu a travers les
fronticres libanaises >l.
60. Toutes les mesures que j'ai prises au sujet de la
question libanaise ont exclusivement repondu a ce
mobile, J'ai utilise l'instrument cree a ceLLe fm par la
resolution. Je me suis egalement fonde sur I'autorlte
que la Charte reconnait au Secretaire general.
61. Je ne me suis en rien preoccupe des evenemetlts
qui doivent ~tre consideres comme des afTaires interieures du Liban. Et, qu'iI se soit agi ne donner efTet a
la resolutiotloU de remplir le rllle que me donne la
Charie, je ne me suis strictement interesse qu'aux
aspect~ internationaux du probleme mentionnt'.s dflns
la resolution. En pareille occurrence, le Secretaire
general n'est evidemment ni un arhitre ni un mediateur.
Touteiois, lllBllle compte tenu dc ces importantes
restrictions, de vastes possibilites d'action se sont
ouvertes a moi pour donner sdte a la resolution sans
m'ecarter en rien des principes et des regles de l'Orga
nisatilln des Nations Unies.
M

11

I

62. The Security Council, in deciding to dispatch La
Lebanon an "obse~vatioll gruup ", defined not only
the character of the operation but also its scope. It did
~o by linking the observation to illE'.gal traflic i:l arms
und infiltrntiol1, r~quesling t]1e Group to l{eep tl\e
Council currently iniormed of its findings. In taking
this stand, the Council defined the limits for authority
delegated to the Secl'etary-General in tllis case.

62. En dccidant d'envoyer au Liban :m (I groupe
d'observation n, le Conseil de secllrite a defini, lIon
seulement le caradel'e de cette operation, mais egalemeat sa portec. n 1'3 fait en etablissant un lien entre
la mission d'observation et le trafic illegal d'arme~ et"
l'mfiltration d ell demandant au groupe d'observation
de twir le Conscil de SCCllrite au courant de ses cOnstatations. Ce faisant, le Conseil a defini les lirnites de
j'autoritc delcguee, dam le present cas, au SecrHaire
general.

63. 1 have, in th~ light of the dl'cision, comidel'ed
mvself free to take all steps necessary for an operation,
co"vering illegal traffic in arms and infiltration,. flS
effective as it could be made as a tool towards ensunng
against such traffic or infiltration with its basic character of observation maintained. r have had a free
hand as to the structure and organization of the operation but have considered myself as barred from an
interpretation of the authority grnnteu which would
have implied that [ changec the policy, laid down
by the. Council, by my decisions 0;1 the scope of the
operation find the llutlHlrity of the observers.

63. Eu egard a ceLLe decision, je me suis cOll~iderc
lUne de prendre Loutes les mesures nccessaires pourorganiser aussi efftcacement que p()ssible le- dcpistagc
dlJ lraflc illegal d'armes et des infiltrations, de fat;on
it en fail'e un itlstrument de luUe contre ce trafic et
ces infiltrations tout en gardfl.nt. an erollp~ son carnctdm
[ondamental d'observaUon. J'ai eu toute liberte pour
monter et organiser certe operation, mais je me suis
juge- teuu d'ccnrter toutc illterpretntion de mon rnandat
qui aurnit eu pour consequence que me::; ueciHiulls,
quant a la portee de l'operation et aux pouvoirs de!\.
observateurs, aboutissent a modifier la ligne de conduite
dermic par le. ConseiL

64, In fad, had 1, by going beyond the reasonable
limits eJf a "group" charged with" observation ", or
by deciding on terms of rde.rem;e exceeding observution,
changed the observation operation into some kind of
police operation. not only would 1 have overstepped
the re!\olution but r would also have fuced a conflict
with principles laid down in the Charter. In a polite
operation, the participants would in this case need tbe
right, if necessary, to tal{e the initiative in the use of
[orec. Such use of force wo (dd, however, have hcJonged
to the sphere of Chapter VII of the Charter and could
have been granted only by the Security Council itself,
directly or by explicit delegation, under conditions
~pelled out in that chapter.

64. En fait, si, outrepassant !cs limitCfi qui decolllaient
normnlement de l'expression «groupe)) charge d'une
mission cl' ,oh~t'.rvation 11, 0',1 assigllant a c€ grOllpe
une mission qui depasse l'ohservation, j'avais transforme I'operation d'observation en quelque operatioll
de police, non seulement je serais sortl du cadre de lu
resolution, mais je me serab heurtc it des ,n·incipcs.
enonces dalls la Charte. Dans une operation de police.
les participants doivent avoir la iaculte_ de prendre,
en cas de necessite, l'initiative de recourir it la force.
Mais cc recours a la force eut et6 regi par le Chapitre VII
de I~ Charte, et cette faculte n'aurait pu etrc accorJee
que par le Conseil de securite lui-meme, soit directement, s()it par delegation explicite, dalls les condiUrln.ft
enoncees dans ledit chapitre,

65, As to the structure and organization of the obser~
vation group and its activities, r have at the initiiil
stage acted in close consultation with member:,; of tile
Security COllncil and the representative of Lebanon.
My interpretation of th~ re~olution, as presented to
them before any adioll was taken, met with their full
approval, including that of the representative of
Lebanon. At later stages I hnve naturally, to a deci·
sive extent, depended upon the judgement of the
highly qualified military, political and diplomatic
experts of the United Nations who are in the field.
The present arrangeme:rts are in accordance with tl:eit·
suggestions and meet with their full approval.

65. En Cl'. qui concerne la structure et l'organisatioll
du Groupc d'obscrvation et ses activites, j'ai, au d~hut.
agi en consultation etroite avec les membres du Conseil
de securite et avec le representant du Uban. Mon
interpretation de la resolution, telle quo.; je la Icur
avait exposee avant qU'aucune mesure n'uil eLe prls.e.
avait reyu leur entiere appO'Obation, y compris celle
du representant du Liban. Pli,ls Lard, bien entendu,
j'ai dO. m'e:1 remetll'C en grande partie aux avis hautement qualifies des experts militaires, politiqUC'.E et
diplomatiques des Nations Unies qui se trouvent sur
place. Les dispositions aetuelles ont ctc prises conformement a leurs suggesliolls cl ont leur cntier accord.

66. I have said before that I have. actcd solely for the
purpose mentioned in the resolution oi' the SecUTity
Council, using the in~trnment created by the resolution,
but using al:>o my authority under the Charter. This
means that the efforts I have made, of a diplomatic
nature, ha.ve been guided hy the d~sire to get nccessary
support for the observation operation, so as to mal{c
it possible for it to succeed as a measure against any
inflltrlltion or smuggling of arms. It wonld bc premature to give here an aeeuunL of the activities to whieh
r refer. Their vrJue for the purpose mentioned can be
judged only in the light of practical experience in the
observHtion operation and of otller dtvelopments, as

66. Comme je l'ai deja dit, je n'ai eu strictemeut en
vue que l'objet de la resolution du Conseil de securite,
en utilisant l'instrumcnt cree pur eette resolution, mais
en usant Eussi de I'autoritc qui m'est conferc par la
ChGrte. En d'autres termes, les efforts -- le lHlture
diplomatique - que rai faits ont cLc insph:;s par le
desir d'obLenir las concoul's necessaires POltf nwner a
bien les operations d'observntion, de fUyon qtte ces
operations soient un moycn elTlcacc d'empeehcr Loutc
infiltration ou contrebande d'armes. Jl serait prcma~urc
de donner id U:1 compte rendu des aetivitcs dont jc
parte. Il ne sera possible de juger de lenr utilite a c('.
point de "ue qu'a la lumiere de l'cxpel'ience pratique

12

r.
t'.

II

I
r

•

"

,

I

,

I,

"gist"ed by ou' ob",v,," 0, by oth" "liable means. I llcquise au cours des operations d'observation et a
la lumiere d'autres evenernents tels qu'i1s seront consignes par nos observaleurs ou grace a d'autrcs moycns
dignes dc foi.
What I have to stress here is that, whatever
weight might finally, in the light of the tests to which
I have referred, be given to the special efforts in which
I have had to engage, it has been a matter of course
that I have striven to give to the observation operation
the Itighest possible efficiency. The diplomatic efforts
in support of the observation operation, or tlteir
()utcome, have been in no way permitted to influence
my judgement as to the size, scope 01' mandate of the
Observation Gmup.

67. Ce qu'il me faut ici souligner, c'est que, quelle
que soit l'importance qu'il faille, en rm de compte, eu
egard nux criteres que je viens de mentionner, attacher
aux efforts speciaux que j'ai del faire, il est bien evident
que j'ai cherche a ce que ces operations d'observation
soient le plus efHcaces possible. Les el10rts diplomatiques
deployes pour assurer le succes des op6'ations d'observation ou le resultat qu'ils ont eu n'ont en rien influence
mon jugement quanl aux effectifs, au champ d'action
ou au mandat dll Gronpe d'observntion.

68. My stand on these last-mentioned questions has

G8. La position que j'ai adoptee sur ees dernieres
questions a ele determinee exciusivement par l'attitude
prise par le Groupe lui-m~me. Comme je I'ai deja dit
en public, le Groupe d'observation compte et comptera
autant d'observateurs qu'il (Hmt ou pourra en desiret'o
D'autre part, il m'a semble qu'il etait tres difficile de
fournir des observateurs au Groupe avant qu'Ll s'estime
pret a les absorber en les affectant a une til.che immediatement utile. Si l'on a pu avoir l'impression que le
developpement du Groupe d'observation s'cst trouve
freine, cette impression s'explique donc par la position
qu'a adoptee le Groupe lui-meme au sujet de ses besoins
et de ses possibilites, et nullement, comme il est bien
evident, par des considerations politiques, et moins
encore par ,'attente du tisultat des efforts diplomatiqUe!>
deployes pour appuyer cette operation d'observation.
69, Lc Conseil sait deja t:omment les observateurs
ont reussi a opereI' dans des regions qui echappent
maintenant au contrOle du gouvernernent. D'apres les
renseignements dej~ publies, il semble que le (Troupe
s'est heurte a des difficultes au nord de Tripoli et au
nord de la region de la Bekaa, le suis maintenant en
mesure d'informer le Conseil que dans toutes les regions
frontieres situees au nord de Tripoli des arrangements
ont ete pris pour assurer la liberte totale d'acces et de
deplacement aux observateurs, et que I'accord s'est
fait sur la creation d'avant-postes dans cette region.
Ce matin meme, dans la region situee au nord de la
Bekaa, le Groupe a, all cours d'une rencontre entre Le
general Odd Bull et un chef des forces de I'opposition
dans cette region, rappele ses precedentes demandes
tendant a le laisser entierement libre de se rendre
dans la region en question.

£7.

been determined exclusively by the attitude taken by
the Group itself. As 1 have already said in public,
the Observation Group has and will have as many
observers as it has asked or might ask for. On the
other hand, I have found it very difficult to provide
them with observers before they consider themselves
ready to absorb them in useful current work. If there
would be any impression that restraint has been shown
in the build-up of the Observation Group, the explanation of this impression is, therefore, the stand taken
by the Group itself regarding its needs and possibilities,
and obviously in no way any political considerations,
least of all any considerations caused by anticipations
of the Dutcome of any diplomatic efforts in support
of the obServation operation.

69. It has already been reporl;ed to the Council how
the observers have managed to operate within areas
which are now outside of government control. From
previous published accounts it has appeared that the
Group has been meeting with difficulties north of
Tripoli and in the north of the Bekaa region. I can
now report to the Council that throughout the northern
border areas north of Tripoli arrangemeilts have been
made for full freedom of movement and access and that
agreement has been reached on the establishment of
out-stations in that area. In the region north of Bekaa
the Group has this very morning, in a meeting between
General Odd Bull and a leader of the opposition forces
in that region, formalized its previous requests for full
freedom of access.

70. Mr. AZKOUL (Lebanon) (lranslated from Frem:h):
On 6 June 1958 [823rd meetingl the Lebanese Minister
of Foreign Affairs attempted to demonstrate here in
the Security Council the following three the.ses:

70. M. AZKOUL (Liban) : Le 6 juin 1958 [823 9 seanceJ,
le Mirustre des alTaires etrangtres du Liban a essay6
de demontrer ici, devant le Conseil de securite, les
trois theses suivanl;es :

71. Pirst, that there has been and there still is massive, illegal and unprovoked intervention In the affairs
of Lebanon by the United Arab Republic and that
this massive intervention assumed, as it is still assuming,
the following six forms:
(a) The supply of arms on a large scale from the
United Arab Republic to subversive elements in Lebanon;
(b) The training in subversion on the territory of the
United Arab Republic of eLements from Lebanon and
the sending back of these elements to sub\'ert their
Government;

71. Premierement, qu'il y a eu et qu'il y a toujours
une intervention massive, iliegale et non provoquee
de la Republique arabe uni.e dans les afYai:'es du Liban;
cette intervention massive se manifest3it et se manifeste
toujours sous les six formes suivantes :
(I) Fournitures de grandes quantites d'armes par la
Republique arabe unie it des elements subversifs aa
Liban;
b) Entrainement a la subversion, sur le territoire
de la RE[Jublique arabe uni~, d'elements venus du Liban,
qui sont ensuite renvoyes dans ce pays pour y renverser
le gouvernement;

13

'I

~,

;

"

! -'

(c) The participation of United Arab Republic civilian nationals residing in or intlltrated into Lebanon,
in subversive and terrorist activities in Lebanon;
(d) The participation of United

Arab Republic

governmental elements in subversive and terrorist
activities and in the direction of rebellion in Lebanon;

(e) The violent and wholly unprecedented press campaign conducted by the United Arab Republic against
the Government of Lebanon;
<I) The violent and wholly unprecedented radio campaign conducted by the United Arab Republic inciting
the people of Lebanon to overthrow their Government.
72. Secondly, that this intervention aims at under~
mining and does in fact threaten the independence of
Lebanon.

72. Deuxiemement, Que cette intervention vise a
saper, et menace en fait, l'independance du Liban.

73. Thirdly, that the situation created by this inter~
vention is likely, if it continues, to endanger the maintenance Qf international peace and security.
74. After this submission and the statements made by
various members of the Council, the Security Council
decided, on 11 June 195&, "to dispatch urgently an
observation group to proceed to Lebanon so as to ensure
that there is no iUegal infiltration of personnel or
supply of arms or other materiel across the Lebanese
border" [8/4023).
75. The first report of the Observation Group was
submitted to the Council on 3 July 1958 [8/4040 and
Corr.I].
76. On 8 July 1958 the Lebanese Government reques·
ted the Secretary-General to circulate its offidal cornmerIts on that first report as a Security Council document to all Members of the United Nations. In this
document {S/ 4043] the Lebanese Government drew the
attention of !I'1embers of the United Nations and more
especially of those of tlle Security Council to the follow·
ing fonr points:

Troisiemement, que la situation creee par cette
intervention semble, si elle se prolonge, devoir menacer
le maintien de la paix et de la securite internationales.
74. A la suite de cette demonstration et des declarations faites par les divers membres du Conseil, le
Conseil de securite a decide, le 11 j uin 1958, ~ d 'envoyer
d'urgence illl groupe d'observation au Liban de fa~on
It faire en sorte qu'aucune infiltration illegale de per~
sonnel ni aucun envoi illegal d'annes ou d'autre materiel
n'aient lieu a travers les frontieres libanaises 11 [S/4023].
75. Le premier rapport du grollpe d'observation a
ete soumis au Conseille 3 juillet 1958 IS/4040 el Con. 1].

First, that the failure of the Observation Group
to reach a conclusive decision on the infiltration of
anned men and the supply of arms to Lebanon was
due, not to the absence of wch infiltration, but to the
following facts:
(a) The Observation Group was unable to reach the
Lebanese frontiers held by the rebels;
(b) It had not then the means of conducting aerial
reconnai:lsance;
(c) It was not yet equipped for night observation;
77.

(d) It had not yet begtm to operate at full strength.
78. Secondly, that the information and observations
in the report nevertheless corroborated Lebanese
charges regarding the in nItration of armed men and
the supply of arms to Lebanon, particularly in the
following respects:
(a) The Observation Group admitted, indirectly,
tllat at least some of the armed men they had observed
were not Lebanese;

...

1:) Participation de ressortissants civils de la Repu.,.
blique arabe unie, residant au Liban ou s'y etant
infiltres, a des activites subversives et terroristes au
Liban;
d) Participation d'etements gouvernementaux de la
Republique arabe unie a des activites subversives et
telToristes ainsi qu'it la direction de la rebellion au
Liban;
e) Campagne de presse violente et entierement sans
precedent menee par la Republique arabe unie contre
le Gouvernement libanais;
f) Campagne radiophoDique violente et entierement
sans precedent menee par la Republique arabe unie
ponr inciter le peuple lib:mais a renverser son gouvernement.

73.

Le 8 juillet 1958, le Gouvernement libanais a
demande au Secretaire general de faire distribuer a
tOilS les Membres des Nations Unies, comme document
du Conseil de securite, ses observations offieielles sur
ce premier rapport. Dans ce document [S/4043], le
Gouvernement libanais a voulu attirer I'attention des
Membres des Nations Unies, et partieulicrement des
membres du Conseil de securite, sur les quatre verites
suivantes.
77. Premh~rement, que l'incapacite du. groupe d'observation a porter un jugement deflnitif sur I'existence de
l'infiltration d'hommes armes et l'envoi d'armes au
Liban provenait, non pas de I'absence de eette infil~
tration, mais des faits suivants :
a) Le groupe d'observaEon n'a pu atteindre les
frontieres libanaises occupees par les reheUes;
b) Il ne disposait pas encore de moyens d'observation
aericnne;
c) Il n'etait pas encore outille pour l'observation de
uuit;
d) Il n'avait pas encore commence a fonctionner
avec les elTectifs pn'ivlls.

.

I

,
)

If

I,

,

,

76.

78. Deuxiemement, que, cependant, les informations
et observations que le rapport contenait corrohoraient
par eUes--memes les accusations libanaises relatives a
I'inflltration d'hommes armes et a l'envoi d'armes au
Lihan, notamment dans les points suivants :
a) Le Groupe d'observation admettait indirectement
que, du moins, '.m certain nombre d'hommes annes
qu'i1 avait observes n'etaient pas des Libanais;

14

'i

;

,

I

!

~

r,

f

1
I

.1

•'i

&

>

>

>

.'

0'

(b) The infiltrations of armed men were actually
occurring or were very prDbable in areas where there
are "bonds of identity within ethnic groups" between
persons liv:ng on either side of the Lebanese-Syrian
frontier;
(c) The presence of the rebels in the frontier regiolls
was explained by the proximity of Syria, from which
they could at any time receive direct support in men,
money and arms.
(d) The obstr\lctive tactics used by the rebels to
prevent the observers reaching their arcas were explained by the fact that the rebels were anxious La
conceal the infiltration whicll was Laking place;
(e) The presence of a company of Syrian soldiers ill
uniform or. Lebanese Lerrltory and in an area under
rebellion could have no other explanalion tha'l tl1at
the troops were there in order somehow to assist the
rebels;
(f) The extensive mortar fire - mortars art'. used
only by regular armies - in the vicinity of the Syrian
frontier could only have come from the Syrian army
or from rebels who had received such <lrms [rom the
Syrian army;
(g) Finally, the arms used by the rebels showed, both
by their quality and by their qnantil:y, that they must
for the most part have come from a hostile Government
interested in supplying them.

b) Leg infiltrations d'hommes armes avaien! lieu
effectivement ou etaient fort probables dans les regions
QU, des deux cotes de la frontiere libano-syrienne,
existent ~ entre groupes ethniques des liens [...],,;

cl La s\lbsistan('~ dp-s rdlp-ll(ls dans les regions frontalieres s'expliquait par la proximite de la Syrie, d'oiJ
ils pouvaient reccvoir a tout instant et directement till
applli en hommes, en argent et en aJ'ffies;
cl) Les taetiques cl'obstruction employees par les
rebclles pour empecher les observateurs de se rendre
dans lenr region s'expliquaient par le fait que les rebeHes
tenaient it cacher le mouvement d'infiltrauon qJ.i avait
liell;
~) La prescncc j'UllC compagnie do soldats syricns
en llniforme sur le territoire libanais et dans une region
en rebellion ne POllvait s'expliquer autremcnt que par
le fait que ces troupes 6taient Ut pour porter de 111elque
rnanicre main forte flUX rcbellcs;
f) Les nombreux tirs de mortiers .- armes qui ne
sont employees que par les armecs regulieres - provenant des environs de la frontiere syrienne ne pouvaient
etre declenches que par l'armee syrienne, ou par les
rebelle5 qui l:llll"aient re<;ll ccs armcs dc l'armec .'Iyricnnc;
,q) Enfin, les armes employees par les rebelles, par
leur qualite et leur quantite, ne ponvaient, en grancle
partie, provenir que d'un gouvernement hoslile interesse
ales leur fournir.

79. Thirdly, that despite the preS~tlCe of Unitlld
t"atiorls observers and their acl:ivities in Lebanon the
infIltration of armed men and the illegal supply of
arms and munitions were continuing and that, consp.quently, the Security Council's purpose in sending the
observers to Lebanon, that of preventing infiltration
and the smuggling of arms, has not yet been achieved.

79. Troisiemement, que, malgre la p~esence des observateurs des Nations Unies et lems activites au Liban,
l'inmtration d'hommes armes et l'envoi illegal d'armes
et dr munitions rontinuaient et que, par consequent,
le but que le Cotlseil de securite cherchait a atteindre
par I'envoi des observateurs au Liban, et qui consiste
a empecher toute infiltration et tout envoi d.'armes,
n'a pas encore ete realise.

80, Fourthly, that an interpretation of the adiorl
decided all by the Security Council in its resolution o[
11 June 1958 which limits the functions of the observers
to mere" observation ", has been proved by experience
to be inadequate to serve the Council's purpose and to
deal with the situation.

80. Quatriemement, que l'interpretation de l'action
ctecidee par le Consei! dll secutite dans sa resolution du
11 juin t958 limitant l'activite des observateurs a la
simple « observation)) se reveJait, a la Jumi~re de
l'experience, inadequate all but du Conscil et insuffisallLe pour faire face a la situal:ion.

81. In making these observations it is in no way my
intention to minimize the value of the presence of the
Observation Group in Lebanon 01' the usefulness of
its activities. On the contrary, I would lil_e to expresS
here the Lebantse Gi:lvernment's appreciation of the
Secretary-General's efforts in so speedily establishing
tile observation machinery aL prestu L operatin.g in
Lebanon and of the Observation Group's efforts in
carrying out the lasl{ of o3servaUon assigned Lo it.
My Government welcomes the expansion of this machinery and of its activities and will do all in. its power to
continue to co-operate with it to the full and to provide
it with every possible assistance.

81. En faisant ces observations, il n'est po:nt clans
mon intention de minimiser la valtur de la presence au
Liban dll Groupe d'observalion ni l'utilite de !les
activitcs, .le tiens, au contraire, a declarer id que le
Gouvernement libanais apprecie les efforls cteploy~s
par le Secretaire general pour mettre ~ur pied, en si
peu de temps, le mccanisme d'obscrvation operant
aetuellemellt au Liban, ainsi que les ellorts dl~ploy~s
par le Groupe d'observation pour remplir la tache
d'observation qui lui a 6te assignee. Mon gonvernement
voit avec satisfaction le developpcment de ce mecanisme
et l'expansion de ses activites, et it fern to/It cc qui est
ell son pOllvoir p.]llr continuer a eooperer entieremenl
avec llli et pour lui fournir Laute I'assistance possible.

82. Sincc the submission of the Lebanese Government's official comments on the observers' [lrsl: report,
the situation in Lebanon has consistenLly deteriorated.
Convoys of armed men and arms have been reported
entering Lebanon from Syria and while the world has
been pacified by press reports describing the s~tuation

82. Depuis la prl\sentation des observations (}mcielles
du Gouvernement libanais sur le premier rapport des
observateurs, la situation au Liban n'a [ait que se
deteriorer. Des convois d'hommes armis et d'armes
penetrant de Syrie au Liban ont ete eonstate~, et,
pendant que le monde etait npaise par des rap parts

15

.I,

as one approachillg calm, c1;mdestioe pl'epuraLioas have
been under WflY fur Lhe laullching of a great offeusive
d{',slgncd lo overthrow the Lebanese Government. We
have reason to belie.. . e tlu.t the Observation Group
will shortly be reporting to the Council somE, at least,
of th~~e infiltrations. The periL threatening the inde.pendence and integrity of Lebanoll is today even more
imminent, ~or tIte coup d'(fal in ll'aq has begun to
have ~riom repcl'cussions in Lebanon.

de pressc dccrivanL la siLuatioll conllue s'achemillunt
vrT.~ llnr acealmie, des prepamtifs se poursuivaicllt
clandestinemcnt pour une grande offensive contre le
GOllvemerneut !ibanais alill de le reaverser. Nous avons
des raisom de croire que certaines de ees infiltrations.
uu moins, seront communiquees bientet au Conseil
par le Groupe d'observaLion. Le du\\gel' qui moacc
l'indcpendance et l'inregrite du Liban est dcvenu plus.
imminent uujourd'11l1i, apnls que Le coup d'Etat en Irak
u commence d'avoil' de grflves repercussions flU Lb(1ll.

83. In view of this situation, m,y GownuncnL would
again appeal to the Security Council and urge il to
t.9.ke some more elIective emergency measure titan tlle
one it has already taken, and one more hlcely to achleve
the Council's purpose; to prevent any illegal innJtra~ion
of personne: or allY sllpply of a.rms or other mutcricl
acruss the Lebanese borders. TIle Lebanese Govr.rnment would like to reaffirm here, today, before the
Security Council, that it is always anxious to ensure
that the a~:;istallc~ it needs ';0 protect Lebanon'~ independence and integrity should be obtained throngh
tlIe United Nations and within lhe framC\\'ol'k of the
United Nations Charter.

83.

I

a

I

81.

H is for this reaSOll that, while making tll:s reqt:est
of the Security Counr:il. the Lebam"_"ir, Gov.... rnment has
decided, in view of the immedi.a~.y 01 the threat to
Lebanon's independence and to the maintenance of
intC'-tnational peace and secllrity in the Middle East,
and while awaiting the actior, it has asked the Security
Council to take, to rely on Article 51 of the Charter,
which recognizes the inherellt right of individual or
collective self-defence. Consequently, the Lebanese
Government has asked for dirtct assistance from friendly
countries. It if; clearly understood that this assistance
is strictly temporary' and will continue only until
slwh timp. as the measure WiiI lrave asked of the Security
Council is carried into effect. As S00n as slIc11 action is
undertaken, the forces of friendly cQuntries which havc
sent troops into Lebanon will at once I)e evacuated
fnJlll our Ler~itory.

84,

85.

the meflsure to which it has had to resort, my Government implores the Security G)uncil La respond fit once
to the appe~l Lebanon has made j;a it in i~.s great
anx.iety at the immediat~ threat to its independence
and integrity and to the maintenance of peil.ce and security in OlLr r::art of the world.

&r;. le Gou\'erne!llent lil18nai.~, rlevant la wavite de
la situation aetuelle au Liblln et U:J Moyen-O~ient, eL
devallt la gr:lVite de la mesure a laquelle il a eu recours,
adjnre le Conseil de secul'ite de fai\'{' suite d'ul'gencc il
l'nppcl qu'il lui adresse avec loute l'angoisse que lui
cause la menace imminente
l'indcpendance et H
l'integriM du Liban ainsi qu'au maintien de l~ pal x et
de la securile dans cette region du monde.

80. Sir Pierson DIXON (United Kingdom): At this
stage in alii !1roceedings, I do not intend to do more
th:,n to ueli.ne in hrief lerms the atUude of Hel'
Majesty's GovemlIJcllt in the Unittd Kingdom to the
5c1';0'.[8 developments which h~Ne led to this emergency
meeting uf the Security COtllldl today.

86. Sir Pic,son DIXON (Royaumc-Uni) IlraduU de
/'anglais] : Au stade actuel de nos debats, je me eontenterai de derinir bri~vem€nt ]'uttitlldC' du gouvl':rnement
cc Sn Majes~e devant les evenements graves qui oat
amenc le Couseil a tcnir aujourd'hui l\lle seance
cl'urgellct'.

(17. The Coulldl has heard of the request made by
thc Pr~sident of Lcbanon, authorized by the Lebflllc"e
Government, ;01' assistance in order to preserve Lebanon's integrity and inde:;Jendcnce and of the response
which ha$ been made by the United States Government. This response to a request from the Government of Lebanon for !"'uch US!)'lstance. is certainly fully

B7.

Cest pourqwi, tout en faisant ocHe demande all
Conseil de sccuritc, le GouvernemwL libauais a decide,
devant I'imminence du danger qui mer.ace l'independance du Liban et le maintien de la paix et de la secllritc
intemationales au Moycn~Orient, et dans l'aLtente de
l'acbon qU'il clemande au COllseil de securiLe d'cntreprendre, de metL:rc en applicatior. l'Article 51 de la
Charte des Nations Dnies, qui reconnait le droit naturel
de Jegitiml': defense, individuelle on collective. En
consc.quence, le Gouvernemenl libanais a uemandc
]'assistance direct'O de pays !1mis, 11 est bieu entendu
1ue ecHe assistance esl ::;trictement pro\'i~oire, cL
qu'ellc ne uevra continueI' que jusqu'a l'entree ell
viIJuel1r de III mcsut'e qllC nous demandons au Conscil
de prendre. Des qu'une telle action sera entreprise,
les forces des pays amis qui anrRient pn"oye des troupes
all Liban devmiel\t i:nmediaLement eVaC\ler notre
terriLolre.

In view o.f the gmvity of the presenL situation in

LebalLOJl !lnd tiLe Middle East and of the E;eriollsness of

..

J)cvant cellc situation, mon gouvel'nemeuL
s'adns5c de JlOllVr.1ll1 all Consei\ de sec-mite. paul' lul
demander de prendre d'urgellce une me~ure plus
dTica,:e que celle qu'il a deja prise et qu: soit de nature
pouvoir alteindre le bIll recherche par le Conseil. cL
qui (ollsi1;tc a e;uJl13cher toute inliltration iJlegalc de
per"ollllcl et tout envoi illegal d'armes ou d'auLre
materic! a travel's les frontieres libanaises. Le Gouvernement lihaUlitS tient it reaffirmer 11l1jourd'hui ic!.
devallt le C.:mseil de secl.lrite, qll'iJ est toujonrs souci\luX
de rechercher auprcs de l'Organisation, et dans le cudrc
de la Charle des Nntions Unies, I'assistancc dont iJ 11.
besoin pour protGger l'independtlllCe UII Llban cL ~O\l
illtegrite.

-'t-

I

I

t
I
.,

r

,

,~

r,

!,
I

a

Le Conscil sai~ que, avec j'autOl'isution du Gouvernement lib,mais, le President du Liban a demande qU'OIl
l'aide it preserver l'integrite. et l'indepelldance du Liban;
le Consei! sait aussi queUe repullse le GOllvernement
des Etats-Unis d'Amerique a dotlnc~. a cette l'equete,
I: ne fait pas de doute que cette repoIlse it cettc
demande d'aide cmanant du Gouvernement hhllflail'.

16

i
•

.'

•

,

•

'consistent with the provisions and purposes of the
United Nations Charter find tilt' esLablishcd rules of
international law.

est coniol'me aux dispositions et aux buts de la Chartc
des Nations Unies et aux normes reconUlles du droit
international.

:88. The dllation in Lebanon has been occupying
LiJr- CuulldJ siuce the beginning of lust monb when
we heard the Foreig:l Minister of Lebanon bring grave
-charges that the Uniled Arab Hepublic was intervening
in the internal aIJairs of his country. We have heard
that view fl'aflirmed today by Lhe l'epf(~sentativc of
Ldlanoll.

88. Le Conseil ~_xnmine la situation qui regnr: flU
Lib<ln clepuis que, au debut du mQis dernier, If' Minisl'r~
des alIilires ctnmgeres du Liball a porte de grave~
accusalions contre la Republique arabe unie, declarant
qu'elle intervenait dans les afTaires interieures de son
pays. Le repre.~~.nt:lnt du Libflll vient rle re<lffirmcr
cettc opinion flujilurd'llUi.

R9. It ha,'i been the consistenl view of HCI i\Iaj~ty'~
Gowrnment that there has been interference from the
United Arab RepUblic in the affairs of Lebanon, and
Clur information is that this )nterfercnce is continuing
despite the cHarts of the Observation Group Wllich
this Council dispatched to Lebanon so 3S Lo ensure
that no illegal inllLtration took place.

89. L~ Gouverecment de Sa ~Iajeslc a toujours estime
que la Rcpublique arab~, unie est effectivement int~r­
venue uans le~ allaires du Llbnn, c:, d'apI'es les renscignements en notre possession, cette ingerence continue
malgre leg eITorts du Groupe d'observation que le
Conseil de sccurite a envoye au Liban pour empechel'
toutc infJ.1tration illegale.

'90.

Her Majesty's Government has been giving its
full support to the United Nations effl)rt banelled
unclel' the resolution of 11 June 1\)58 [5/4028] and
-continues to support that effort. We recognize and
deeply appreciate the contribution wh:ch the Secretary~
General has made and is making.

90. Le GOllvernement de Sa Majes;c a donne son tlltkr
applli aux efforts que l'Organisatio:1 des Nalions Unies
::l deployes aux termes de la resolution du 11 juin 1958
[5/4023J et il continue de le faire, Nous apprecions a so
juste "'aleur la contribution que le Secretairc general
a apportee et apportc encore a cette entre[lrisc.

"91. If the news is i;onflrmed, r should like lo join my
lhitcd States colleague in expressing my deep concern
at the Iliurder of Mr. Fadhil A1 Jamali and my horror
at the employment of these ~rutal methods. And this
prompts me to say tllat it has lung been our view th<it
for a stable and peaceful world, States must eradicate
from their national policies the various methods of
subversion and indirect aggression that have been so
distressingly current in recent years. We believe pro~
foundly that it is for the llnited Nations to identify,
to condemn and, so far as it can, to arrest these decep~
tive but highly dangerous tendencies which have so
gravely complicated iuternalional relations.

91.

Si la nouvelle qu'il nailS a annoncee csl confirmce,

ie voudrais m'associer a mon eollegue des Etats-Unis

pour dire eombien nollS deplorons le. mcurtre de
M. Fadhil Al Jamali, et CDmbien l'emploi de methodes
aussi brutulcs nous fait horreur. Je voudrais ajouter
egalement que depuis tres longtemps mon gouvernement
est d'avis que si les Etats veulent instaurer la stabilitc
et la paix dans le monde, ils doh'ent renancer, dan.,
leur politique Rationale, aux diverses methodes de
subversion et d'agression indircctc qu'ils ont malheureuserrellt si souvent employees au cours des dernieres annees. NoilS sommes profondement convaincus
qu'il nppurtient a l'Ol'ganisation de'i Nations Unies
d'identifier, de condamner, et, autant que fairc se peut,
d'enrayer une tendance qui peut faire illusion, mais qui
est en fait tres dangereuse et GIli a beaucoup aggl'ave
leR relations internationales.

and confused, it is clear that there have been extremely
disturbing developments in that country and that this
illustrates the dangerous nature of the situation with
which the Council is at present dealing and the need
for immediate remedial steps. In these circumstances,
Presidtnt ChamOlln and the Government of Lebanon
have appealed for assistance,

92. Les nouveUes parvenues Ilier d'frak Wilt incom~
pletes et confuses, mais il est clalr qu'il s'est produit
dans ce pays des evenements tres inquietants qui font
ressortir le caractere dallgereux de la s.ituation dont
le Conseil s'occupe uctuellement et la JJecessitc de
prendre des me.sures immediates pour y remedier.
C'est Jans ccs conditions que le presiden: Chamonn
et le Gouvernemtnt libanais ont demandc assistance.

93, The Council has heard from the representative of
the United States the manner and purpose of the re~
sponse of the Uniti'c! States Governmmt to this appeaL.
r am authorized to inform the Council that the announcement just made on behalf of the United States by
Mr. Lodge has the full support of Her Majesty's Govern~
ment in be United Kingdom.

93. Les mcmbres du Conseil ont e.ntendu l~. representant des Etats-Unis cxposa la maniere dont son
gouvernement a repondu a cet appcl et quel but il
se propose. Je suis alltorise f1 informer le Conseil que le
Gouvernemcnt de Sa Ivlajeste dans le Royaume-Uni
approllve entie.remtut la declaration que M. Lodge
vient de f<tire au nom des Etats-Unis.

\)4. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): H
the Council agrees, I will proceed as follows, r will
call on the next speaker on my list. Then I will adjourn
the meding, and the Council will meet again at 3 p.m.,
when it will begin with the interpretation of the statement by the last spetlker to be heard at the present
meeting. If there is no objection, I will give the floor
to the representative of the Soviet Union.

94, Le PRESIDENT (Iraduil de l'espagnol) : Si le
Conseil n'y voit pas d'inconvenient, voici ce que je
compte fllire : donner la parole it l'orateur suivant,
puis lever la seance; nOllS nous reunirons de. nouveau
a 15 hcures pour entendrc d'abord l'interpretation de
l'intervention qui terminera la presente seance, SOil
n'y a pas d'objection, ie donne la parole au reprr.sentant de I'URSS.

92, Thongh yesterday's news from Iraq is incomplete

17

95.

Mr. SOBOLEV (Union of Soviet Socialist Repub w
lics) (translated from Russian): The Security Council
has again been convened to CDnsider the Lebanese
question, but this time at the request of the United
States delegation. As we all know, the St;curiLy
Council has already - and not so long ago - eJ<amined
the Lebanese complaint, accusing the United Arab
Republic of alleged interference in Lebanese afTairs.

95. M. SOBOLEV (Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques) [lraduit du russe] : Le Conseil de securite
a de nouveau ete convoque pour examiner la question
libanaise, cette {ois 3 la demande de la delegation
de~ Etats-l:nis. On sait que le ConseiJ de securite a
deja examine - il n'y a guere longtemps - la plainte
du Liban. qui accusait la Republique arabe unie d'une
pretendue ingerence dam, les afiaires du Liban,

96, As you are aware, the United Nations Observation
Group which was ~ellt to Lebanr}J\ by decision ot the
Security Council did not confirm these complaints
against the United Arab Republic. The Chairman of
the Group, Mr. Galo Plaza, former President of Ecuador,
said that the Group had found no evidence of mass
interference in LebaneRe affnirs hy the United Arab
Republic. He confirmed, at a press conference at
Be.inlt, that the Group had no proof of infiltration or
support of the rebels against the Lebanese Government
on the part of the United Arab Republic. Mr. Galo
Plaza stated that he regarded fIe events in Lebanon
as a civil war.

96. Le Groupe d'observation des Nations Unies, qui

a Me envoye au Liban conformement a la decision
du Conseil de ~ecurite, n'a pas, on le sait, confinne
les accusations portees contre la Republique arabe
unie. Le President du Groupe, M. Galo Plaza, ancien
presidenL de I'Equateur, a declare que le Groupe n'avait
trouve aucune prcuvc d'um: intervention massive de la
Republique arabe unie da::ls les affaires du Liban. II
a eonfirme, lors d'une conference de presse tenue a
Beyrollth, que le Groupe n'avn,it aucune preuve d'infil.;.
tralion d'elements provenant de la Republique arabe
unie ou d'un appui prete ;Jar eet Etat a ceux qui se
sont insurges contre le Gouvernement lihanais. M. Galo
Plaza a declare qu'il considere les evenements qui se
cleroulent au Uball comme une guerre civile.

97. It convient d'ajouter que le Secretaire general

97. To this it shQuld be added that :he SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, who was instructed by
a special decision of the Council to supervise the llCtivities of the Observation Group, has also stressed on
more than one occasion tlmt the events taking place in
Lebanon are the domestic affairs of the Lebanese
people.

..

de l'Or~anisation des Nations Dnie!'., chmge, en vertu
d'une decision sptkiale du Conseil. de surveiller l'activite

du Groupe d'observation, a souligne, lui aussi, ii plusieurs reprises, que les evenements qui se deroulent
uu Uban sont des afTaires interieures du peuple
libanais.

98. What, then, is the reason for the United States
request for an urgent meeting of the Security Council7
Surely nothing new has happened in Lebanon. In
order to answer this question, we must consider what
has happened in the last few days in the countries of
the Near ond Middle East and wllat lie~ behind these
events.

98. Dans ces conCitions, comment la demande des
Etatg.-.Unis tendant a reunir d'urgence le Conseil de
securite se justifle-t~elle? Quelque chose de nouveau
cette
s'est-il produit au Liban~ Pour repondre
question, il est, semble-twit, necessaire d'examiner ce
qui s'est passe au cours de ces derniers jours dans les
pays da Proche~Orient et du Mcyen-Orie:lt, ainsi que
les causes des evene::nents qui y ont eu lieU.

99. The facts. with whiciJ everyone is familiar, sbow
that there is in fact a state of civil war in Lebanon.
The Lebane~e people, indignant at the anti-popular
and reactionary policy of the Chamoun Government,
has arisen in defence of its constitutional rights and the
independence of the country. The fact is that the
Lebanese pCQple, in it~ struggle against the tyranny of
the colonial yoke, has uniiP.r1 RlI it!'. forces again~t the
regime which is trying to retain its mastery over the
people, by force of arms, in order to serve the imperial~
lsti.c interesb of certain Western Powers.

99. Des faits que nul n'ignore montrent que le Uban
connait une veritable guerre civile. La popu:ation
libanaise, indignee ;Jar la politique antipopulaire et
rcactionnaire du gouvernement Chamoun, s'est soulevee
pour defendre se~ dl'Oits consLitutionnels et l'independance du pays. Voici ce qui se passe: le peuple
libanais, qui veut seeouer le joug colonialiste, a uni
to lites sc~ forces pour rellV€rSer illl regime qui cherche,
par la force des arm~s, a maintenir sa domination sur
le peLple afln de servir les interets imperiaJii'tes de
ccttaines puissances occidentales.

100. The fact that, despite all his eHorts, Chamoun
has not succeedCld in llchicving the so-callt;d "slabilization of the situation in the country" is yet further
proof that the Lebanese authorities are f~ced not with
elements infiltrating from the United AJ'ab Republic,
but with a tr:.tly nation-wide movement. It is difficult
to cope with a mass anti-colonial movement, if even
the jet planes, tanks and guns hastily ruslled to Lebanon
by the Western Powers cannot help.

lOO, Le fait que, malgre tous ses efforts, M. Chamoun
n'ait pas reussi If obtenir ce qu'il appelle 11 une stabili~atioli
de la situation dans le pays 11 prouve une fois de plus
que les autorites libanaises se heurtent, non pas a des
elements qui se seraient inmtres de la Repllblique arabe
unic au Liban, mais a un mcuvement veritablement
nationaL 1] est difficile de roprimer un mouveml:llt
anticolonial auquel ~rend part tout le peuple, alors
m~me que les avions it Teacton. les chars et les canons
expedies d'urgence au Liban par des Etats occidentaux
se sont revCles inefficaces.

101. It is also known that certain Western Powers
have long been tryjng to use the events in Lebanon as

101. On sait aussi que certaines puis5ances occidentales
s'efforcent depuis lO:lgtemps deja de tirer parti des

a

18

5

••

,

•

I

,
'. •
•

a basis for military intervention against the Lebanese
people. Leaders in the United States and the United
Kingdom have openly referred to their Governments'
willingness to send their anned forces to Lebanon
under any pretext. Suffice it to recall the press conference given by Mr. Dulles, Secretary of Sb.~te of the
United States, not so long ago, on 17 June, when he
openly declared the United States' intention of sending
its armed forces to Lebanon. At the same time, he
stressed that United States troops might disembarl\
in Lebanon not only under tlte flag of Lhe Uniled
Nations, but also <IS a unilateral action.

evenements du Liban pour se livrer a une intervention
militaire eontre le peuple libanais. Les milieux dirigeants des Etats-Unis d'Amerique et du Royaume~Uni
ont declare ouvertement que leurs gouvernements
respectifs etaient prets a envoyer leurs forces armees
au Liban sous n'importe quel pretexte. It me suffira
de rappeler qu'au cours d'une conference de presse
que le SecrCtaire d'Etat des Etats~lTnis, M. DuJles, a
tenue le 17 juin - il n'y a done pas tres longtemps cehri-ci a declare ouverlement que les Etats~Unis
avaicnt ['intention d'envoyer leurs forces armees au
Uball. Il n souligne a celle occasion que les troupes
americaines pouvaient debarqucr au LiIJan non seu~
lement sous le drapean de l'Organisation des Nations
Voies, mais aussi dans le cadre d'une action unilaterale.

102. Things have come to such a pass that Mr. McElroy,
United States Secretary of Defence, went so far as to
threaten the use of atomic bombs by the United States
in tIle event of the disembarkation of troops in Lebanon.

102. La situation en est arrivee ;.Ht point 00. le Secn~­
taire n ta defense des Etats-Unis, M. MeElroy, est alle
jusqu'a des menaces en disant que les Etats~Unis
Iltiliseraient des bornbes atomiques dans le cas oil
des troupes debarqueraient :la Liban.

103. Thus, there is incontrovertible factual evidence
that Lebanon has been threat/,ned and is being threatened not by fictitious intervention in its internal
affairs by the United Arab Republic. but by direct
military intervention by the United States and its
Western partners, who are trying to maintain in power
by armed force a Government whose policy and action.~
are vigorously rejected by the Lebanese people.

103. Ainsi, les faits montrent de fayon irrefutable
que le Liban a ete menace et reste menace non pas
d'unt' intervention, inventee de LOlltes pieces, de la
Republiql1e arabe unie dans ses aITaires interieures.
mais d'une intervention militaire dirccte de la part des
Etats-Unis et de lenrs partenaires occidentaux, qui
cherchent, par In force des armes, a maintenir au
Liban un gouvernement dont h politique et lcs methodes
sont resolument rejetees par le peuple libanais.

104. It is no secret that the United Slates and other
Western Powers counted on being able to use the
United Nations observers sent to Lebanon to justif:y
their plans for intervention against the Arab peoples.
But their hopes were not fulfilled. 'the Observation
Group took an objective position and rightly appraised
the events taking place in Lebanon as matters of
domestic concern to th.c Lebanese people.

104. Ce n'est un secret pour personn.e que les EtatsVnis, comme d'ailleurs d'autres puissances occidentales,
cornptaient pouvoir utiliser les observateurs de l'Orga~
nisation des Nations Uoies envoycs au Liban pour
justifier leurs plans d'inlervention contl'c les peuples
arabes. Mais leurs espoirs sont demenres vains. Le
Groupe d'observation a adopte \loe attitude Clbjective
et a conclu, a juste titre, que les evenements qui se
deroulent au Libaa constituent uae aJfaire interieure
du peuplc libanais.

105. Yesterday, to the events in Lebanon were added
those in Iraq, where I{ing F'aisal's Government was
overthrown and the Republic of Iraq was proclaimed.
The message of Coiooel Arif, Vice Prime Minister oj
the Republic of Iraq, to the Iraqi people contains the
following statement:
"The Iraqi people, relying on their loyal sons and
their national armed forces, have decided to free
their country from the domination of a criminal
gang, which imperialism brought into power in order
that it might hold sway over the destinies of the
people, their wealth and their resources in its own
interests and for its own profi 1."

105. Hier, <lUX evenemcnls du Liban S(lDt venus
s'ajouter les evenemellts d'Irak, ou. l'autorite du rai
Faisal a ttc renversec et oil lu republique a ete pro~
clamee. Dans la declaration que le Vice·President du
ConsE':il de la Republique d'Irak, le colonel Arif, a
adressec au peuple irakien, on peut lire ee qui suit:
«( Le peuple irakien, s'appuyant sur ses fils devoues
et sur les forces ::lrInees nationales, est intcrvenu
pour libcrer la pnirie de la domination d'une bande
de crimincls qui avait ete placee au pouvoir par les
imperialistes n flO de pouvoir disposer a son gre
des destil1tes du peuple, de ses richesses et de ses
biens dans son propre intefl~.t et;1 son propre avantage. »

106. Colonel Arif further stated that the Government
of the Republic of Iraq would strive to bring ahout
frnternal relations with other Arab llnd Moslem countries, that it would act in accordance with tlle principles of the United Nations and tllat it wlllLld abide
by obligations and treaties which serve the interests of
the country and are in keeping with the decisions of the
Bandung Conference.

106. Ii'[. Arif a ajOLlte que le gouvernement de la
Republiquc rrIrak s'efforcerait de maintenir des rela~
tions fraremencs avec 1es atllres pays arabes et musul~
mans, qu'il agirait conformcment aux. principes de
l'Orgallisation des NRlions Uoics et qu'i\ respecterait
les engagements el les traites qui rcpondent aux iJltercts
du pays et qui sont conformes [lUX decisions d(~ la
Conference de Bandoung.
107, Les cyenements d'[rak sont llne affaire exclusivement intericure du peuple irakien, qui s',·.st soulevc

)

,
,,
~

,

(

,:).

•

, '.

,.

107. The events ill Iraq are purely the domestic affair
of the Iraqi people, who have risen against foreign

19

j

domination and have freed the country from the [lna·
chronistic and reactionary rule of King Faitml.
108. It is reported that the new Government of the
Republic of Iraq is receiving thousands of telegrams
from workers, trade unions, employees, teachers,
youth and student organizu Lioll8 Bud tribal leaders,
ex~ressing support for and solidarity with the people's
victory <lod the proclnmalion of tllC Rc:mblic.
lO!J. All this bears witness to the fact lIu" peoples 01
the Arab world have taken the path of nuLiollallibernlion, are determined to defend their political independence, and want to manag~ their own resources and to
pursue a policy serving their national interests, wltllOut
lookiug either to London or to Washington. In other
words, the peoples of the East want to live like other
peoples, like masters in t\ltir own house, in peace and
friendship with all peoples, and not, as the organizers
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the SouthEast Asia Treaty Organi'llltion, or the Baghdad Pact
would like, with their policy closely bound to Lhe cold
war, the armaments race and unbridled expansion at
the expense of sTllall countries and peoples. B:.lt this
does not enter into the calculations of these. organizers,
who "'ant to bind the Arab East hand and fool politically and economically.

108. On annonce que le nouveau gouvernement de la
Rcpublique d'Irak regoit des milliers de telegrammes
d'ollvriers, de syndieats, d'employcs, d'instituteurs.
d·organisations, de jeunes gens et d'etudiants et de
chefs de tribus, qui l'a~Slll'ent de leur appui et llli
exprilllellt leur :;olidaritc a I'occasion de la victoirc
dn pellpJe et de la prOcl~mHl.tion de la repl.1blique.
109.

Tous ces faits lnontrcnt que les peuplcs du monde

arabe, q\li se wnt c\\gagc~ duns la voie de la Iiberalinn
nuLionale, \'eulent assurcr lellr independance politiqllL~.
disJloser eux-meme:; de lenrs ricl1esses, pratiqller une
politiquc qui reponde it kurs intere.ts natiollflUx, ~nr_~
se tou1'ller vel'S Londres Oll vers \Vashington. BreL lcspeuples de rOriellt veulent vivre comme les alltres
penpies, ils veulent ctre selll:; maitres cllez eux, Us
veulent vivre dans la paix et dans l'amitie avec Loes
les peuples, et non pas colllmc le voudraicnt Ics orgall.Jsateurs de l'Orgunisation du Traite de I'Atlantique
nord, de ('OrganIsation de '[raite de l'Asie du Sud-Est
et du Pacte de Bagdad, qui ou1; lie etroitement lcur
politiqll.e a la gue1'l'e froide, a la course aux arnement"
(It 2 une expansion efT~ncCl, au detriment des peLits
pays et des petits pellplrs. Or, c'est cela prccisement
qui va a l'encontre des calculs de ces organisatenrs,
qui voudraient te:lir les peuples de l'Orienl arah(~
pieds et poings lies sur le plaIt llolitlque et economiqne.

110. The reactions of ruling circles in the United States
Lo the events in Iraq show that the very exi"tenec of
the aggressive military blocs in the Near and Middle
East and, in particular, of the Baghdad Pact, is now
at stale.

110. La reaction des milieux dirigeallts de!; EtaLs-Unis
devant les evencments d'Il'ak PfCluve que c'esl l'cxistr.nce meme des blocs militaires agrcs"ifs du Pl'oche~
Orient et du Moyen-Orient ..- et, nvanl tonl, dn Pact/;
de Bugdad - - qui est en jeu.

l1I. Furthermore, the events in Iraq have created a
threat to the unchallenged domination of imperialistic
States over that country's economy,

111. All surplus. les evenements d'Trak menacenL la
domination sans partage exerCee par les Etats imperilllisks sur l'ecoll.Olnie de Cl' pays.

112. Accordiug to press reports, the special sensitivity of the United States and the United Kingdom
towards events in Iraq can be attributed to the demands
(If the large American and BriLish petroleum n'lono~
poUes tha.t deeisive step~ ~ho\11d be taken to erush the
aspiralons of the Iraqi people to become the real
masters of their destinies, their resources and their
State. The word "oil" dominates all the news in
loday's papers. The Neor East "mens of ~ oil ". That
i~ why ruling circles in the Unitcd State:! are reacting
,;0 strongly ~o events in Iraq.

112. Cc n'est pas par hasard q',le, d'apres les informations publices dans la presse, la reacLion particuJiercment vive enregistree aux ELats~Unis d'Arneriql1c et
an Roynume~Uni devant les evellem~nt~ en Irak
s'cxpliqll.e par lc~ exigences des puissallts monopole5
petrnllcrs americains et britanniques, qui vculcnt que
des mesures ellcrgiques scient prises pour etoufIer le
desir du peuple irakien de devenir mailre de ses destinees, de seg richesses cL de son Etnt. Dans tOllS les
urticles parus daus les journaux d'aujollrd'lllli, le mat
I( petrolc» tient la vedette. Le proche-Oricnt sent le
petrole, Et c'est [a raison pour laquelle la reaction des
milicux dirigeanLs des Etat;;.Unis devant lcs evenelOcnts
d'Irak est si vive.

113. Wc haw just lIeard the l1niled Statc~ reprc:>entative's statement about the landing of United States
armed forces in the territory of Lebanon. The fact
is that the United States has d{',cidc.d ope:lly, wilhout
taking cover bebiud any flag, to intervene WIth its armed
f,)rces in the idernaJ affairs ,)f the Arab countries and
to force. to their knees peoples who have risen in defence
of their freedom and independence, not only in Lebanon,
but also in otller Arab States,

113. NOlls venons d'enlendre la declaration du repre~
sentant dell Etats-Unis au suje'.: du ctebarqJCmcllt
des forccs armees des Etats-Unis sul' le territoire du
Liban. Les Etats-Unis ont decid6 ouvertcmenL, sans
!:>e cO:lvrir rl'al.lcun drapca\l, d·intervenil.' par leurs
forces armces dans les affaires interieures des pays
arabe~ et de Iaire pEer devant eux non sculemcnt le
pe\lpl~ libanais, mais aussi les pe~lples d'autres Etats
arabes qui se sont .oollleve.~ POllI' defend re leur liberte
et leur independance.

20

•

contre la domination ctrangere et qui a libere SOil pfly!;
de l'autoritc reactionnaire du rei Faisal, qui avait fait
son temp~.

I

I

I

I

I

5

,

·

,

~

I•

•

114. In un altcmpt to justify his country's aggressive
action. t}lC United States representflth'c alleges that
it was requested by the present rulers of Lebanon.
It is no secret, however, that these rnlcrs are simply
political puppets of the United States and that their
requests are inspired by the United States State
Department.

114.

Ponr justifier les actes agressifs de son pays, le
des Etats~Unis sontient que la decision
de son gouvernemenl a ete motivee par une demande
des dirigeants actuels du Liban. Or, ce n'est un secret
pour personne que ces dirigeants ne sont que des
pantins politiques des Etats~Unis et que les demandes
qu'ils adressent sont inspirer::s par le Departement
d'Etat de ce pays.

115. In tllesc circumstances, the sending of United
States troops to Lebanon is an act of aggression against
the peopies of the Arab world and a case of ,gross inter
venlion in the domestic afTairs of the countries of that
area. This <let is a l1agrant violation of tile United
Nalions Charter. which prohibits the use of force as
a tool of foreign policy. This act is contrary to tIle
principles and tenets of international law and eonsti~
Lutes a ehnllenge to all frectlom~loving people. No
reference to Chamoun's requests can justify this act
of armed aggression, for these requests were provoked
precisely in order Lo justify United States intervention
in the domestic affairs of the countries oE the Arab
wurld. But such justification is impossihle.

115, Daus ces conditions, l'envoi de troupes des EtatsUnis au Liban constitue UIl acte d'agression contre les
peuples du monde arabc et uue ingerence brutale dans
les afl'aires interieurcs des Etats de cctle parLie du
monde. Cet acte constitue nne violation flagrante de
la Charle des Nations Dnies, qui inLerdit de faire usage
de la force pour a.tteindre des objectifs tie politique
exterieure. Cet acLe est mntraire aux principes et nux
regles du droit internnLional, UIl deli lance a toute
l'humanite eprise de liberLe. Aucune reference :lUX
demandes de M. Chamoun ne saurait justifter cet acte
d'ngression armee, car ces demandes ont prccisement
ete inspirees a eette fin; dlcs vise.llt a justifier I'ingerence
des Etats-Unis dans les alTaires intcrieures des Etats
du monde arabe, alOl's que rien ne saurait justifier
eette ingerence.

116. As grounds for its intervention the United Stales
refers to the United Nations Charter. It is true Lhat
the Charter provides for the right of individual or collective self-defence if un armed attack occurs against
a Member of the United Nations, until the Security
Council has taken the measures necessary to maintain
international peace and security. But in this case the
situation is quite different. The Security Council is
taking action in Lebanon. It has taken a decision
which makes possible a settlement of the situation in
that country. No one has attacked Lebanon and
there is no threat of an armed attack against Lebanon.
It. is obvious that this reference to the Charter has
llolhing to do with the case and that it is merely a
manCCl.lvre designed to conceal the aggressive nature
of the armed intervention of the United States against
t)le Arab peoples. Lebanon is threatened by no one
<'xcept those who have undertaken armcd intervenlion
with a view to crushing a people in revolt, :Moreover,
the referencl~ lo the United Nations Charler also fltnS
countel' to tlle report of the Ohservation Group sent
by the Security Council, which states thaL tllerc is no
threat whatsoever to Leb~non, on the part of the UniLed
Arab Republic.

1lB. Pour etablir le bien-fonM de leur intervention,
les Etats-Unis invoqucnt la Charte des Nations Unies.
La Charte reconnait, en efIet, UtIX Etats Membres de
1'0rganisation des NatLOlls Unies le droit de legitimc
defense, individuelle ou collective, si ces i\Iembres
fonL l'objet d'une agression armee, jusqll'a ce que le
Conseil de secnrite ait pris les mesures necessaires
pour maintenir la paix et la secmite internn bonules.
Mais, en l'occurrence, la situation est tout autre. Le
Conseil de secmite agit nu Lihan. n a pris nne decision
qui permet de retablir une situation normale a l'interieur
du pays. Personne n'a attaquc le Liban, eL aucllnc
menace d'agression armec ne pese sur cc pays. Il est
patent que cette referencc a la C1Jarle n'a aueUll rapport
avec le probleme: iJ s'agit uniquement d'une manCEuvre
destinee a dissimuler le caracte-re agressif de !'intervention m·mte des Etats"Unis contrc Ics peuples arabes.
Personne ne menace le Liban, si Cc n'est ceux qui
procedent 11 une intervcntion armee pour reprimer le
soulevcmenl du peuplc. D'ailleurs, la refenmce a la
Charte de!'! Nations Unit's est contreditr:: egalement par
le rupport du Grollpe d'observation envoyc par le
Conseil de seeurite, qui indiqlle notammcnt que le
Liban n'est mcnace d'aucun danger de la part de la
Hepublique arabe unie.

117. The Soviet Union delegation considers that the
attempt of the United States to cover up its armcd
intervcntion against the peoples of the Near and j\'fiddle
East by a reference to self-defence makes a mocleery
of the United Nations Charter, and of tIle high pur~
poses ali.d principles on which our Organization is
b~setl and which are rcllected in the Charter.

117. La delegation de l'Uniou sovietique considere
que In Lentative faite par les Etats-Unis de masquer
lellr in lervention fil'mee cOntre les peuples des pays
du Procl\e-Orient et du i\Ioyea-Orient en invoquant
la legiLimc defense cquivaut it ridieuliscl' la Charte
des Nations Dnies - Ics nobles j]ns et principes sur
lesquels repose notre Organisation et qui sont enonces
dans la Ch::lrte.
118. Le r~glement des questions touchant le Gouvernement tlu Liball et le Gouvcmement de I'Irak
est un droit itlalicnable des pCllples de ces pays. Les
evenements intericurs qui surviennent dans un pays
ne sauraient servir de pretexte a Wle ingerence dans
les affaires interieures de ce pays. Toute intervention
armee des puissances occidentales risquc d'avoir les

repr~sentant

M

'.

•

, ,
f

·•
·
>

,•

-

,

•

-

118. The peoples of Lebanon and Iraq have the 111alienable right to settle all problems relating to these
States. No internal incidents occurring within a country can serve as a pretext for intervention in ih
domestic affairs. Any armed intervention by the
Western Powers is fraught with the most serious consequences, threatens acutely to aggravnte the intcr-

21

i
1
j
,

I
l

I
l

I

I
,

....

national situation and is liable to plunge the world
into the ahY8s of a new war.

consequences les plus graves; elle menace d'envenirner
considerablement la situation intel'nationale eL d'entral~
ner le monde dans le gouITre d'Hnc nouvelle guerre.

119. The entire responsibility for the;;c. conseq~ences
falls upon the organizers of and participators III the
armed intervention against the peoples of the Arab
East and, first and foremost, on Lhe Government of
the U oited States of Americo.

119. Toute la responsabilitc de ccs consequences
possibles incombe a ceux qui ant organise l'inLervention
armce contre les peupies de l'Orient arabe et qui y
participent, et. au premier chef, au Gouvernement des
Etats-tJllis d'Ameriquc.

120. So fur as the Soviet Union is concerned, as we
have frequently f>Lated, we firmly believe that peace
must reign in the area of the Near und Middle East,
which is adjacent to lhe frontiers of the Soviet Union.
The Soviet Union cannot, there.Lore, remain indifferent
to foreign intervention in the countries of Lhat urea,
under whatever cover such intervention is perpetmled.

Quanl ill'UlIion sovietique, comme nous J'avOl1~
dec];lf(~ a mainte~ reprises, eUe vent que Ja paix regnl;
dans l:'l region du Proche-Orient et du Moyell-Orient,
qui est a prDXillliLe de ses Irontieres. C'est pourquoi
l'Unioll sovietlque ne saurait demeurer indifIerente it
UriC intervention etrangere dans les pays de c"Uc
region, quels que soient les arguments invoques [lout>
masql1er cette interventioll.

L21. It is the duty of every State and Governmcnl
which is really concerned with peace to do everything
in its power to stop agression against the pcoples of
1.I1at area,

121. Chaqne Etat cL Cll:lqlll' gouvernClllcnt veritahlement soucieux de la paix II le devoir de faire tout Cl'
qui est en son pouvoir ponr mt:Ltre un terme al'agressioll
perpctree contre les peuples de cettc region.

122. The Securily Council, bearing in mind the respollsibilities vested in it by the United Nations Charter
in connexion wHll the maintenance of peace and security, must tDke decisive measures to put an end tu
armed interference in the affairs of the Arab States
and to ensure peace and tranquillity in that part of
the world.

122. Le Conseil de sewrile, en vt'rtu des obligations
que lui confere la Charte des Nations Unies pour les
questions relatives au maiutien de la paix et de la
securite. doit prendre des mesures energiques POUl'
Inettre fin a l'intervention armce dan:; les afIaires des
pays arabes eL assurer la paix et le calme dans cetle
regiOll du mondc.

123. The Soviet delegation has tllerefore submitted
to the Security Council the following druft resolution:

"The Security Council,
" Having heard the announcement made by the
representative of the United States of America con·
ceming the introduction of United StoLes armed
rorces within the confmes of Leuanoll.
.. Recognizing that such action constitllLes gross
illtervention in the domestic affairs of tlte peoples
of the Arab countries and is cansequently cantrary
to tile purposes and principles of the United NatiOIls
Ui:l sr.t forth in its Charter und, in particular, in
Article 2, paragraph 7, which prohibits intervention
in matters which arc essentially within the domestic
j urisdtction of ::lllY State,
.. Considering thut the action of the United States
wnstitutes a seriolls threat to international peace
and security,
,. Calls upon the Governmenl of the United SLales
of America to cease armed intervention in the domestic affairs of the Arab States and to remove its
troops from the territory of Lebanon immediately. "
[S/4047]

123. La delegation de l'Union sovie.tiqul:: SOLlmet It
I'examen du Conseil de secnrite le projet de resolnUolI
suivant :
<I Le Conseil de securite,
l( l1yant entendu la communicalion du representant
dcs Etats-Unis d'Amerique conceruanl l'envoi de
forces armees amcricaincs ,i l'intcrieur des limites
du Liban,
1< Reconnaissanl qnc de tels acles constituent Ulle
intervention flagrante dans les all'aires interieures
des peuples des pays tmlbes el, en consequence, soul
contraires aux buts et principes de l'Organisation
des Nations Ullies enonces dans la CharLe, et notamment all pamgraphe 7 de l'Article 2, qui interdit
toute intervenlion dans les afIaires qni relevent
essentiellclllent de la competence nationale d'un Etat,
~ Considerant que les actes des Etuts-Unis consti·
tucnl unc grave menace contre la paix el )n securitli
internationales,
«Fail appel au Gouvernemenl des Et3ts~Ullis
pOllr qu'il mette fin a I'intervention nrmee clans lc~
aITaircs interieures des Etats arabes ct retire immcdiatemcnt ses troupes du tcrritoire du Libau."
[5/4047.]

124, The Soviet delegation appeals to all members
of the Council to support this draft resolution. lts
adoption by the Council would he a step towards put~
Ling 2n end to this gross intervention in the domestic
affairs of the Arab peoples and would help to remove
the real threat of 11 new war.

124. La delegalion de l'Union sovielique invite
instammcnt tous les membrcli du Conseil ii appuyer
cc projet de resolution. SOil adoption par le Conseil
conlribllcrail il. {aire cesser l'ingerence brutale dans les
affaires interiemes des [Jcllples urabe.'> el a ecarter
le reel dangr.r d'un!' nO\lVC'II!' gllerre.

The meeting rose at 1 p,m.

La $eance I.'sl l~uel' Cl 13 heurr.s.

Printed fn France

Price

(

"

)

~,

120.

SO.S. °-.35; 2/6 stg.; Sw. fr, 1.50
(or eqmvalent in other currencies)

12007-Fcbruary 1960-1,675

>

I
~,

r,

,
I

,r>
,

..

"

r
)

I

.,

r
r

r
