S/2020/436

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
27 May 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 27 May 2020 from the President of the Security Council
addressed to the Secretary-General and the Permanent
Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Mr. James Swan, Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia; Mr. Francisco Caetano José Madeira,
Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
for Somalia and Head of the African Union Mission in Somalia; and Ms. Agnès
Marcaillou, Director of the United Nations Mine Action Service, as well as the
statements delivered by the representatives of Belgium, China, the Dominican
Republic, Estonia, France, Germany, Indonesia, the Russian Federation, South
Africa (on behalf of the three African countries that are members of the Security
Council — the Niger, South Africa and Tunisia — as well as Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines), the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United
States of America and Viet Nam, in connection with the video-teleconference on
the situation in Somalia convened on Thursday, 21 May 2020. A statement was also
delivered by the representative of Somalia.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of
the Security Council addressed to Permanent Representatives of Security Council
members dated 7 May 2020 (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of the
extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, these
briefing and statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Sven Jürgenson
President of the Security Council

20-07105 (E) 030620 120620

*2007105*

S/2020/436

Annex I
Statement by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Somalia, James Swan
I wish everyone a good evening from Mogadishu and Ramadan Mubarak to
our Somali brothers and sisters as we approach Eid al-Fitr.
Somalia, like the rest of the world, is focused on confronting the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Somalia has more than 1,500 recorded cases,
although the actual figures are almost certainly much higher.
The consequences for Somalia are acute. Even before COVID-19, more than
5 million Somalis required humanitarian assistance. The 2.6 million internally
displaced persons are particularly at risk. Compounding the crisis, nearly 1 million
Somalis are now affected by flooding, and the country also faces its worst desertlocust infestation in some 25 years.
In addition to the medical and humanitarian effects, COVID-19 is also
having a severely negative economic impact on Somalia. The Federal Government
projects an 11 per cent decline in nominal gross domestic product for 2020. Revenue
generation has suffered from the closure of ports and airports. Vital remittances
from the diaspora have dwindled by 40 per cent.
The Federal Government and federal member states have responded quickly
to the crisis within their means. A national COVID-19 task force was established
in early March, under the chairmanship of Prime Minister Hassan Khayre. Federal
member states have created similar structures and also participate in the nationallevel coordination. Public-health messages are being disseminated, funds mobilized
and medical and protective equipment procured.
The United Nations family is working to reinforce the Government’s response.
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes have reoriented their activities
to give priority to COVID-19. I will list just a few examples: the World Health
Organization has expanded Somali hospital capacity, established isolation centres
and supported testing laboratories. The United Nations Development Programme has
provided generators. The United Nations Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS) and
the United Nations Humanitarian Air Service have provided vital air transport and
other logistical support. The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs is
leading on coordination within the United Nations family and with partners. And
much more is being done across all agencies, funds and programmes.
Somalia’s ability to respond to COVID-19 is greatly aided by its having achieved
the decision point under the World Bank and International Monetary Fund Heavily
Indebted Poor Countries Initiative on 25 March. That historic milestone recognized
Somalia’s improved public financial management and has now enabled Somalia to
become eligible for the additional grant financing urgently needed to mitigate the
impact of COVID-19. The World Bank and other partners have mobilized funding
for immediate preparedness needs and budget support. The World Bank and United
Nations agencies such as the World Food Programme are also fast-tracking economic
recovery and cash transfer investments to help shore up livelihoods and resilience.
In addition to its direct response, the United Nations family has supported
the Government by engaging with and coordinating help from the broader donor
community. On 23 April, the United Nations in Somalia issued the country
preparedness and response plan for COVID-19, which consolidated United Nations
system requests in support of the Government.
Prior to the global pandemic, Somalia had set ambitious national priorities for
2020. These include the holding of the first direct, one-person-one-vote elections in
Somalia since 1969. As the Council noted in November (see S/PV.8671), the holding
2/34

20-07105

S/2020/436

of peaceful, inclusive, credible and transparent one-person-one-vote elections would
be a historic step in rebuilding Somalia and would assist with the country’s continued
democratic development.
The coming weeks will be decisive in determining how Somalia will proceed
to these elections. The parliamentary joint ad hoc committee is expected to present
its recommendations for resolving the issues omitted in the electoral law passed in
February. These include designating constituencies, allocating Upper House seats
and guaranteeing 30 per cent of the parliamentary seats for women. Parliament must
also adopt amendments to the political parties law to conform to the electoral code.
The Chairperson of the National Independent Electoral Commission will also
report to a joint session of the Houses of the Parliament on plans for conducting
elections within the constitutional time frame: November 2020 for the Parliament
and February 2021 for the presidential elections.
These Somali institutions will determine the pathway to elections. Somalia’s
partners must then be ready to mobilize the technical support and financial resources
needed for implementation. The work of the national electoral security task force
must also accelerate to ensure the necessary security arrangements for voting to
take place. Equally important, there will be a need for consensus-building among
political leaders and across Somali society to ensure that the elections enjoy broad
support and acceptance.
In addition to the focus on elections, we also note the importance of Somalia
making progress on other critical State-building priorities. These include the
formation of the Constitutional Court, the Judicial Service Commission and an
independent Human Rights Commission, as well as completing the review of the
Federal Constitution.
Effective democratic competition also requires an enabling environment
that protects freedom of speech, assembly and organization. I call on the Federal
Government and federal member states to ensure these are fully respected, especially
during this critical election year.
Turning to the security situation, let me first pay tribute to Somali security
forces and the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) for their continued
sacrifice in the pursuit of peace. AMISOM completed the reduction of its troop
ceiling by 1,000 troops on 5 March, as decided by the Council. UNSOS is currently
providing logistics support to 19,626 AMISOM uniformed personnel as well as
to 10,900 Somali security forces, supported by donor contributions to the Somali
security forces trust fund.
Since my most recent briefing (ibid.), Somalia has made progress in
recovering areas occupied by Al-Shabaab. On 16 March, the Somali National Army
and AMISOM liberated the strategic town of Janaale, in Lower Shabelle. Somali-led
forces have held the town since then, and efforts by the federal and South-West state
authorities to return governance, justice, the rule of law and stability to the town are
ongoing, supported by UNSOS, the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM) and other partners.
Meanwhile, institutional reforms have continued in the security forces,
including improvements to management and personnel systems.
As set out in the threat assessment undertaken jointly in January by the United
Nations, the African Union and the Federal Government of Somalia, the threat of
Al-Shabaab has continued to evolve. The group continues its intimidation and violence
through improvised explosive devices (IEDs), mortar attacks, assassinations and
other means. Within communities under its control, Al-Shabaab employs extortion
and conducts illegal commercial and criminal activities. We regret that it has not
20-071053/34

S/2020/436

embraced the Secretary-General’s appeal for a global ceasefire and that its terrorist
operations continue unabated.
With regard to the specific threat of IEDs, Somali security forces would
benefit from additional support to counter that deadly menace. In that connection,
I look forward to the briefing by the Director of the United Nations Mine Action
Service later in this meeting.
I welcome the Federal Government’s commitment to revise the Somali transition
plan by updating the timelines and identifying key tasks and gaps in response to the
evolved threat from Al-Shabaab. The Federal Government has acknowledged the
need for greater coordination, both internally and with international partners, as
well as the need for additional non-military responses to the diffuse Al-Shabaab
threat, such as addressing terrorist financing. The Government has signalled its
commitment to promote a comprehensive approach to security, and we welcome that.
Regrettably, COVID-19 has slowed the international partner training needed
to generate forces for the fight against Al-Shabaab. That may impact operations,
underscoring the need for an updated transition plan that reflects all changes to the
force generation timeline.
We welcome the recent inclusive conversations held among Somali security
leaders and key international partners to discuss requirements and configurations
for international support for Somalia’s security sector in the coming years. We
look forward to continuing those discussions with a view to strengthening our
collective efforts.
Turning to developments with regard to the federal member states, we are
encouraged by recent progress on dialogue and reconciliation in several of them.
Those include Galmudug, where a broadly representative new cabinet has been
appointed, South-West state, where elders have selected a new Parliament, and
Jubaland, where former political rivals have agreed to work together and to pursue
further reconciliation. In those and other federal member states, we urge continued
efforts to promote dialogue and outreach in all communities for the sake of inclusive
governance in the interest of the people.
With regard to Somalia-Somaliland relations, we welcome the ongoing dialogue
at senior levels and are encouraged that both sides have indicated a willingness to
maintain open channels of communication and pursue further discussions.
We urgently call for commitment to dialogue and improved cooperation to
extend to relations between the Federal Government and all of the federal member
states. While relations between the central Government and some federal member
states remain cooperative, we regret that it has been more than a year since the
President and all federal member state leaders met. They must all work together
with urgency if they are to address important national priorities in the interest of the
Somali people.
As directed by the Council in resolution 2461 (2019), UNSOM has supported
efforts to accelerate regular high-level dialogue between the Federal Government
and federal member states. The United Nations stands ready to support Somali
initiatives on reconciliation and collaboration through inclusive dialogue.
In conclusion, I wish to reassure the Council that United Nations forces in
Somalia remain present, active and committed to delivering our mandate — despite
the limitations and additional challenges resulting from the global pandemic and
the ongoing security threats to our Mission. We have temporarily reduced the staff
working in Mogadishu and our field offices, but our colleagues are still working
remotely from all over the world, remain engaged and continue to demonstrate their
determination to support the people of Somalia.
4/34

20-07105

S/2020/436

Annex II
Statement by the Special Representative of the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission for Somalia and Head of the African
Union Mission in Somalia, Francisco Madeira
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has not spared Somalia. COVID-19 is
undercutting our collective efforts in the country and undermining the progress
that the Federal Government of Somalia and federal member states have made. We
have set up an COVID-19 response task force within the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), which is working closely with the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia, the central Government and the Governments of the federal
member states in all AMISOM sectors.
It is with admiration that we witness the effort Somalia is making to contain
terrorism, build peace through dialogue and reconciliation and develop the country
through State-building, reconstruction and recovery — despite the disruption of
COVID-19 in Somalia and its potential to derail the implementation of the country’s
outstanding priority tasks. In that context, I would like to highlight developments in
three key areas: Somalia’s economic recovery, inclusive politics and security.
In October 2019, at the Somalia Partnership Forum, the Federal Government
committed to continuing its stringent economic reforms as part of its debt relief
efforts. The country needs to overcome important economic hurdles, however, if it
is to fully cancel its debt.
To achieve its next milestone, the Federal Government must now embark on
new short-term targets, which include providing food assistance to about 5.2 million
people, addressing the needs of those in internally displaced persons camps, educating
people who are not in school and creating around 400,000 jobs each year. That is a
daunting task if we take into account the adverse conditions brought about by the
combination of terrorism, recurrent natural disasters and the impact of COVID-19
on Somalia’s economy. Already there are indications that remittances are declining,
trade is dropping and household incomes are facing a downward trend. If the trend
of decreasing revenues continues, due to COVID-19, a potentially more worrisome
concern is the risk that the Federal Government will struggle to meet some of its
obligations. As partners of Somalia in our common endeavour to help the country
remain on its feet and progress, we need to envisage ways to help Somalia overcome
those trends and meet the conditions to be eligible for full debt cancellation.
While the Federal Government does not yet fully enjoy cooperative relations
with all of its federal member states, in recent months we have witnessed a degree
of readiness to move forward on key national issues. I take note, with satisfaction,
of the Federal Government’s role in strengthening its technical cooperation with
the federal member states’ line ministries to ensure that important must-not-fail
priorities are achieved.
In February, after hosting a consultative conference, the Puntland President
announced his intention to pursue dialogue with Mogadishu. In conjunction with
other initiatives under way, we hope that this will lead the Federal Government and
federal member states to begin articulating a common vision for Somalia.
In addition to the encouraging signs of a much-needed national dialogue in
the near future, we have also seen progress in reconciliation and dialogue efforts at
both the State and local levels.
In Galmudug, the deployment of AMISOM troops in Dhuusamarreeb has
contributed to the creation of a conducive environment for the holding of a successful
20-071055/34

S/2020/436

all-clan reconciliation conference and to substantial progress in state formation. The
process saw elections take place in February and, more recently, we witnessed the
formation of an all-inclusive Galmudug cabinet and a peaceful transfer of power
from former President Haaf to the new incumbent, President Qoor Qoor. We welcome
these significant developments, and we are optimistic about the future of Galmudug
and the ability to build on those important steps.
In Jubaland, we take note of the recent developments that saw the Jubaland
leader and Ogadeni opposition figures reach a settlement that led to mutual
recognition and cohabitation. Nevertheless, we insist on the need to go further to
ensure that all clans come together in an all-Jubaland stakeholder congregation to
find a lasting solution to the political, social and economic problems that continue to
besiege that federal member state.
At the local level, similar reconciliation efforts were also promoted in
April as part of a push to end violent clan conflicts. In Lower Shabelle, the swift
intervention by the South-West President saw put an end to conflict between the
Gaaljecel and Shanta Caleemood clans. And in Galmudug, a similar approach by the
new Administration resulted in a cessation of hostilities between the Wagarda’a and
Habar Gidir clans.
Work to prepare for elections continues. In that context, I would like to applaud
the commitment of the joint parliamentary ad hoc committee on elections and the
tireless efforts of the National Independent Electoral Commission (NIEC). Despite
the COVID-19 disruptions, both the Committee and NIEC have opted to continue
most of their work through technological platforms. Pursuing that option enabled
the critical drafting of recommendations to complement the national electoral bill
passed in February.
In addition, I commend the vital work of the National Electoral Security Task
Force. In adverse conditions, the Task Force increased its activity, which recently led
to an agreement on its terms of reference and the adoption of the concept of security
for voter registration.
We also see additional progress as the Task Force held a two-day workshop in
March to conduct assessments on the ability to create secure areas across Somalia
and to make plans for starting to map potential voter registration centres.
It is abundantly clear that holding national elections is a top priority for
Somalia. From my engagement with key election stakeholders, I am also convinced
that they too view this as a matter of necessity and urgency. The recent return to
Mogadishu of the two Speakers of the Federal Parliament is an encouraging sign, and
it will enable the report of the NIEC’s Chair to be delivered on 27 May.
I am concerned, however, that despite genuine efforts to prepare for elections,
there are outstanding and potentially contentious issues that must be immediately
and effectively addressed. Those include making the electoral law implementable
and ensuring a 30 per cent quota for women representatives and the adoption in
Parliament of the amendments to the political parties law.
But above all, Somalia’s election will require the political support and
involvement of all federal member states. This is urgent as time is running out. I
therefore call on all stakeholders at the Federal and regional levels to overcome their
challenges and to allow the presence and effective action of the National Independent
Electoral Commission in all federal member states so that credible, free and fair
elections can take place.
During the reporting period, there were tangible security gains in degrading
and disrupting Al-Shabaab’s operational capabilities across Somalia. On 16 March,
6/34

20-07105

S/2020/436

through Operation Badbaado, Al-Shabaab was dislodged from the bridge town of
Janaale in Lower Shabelle. The recovery of Janaale represents a serious blow to
Al-Shabaab, as the town was a strategic stronghold for the group’s operations in
Lower Shabelle and Mogadishu. Janaale was also a hub for manufacturing improvised
explosive devices (IEDs) and vehicle-borne IEDs. Beyond Janaale, targeted operations
by AMISOM and Somali security forces in Bula Xaaji on 20 March destroyed enemy
positions and considerably reduced the group’s capabilities.
In line with resolution 2472 (2019), AMISOM completed its mandated
drawdown of 1,000 troops by 28 February without handing over or collapsing any
of its forward operating bases. In doing so, they have consolidated the gains made
over the years and have protected the population from Al-Shabaab. As agreed at
the Kampala operational coordination committee meeting, each troop-contributing
country assumed all expenses related to maintaining its forces in the forward
operating bases that were to be collapsed.
The implementation of phase one and two of the transition plan has seen
AMISOM and the Somali security forces conduct several joint operations as part of
efforts to disrupt and degrade Al-Shabaab. Nevertheless, much work remains if we
are to fully implement the tasks in both phases of the transition plan by December.
However, the current pace of generating well-trained, well-equipped and regularly
paid Somali security forces may not be enough to reach the goal of producing a
critical mass of Somali forces capable of taking over from AMISOM by the end
of 2021, or to preserve the gains made over the years with so much sacrifice. That
fact alone calls for the urgent reconsideration and readjustment of the way and pace
in which all stakeholders involved in supporting peacebuilding and State-building
efforts in Somalia — together and individually — implement the tasks outlined in
the Somali transition plan.
AMISOM’s effectiveness in the theatre of operations should be seen in the
broader context of several actors, each with a specific role in responding to Somalia’s
fundamental problems of terrorism, political disagreements, lack of reconciliation
and economic underdevelopment. In that connection, the comprehensive approach to
security, which underpins the implementation of the transition plan and outlines the
division of labour into five strands, remains the most viable vehicle to ensuring that
all fundamental aspects of the Somali crisis are taken into account and effectively
tackled. The comprehensive approach to security may be reviewed if necessary so
as to ensure maximum effectiveness. In that regard, such a framework would ensure
that all actors have shared responsibility and help overcome the challenges related
to poor coordination and coherence, erratic information sharing and lack of trust
and mutual accountability, which are all serious obstacles to our joint endeavour
in Somalia.
The current rate of force generation is too slow and, if left unchanged, will take
several years to reach the threshold for an effective transition. The recent successes
in Lower Shabelle under sector 1 were possible only because of the generation of
national forces that relieved AMISOM forces and created mobile units.
In the coming days, the Council will consider AMISOM’s mandate renewal. On
7 May, the African Union Peace and Security Council, in its communiqué, renewed
AMISOM’s mandate for 12 months. But, as the Council deliberates on AMISOM’s
mandate renewal tasks, a key focus will be the future engagement of Somalia’s
key security investors, particularly the need to base that future engagement on a
comprehensive independent assessment.
As members of the Council are aware, the African Union Commission is
currently undertaking its own comprehensive assessment of what future support the
20-071057/34

S/2020/436

African Union will provide to Somalia through AMISOM beyond 2021. In addition,
we are exploring options that will allow other key international partners, including
the United Nations, to better realign their support to Somalia. To achieve this, and as
agreed at the recent high-level virtual meeting on Somalia, there must be consensus
on formulating a comprehensive approach to Somalia’s stability and security, and, as
noted earlier, a commitment by all of Somalia’s security investors not only to revising
and updating the transition plan but also to taking into account its implementation
modalities for all stakeholders.

8/34

20-07105

S/2020/436

Annex III
Briefing by the Director of the United Nations Mine Action Service,
Agnès Marcaillou
I am honoured to address the Security Council on the threat posed by
Al-Shabaab’s use of improvised explosive devices (IEDs) in Somalia and their
impact on the civilian population, the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
troops and the Somali security forces. I am also honoured to present the activities
carried out by the United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS) to mitigate the
threat posed by explosive ordnance in Somalia.
With respect to the IED threat, the number of IED-related incidents has risen
from 402 and 492 in 2017 and 2018, respectively, to 529 in 2019, with 161 such
incidents recorded through April 2020. Between 1 January 2017 and 30 April 2020,
153 AMISOM troops and 489 Somali security force personnel were killed in targeted
IED incidents. Without counting the close to 600 people killed in the horrific
14 October 2017 IED attack that occurred in Mogadishu, a reported 787 civilians
have been killed and 1,779 injured.
We have noted the drop in civilian casualties in Mogadishu in 2020, which we
attribute to the positive impact of the current Mogadishu security plan and Operation
Badbaado in Lower Shabelle, which have limited the infiltration of explosive devices
into Mogadishu. The decrease has been from 1.17 vehicle-borne IED incidents per
month in 2019 to only one such incident to date for the whole of 2020.
Meanwhile, as Somali security forces have led military operations in Lower
Shabelle since the second quarter of 2019, there has been a concomitant increase
in Al-Shabaab’s IED attacks targeting the Somali National Army (SNA), causing
an alarming increase in SNA casualties, which, in the first quarter of 2020, and
for the first time, have exceeded civilian casualties. In recent years, Al-Shabaab’s
manufacture of IEDs has shifted from using military-grade explosives to more
readily available compounds and components, hence demonstrating both its ability
to adapt and its determination to continue to use this method of warfare.
With regard to UNMAS in Somalia, the Mine Action Service is an integral
component of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and of the
United Nations Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS). UNMAS provides the Federal
Government of Somalia with expert advice on the development of legislation, plans
and policies to mitigate the threat of explosive ordnance. It also produces regular
Somalia-specific IED threat analyses, which inform preventive and responsive
actions by the SNA, AMISOM and other partners. UNMAS also assists UNSOM
and carries out clearance activities following indirect-fire attacks against the United
Nations compound in Mogadishu and the airport area.
With the support of UNSOS, UNMAS maintains a physical presence in all
AMISOM sectors and provides advice, analysis, training and mentoring to AMISOM
uniformed personnel to find and destroy IEDs and to safely operate in this high-threat
environment. Since 2017, UNMAS has trained over 50,000 AMISOM troops on
subjects ranging from IED-threat awareness to search and detect techniques as well
as to deploy techniques for defeating IEDs. UNMAS uses and promotes a number of
standardized training materials that it has drafted to support the consistent growth
of IED-disposal operators across troop-contributing countries.
UNMAS training and mentoring of AMISOM mission enabling units has
increased troop confidence in the utilization of main supply routes and led to
vastly increased consignment movements on these routes from Mogadishu to
the sectors. UNMAS provides AMISOM with an explosive-ordnance clearance
20-071059/34

S/2020/436

capacity of 21 teams, working with 42 explosive-detection dogs, to protect such
key infrastructure as airports, airstrips and AMISOM bases. The Service’s survey,
detection and clearance capacity also facilitates the construction of AMISOM
forward-operating bases.
UNMAS support has contributed to a strengthened AMISOM capacity to
respond and adapt to the evolving IED threat. While the number of IED incidents
reported as targeting AMISOM has remained high, the AMISOM casualty rate per
incident has decreased from 2017 to the present. Moreover, while there has been a
gradual increase in IED incidents, no impact on AMISOM has been observed. As I
speak, despite coronavirus-disease pandemic restrictions, all UNMAS activities in
support of AMISOM are ongoing, except for predeployment and in-person training.
In the past few years, UNMAS has responded to requests from the Somali
Government to build the threat-mitigation capacity of the Somali police. To date,
UNMAS has trained and equipped the existing 14 Somali police explosive-ordnance
disposal teams. I want to thank those Member States that have provided UNMAS
with the voluntary financial contributions necessary to support these activities.
In conclusion, UNMAS action has proved, and continues to prove, that it
enhances AMISOM’s force protection, mobility and operational effectiveness and
has contributed to reducing casualties and fatalities among the AMISOM ranks.
According to our analysis, Al-Shabaab is likely to continue its IED attacks against
SNA personnel, using available precursors and ever-evolving and complex designs.
To be better equipped to operate safely and effectively in this IED-threat environment,
SNA troops need appropriate training, mentoring and equipping consistent with
standards that match those guiding UNMAS support to AMISOM. Effective,
sustainable and accountable IED-threat mitigation capabilities for Somali security
forces would support the transition of security responsibilities from AMISOM.
As an integrated component of UNSOM and UNSOS, UNMAS stands ready
to extend its support to the SNA. It is our hope that the Security Council will
consider expanding the categories of the United Nations non-lethal support package
provided to the SNA through the United Nations Trust Fund for the Somali security
institutions to include IED-threat mitigation support, namely, the training, mentoring
and equipping I just mentioned. Accordingly, I would call upon Member States and
other partners to channel funding towards the strengthening of the SNA’s IED-threat
mitigation capabilities through the United Nations Trust Fund mechanism.

10/34

20-07105

S/2020/436

Annex IV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Belgium to the
United Nations, Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve
I thank the briefers. While some of the news we have received is encouraging,
other news is less so.
With regard to the political situation and the preparation for elections in
Somalia, the country has shown the capacity to make progress on its priorities. The
signing of the electoral law is an important step, yet more efforts are needed to work
out its implementation. Among other things, the participation of women must be
ensured. Work has also started on other pieces of legislation, such as the political
parties law, and will have to resume. Technical preparations, including on electoral
security, should stay on track. Elections can still happen in accordance with the
planned timetable.
We also ask the Federal Government to re-establish the dialogue with the
federal member states. Somalia needs this dialogue to overcome challenges not only
to the elections but also to the transition plan and to those presented by the current
humanitarian crises. This lack of dialogue has gone on long enough.
Unfortunately, Somalia has not been spared by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, or by seasonal floods or locust infestations. Belgium stands
with the people of Somalia and is contributing to the humanitarian response. We also
think it is important for the international community and the Somali authorities not
to lose sight of the country’s development and political objectives while responding
to these crises.
As the Security Council is about to discuss the renewal of the mandate of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), we note that Al-Shabaab remains a
very significant threat. There have been successes with joint Somali National Army/
AMISOM operations, but they have not been sufficient to lead us to expect the
successful conclusion of the transition plan in the planned time frame.
The Federal Government and the federal member states must come together to
forge a shared vision for national security. We welcome the Government’s willingness
to revise the transition plan. The international community, including the European
Union as an important financial donor, will work with Somalia to implement this
plan. Coordination should also be ensured among the security partners, under the
leadership of the Federal Government.
Finally, in the immediate future, looking towards the elections, we believe
that AMISOM should continue to perform its mandate in its current form and, before
considering plans for 2021, will seek to renew its mandate with no significant changes,
but for a slightly shorter time period. Let me also thank the troop-contributing
countries for their commitment.

20-0710511/34

S/2020/436

Annex V
Statement by the Acting Deputy Permanent Representative of
China to the United Nations, Yao Shaojun
I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General James Swan, Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission Francisco
Caetano José Madeira, and Director Agnès Marcaillou for their briefings.
China pays close attention to the situation in Somalia. China commends efforts
made by the country in the past three months in preparing for elections, implementing
the transition plan, improving the relationship between the Federal Government and
federal member states and promoting economic and social development. We have
good reason to believe that the people and the Government of Somalia will continue
to make new progress in the national governance and peace processes.
Somalia is entering a critical stage, with the elections at the top of its priorities.
President Farmajo signed the electoral bill into law and the National Electoral
Security Task Force adopted its terms of reference and reviewed the draft concept
of security for voter registration. The progress in these areas fully demonstrates
Somalia’s strong willingness to promote peaceful elections. China supports all parties
in Somalia that proceed from the fundamental interests of the country as a whole,
enhance cooperation and dialogue and jointly advance the electoral and political
processes. In providing constructive assistance, the international community should
adhere to the principle of a Somali-led and Somali-owned process.
China consistently advocates the idea that African countries should address
African issues in African ways. The African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
has been playing a significant role in maintaining peace and stability in the country.
China supports AMISOM in continuing to perform its duty in accordance with
its mandate and helping the Somalia national security forces to strengthen their
capacities and gradually assume security responsibility. The African Union Peace
and Security Council has made requests and suggestions in terms of Somaliarelated issues. We hope that the United Nations Security Council will give sufficient
attention and positive response to the African Union’s voice.
China strongly condemns all forms of terrorism. The United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia and AMISOM have made notable contributions to
Somali efforts aimed at combating terrorist activities. Terrorism attacks targeting
the United Nations and AMISOM facilities are a matter of grave concern. We call
on all relevant parties to take pragmatic measures that would effectively guarantee
the safety and security of United Nations and African Union facilities and staff
in Somalia.
The coronavirus disease pandemic, combined with locust infestation and
floods, has worsened the humanitarian situation in the country. China appreciates
measures already taken by the Somali Government to prevent and control the
pandemic. Limited by its economic and social development conditions, Somalia is
more vulnerable than ever and less capable of responding to disasters.
The international community should continue to provide constructive
assistance in order to help Somalia overcome difficulties and achieve sustainable and
independent development at an early date. In the face of the pandemic, we are truly
a community with a shared future. The Chinese Government and enterprises have
donated multiple batches of medical supplies to Somalia and shared our experience
and best practices with Somali medical personnel through video-teleconferences.
China will continue to make its own unilateral contributions.

12/34

20-07105

S/2020/436

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Dominican Republic to
the United Nations
We would like to start by thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Swan for his briefing and Ms. Agnès Marcaillou for her focus on the work
being carried out by the United Nations Mine Action Service on the continued threat
of the use of improvised explosive devices in Somalia.
We remain concerned about the continued political stagnation between the
Federal Government and some federated member states. Overcoming the current
stalemate is key to resolving the challenges that prevail in Somalia. We urge the
leaders to put aside their differences and join forces to forge strategic agreements
that would allow the priority concerns of the country to be addressed. We express
our solidarity with the people of Somalia in their fight against the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, whose effects represent a real challenge and whose
consequences will affect all aspects of the daily life of Somalians throughout
the country.
Even in these very challenging times, preparations for timely, credible
and transparent one-person-one-vote elections are vitally important, as is the
continuation of the work for the adoption of the amendments to the political parties
law. In this regard, we continue to advocate 30 per cent participation by women,
whose participation in the electoral process — as well as that of minorities — is
paramount. It is also essential to continue the constitutional review process, and
we urge the parties to make full use of the tools put at their disposal by the United
Nations and its partners.
The Dominican Republic welcomes the measures taken by the Somali
Government to mitigate the spread of the virus among the population and to facilitate
continued access to emergency supplies. The fragile humanitarian situation paired
with the increased number of recorded cases and a weak health-care system makes
Somalia one of the most vulnerable countries facing this pandemic.
It is equally worrisome that the seasonal rains that have prompted farmers to
begin cultivation have also caused flash floods, increasing the possibility of waterborne diseases and creating the conditions for locust breeding, a plague already
causing serious damage across the region. We encourage the international community
to contribute to the Somalia Humanitarian Fund, which would save lives, alleviate
the needs of the most vulnerable and help to scale up responses to the pandemic.
We would like to pay tribute to the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and the Somali security forces for their sacrifices in the search for peace
and stability in the country. The volatile security situation in Somalia is cause for
concern. We condemn all attacks carried out by Al-Shabaab, especially the mortar
attacks on the Aden Adde International Airport in Mogadishu, where the United
Nations compound is located, as well as the attacks targeting AMISOM.
We condemned the ongoing grave violations committed against children and
encourage the Government to adopt and implement the national strategy to prevent
child recruitment, facilitate the release and reintegration of child combatants and
further strengthen the legal framework for child protection. Equally worrisome is
the rise in female genital mutilation in the country during the pandemic, which is
why the issue should be included in any COVID-19 response.
We commend the work being carried out by the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) on the implementation of the youth, peace and security
agenda. Young Somalis make up a vast proportion of the population; therefore, an
20-0710513/34

S/2020/436

enabling environment is needed to allow them to further engage meaningfully in
peacebuilding and governance activities.
To conclude, Somalia needs the support of the international community,
neighbouring countries and partners more than ever. We recognize the continued
efforts and role that the United Nations Support Office in Somalia, AMISOM and
UNSOM have been playing in difficult conditions to achieve lasting peace and
stability in the country.

14/34

20-07105

S/2020/436

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I would like to join others in thanking the briefers for their insightful overviews.
Estonia is concerned about the spread of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) to
Somalia, and we welcome measures taken to combat the disease. Even in the face of
the obstacles created by the COVID-19 pandemic, we believe that Somalia, together
with the international community, should not lose sight of the long-term goals of
State-building. In that connection, we would like to highlight the following points.
On the political front, holding peaceful, transparent and one-person-one-vote
elections, within the agreed time frame, must remain a priority. In that regard, it
is crucial that the Federal Government of Somalia and all federal member states
urgently resume their dialogue. It is also important that the remaining issues
regarding the electoral law be addressed. We warmly welcome any progress made
and strongly encourage further efforts to those ends.
On the security front, we welcome the commitment of the Somali authorities
to update the transition plan. Clear timelines, clear tasks and a clear vision are
crucial in order to achieve the end goal of Somalia taking full responsibility for
its security. We will achieve the best results on how to get there if all stakeholders
work closely together. Therefore, we encourage the Somali authorities and all key
partners to engage in inclusive discussions about international support for the post2021 arrangements. We also welcome the joint operations against Al-Shabaab in
Lower Shabelle. However, we underline the need for the military operations against
Al-Shabaab to be conducted in compliance with human rights law and international
humanitarian law.
We are very concerned about the threat of the increased use of improvised
explosive devices in Somalia. To address that trend, we should support Somalia in
the development of a national regulatory framework that would help to effectively
combat the threat. In addition, on the operational level, it is important to support the
capacity-building of security institutions and the Somali National Army through the
provision of training and equipment.
Finally, Estonia is deeply concerned about the current humanitarian situation,
which is exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic, a locust infestation as well as
floods. We are concerned that the humanitarian response plan for 2020 remains only
17 per cent funded and call for the international community to address that.
I would like to conclude by expressing Estonia’s thanks and support to the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, the African Union Mission in
Somalia and Somali security forces for their efforts, commitment and sacrifices to
make long-term peace and stability in Somalia a reality.

20-0710515/34

S/2020/436

Annex VIII
Statement by the Political Coordinator of France to the United
Nations, Antoine Michon
I would like to thank our briefers for their useful presentations and highlight
three points regarding the situation in Somalia.
First of all, France is concerned by the spread of coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) in Somalia and across the region. We welcome the measures taken by
the Somali authorities to combat the spread of COVID-19 with the support of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and other partners. France
is mobilized, in coordination with the European Union (EU) and the African Union,
to support our African partners in their response to the pandemic. The EU has
dedicated around €27 million to Somalia and is also implementing a humanitarian
air bridge to Africa, which France fully supports. Moreover, France has strongly
advocated for a collective effort to consider a moratorium on the debt servicing
payments of African countries. France has also mobilized €1.2 billion to support
our African partners in four priority areas: health, economic recovery, humanitarian
assistance and scientific research.
Secondly, France considers that Somalia is now at a critical juncture regarding
both its political situation and the process of preparing its security architecture
post-2021. On the political front, all Somali actors must continue to work for the
preparation of peaceful, inclusive, transparent and one-person-one-vote presidential
and legislative elections in late 2020 or early 2021. That requires broad consensus on
the electoral framework; therefore, we encourage the Somali authorities to address
remaining issues relating to the electoral law with the assistance of UNSOM.
In that context, France also calls on the Federal Government of Somalia and
all federal member states to urgently resume their dialogue. Such dialogue will be
key not only for the holding of the upcoming elections but also for other critical
reforms, especially in the security sector. In that connection, we strongly condemn
the clashes in the Gedo region, which are guided by political interests at the expense
of the security transition.
Somalia is also at a critical juncture on the security front, as Somali institutions
are set to take over the responsibility for security by 2021. In that context, we welcome
the resumption of joint operations led by the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and the Somali National Army against Al-Shabaab in Lower Shabelle.
We call on the Somali authorities to extend those operations to other areas, to update
the transition plan and to accelerate the establishment of a plan for the generation
of new Somali forces and the integration of regional forces into the National Army.
The latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/398) shows that more progress is
urgently needed on that front.
Lastly, France believes that the Somali authorities and their key partners,
including the European Union, the African Union and AMISOM troop-contributing
countries, must now seriously engage in discussions on international support to the
security sector in Somalia after 2021. The European Union has shown its readiness
to actively participate in such discussions and is in favour of a more transactional
approach. In that context, we think that the current model of international security
support to Somalia should not be taken for granted and that all options must be
put on the table, including alternative options to AMISOM. In particular, we want
to make clear that the European Union’s current financing model for AMISOM is
not sustainable. If the European Union is to continue to support the security sector
in Somalia, that support will be dependent on the establishment of accountability
16/34

20-07105

S/2020/436

mechanisms, the participation of the European Union in strategic decisions and the
financial contribution of other partners. More generally, the European Union has also
initiated a brainstorming process on its broader cooperation with Somalia, including
through the strategic reviews of its three missions — Atalanta, the European Union
Training Mission for Somalia and the European Union Capacity-Building Mission
in Somalia.

20-0710517/34

S/2020/436

Annex IX
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Germany to
the United Nations, Juergen Schulz
Let me start by talking about the political cooperation between the Federal
Government and all federal member states. We have talked about this many times,
but I think it cannot be stressed enough. It should be a key element of all efforts if we
want to see Somalia move forward in the right direction. It is the basis for reaching
sustainable progress. For example, coordination meetings should be resumed swiftly
and should take place regularly in order to resolve outstanding issues, such as
constitutional reform, or open questions on the electoral process.
We take note of the progress made in the preparation for the elections but are
concerned that the electoral code does not include a 30 per cent quota for women.
Let me also underscore that credible, free and fair one-person-one-vote elections
in late 2020 or early 2021 are key to democratic State-building in Somalia and will
be the yardstick by which the current Somali Administration will be measured.
We acknowledge the challenges posed by coronavirus disease (COVID-19) to the
continued preparations for the elections, but want to make clear that this should
not hamper the Federal Government’s ability to answer unresolved questions on
the basis of a broad political consensus and in full cooperation with the federal
member states. A return to the 2016 clan-based model must be avoided. We need to
see concrete progress towards implementing the principle of one-person-one-vote
wherever possible.
We welcome the progress made in the security sector; however, the security
situation remains a great challenge. We are concerned about the high frequency of
attacks by Al-Shabaab. In order to update and implement the security transition plan,
a comprehensive approach to security is essential. The plan needs Somali ownership
and buy-in from all stakeholders and partners, as well as a focus on capacitybuilding for the Somali security forces in order to enable them to fully take over
responsibility for security in the country. Against that backdrop, we must pursue a
constructive discussion on international support to the Somali security sector over
the next months, also with an eye on the upcoming independent assessment.
The African Union Mission (AMISOM) has been of key importance to the
security situation in Somalia since its inception. The European Union (EU) has
contributed very significantly to supporting AMISOM, with a total of almost
$2 billion since 2007. Germany is convinced that AMISOM will continue to be one
of the cornerstones of international support to the Somali security sector for the
time being.
Turning to the humanitarian situation and COVID-related repercussions, we
remain extremely concerned about the current humanitarian situation. The present
flooding and the increased spread of desert locusts clearly show the aggravating
consequences of climate change for Somalia’s humanitarian situation and fragile
statehood. COVID-19 poses additional challenges. We welcome the measures taken
by the Somali authorities to combat the spread and call upon all international partners
to support Somalia in that regard.
It is essential that, under these circumstances, humanitarian access be
maintained and humanitarian principles be fully respected. We will continue
our humanitarian engagement in Somalia. The EU is very heavily and seriously
engaged in humanitarian support for Somalia. Germany is doing the same bilaterally
and nationally. Germany has already provided over €55 million for humanitarian
assistance. In the light of the worsening humanitarian situation, further commitments
are being considered.
18/34

20-07105

S/2020/436

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Indonesia to the United Nations, Dian Triansyah Djani
Let me begin by thanking Mr. Swan, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Madeira, Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission for Somalia and Head of the African Union Mission in Somalia,
and Ms. Marcaillou, Director of the United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS),
for their comprehensive briefings.
I welcome Ambassador Abukar, Permanent Representative of Somalia, and
wish our brothers and sisters in Somalia a blessed Ramadan.
This meeting is taking place amid a very challenging situation for Somalia.
Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has impacted its economy and development and
will potentially exacerbate the humanitarian situation. However, I believe that this
common challenge could also serve as an impetus for all parties to resolve their
differences and refocus their efforts towards work together constructively. In that
regard, I would like to highlight three points.
First, we cannot overemphasize the need to ease tension between the
Federal Government and some of the federal member states. As highlighted by the
Secretary-General in his report (S/2020/398), the pandemic has highlighted the need
for Somalia’s federal and state leaders to come together in a spirit of unity and
compromise. We welcome the efforts to facilitate the resumption of political dialogue
between the Federal Government and the federal member states. With regard to the
election, we welcome the enactment of the electoral law and the efforts to address
key issues in the law. We also welcome more women holding parliamentary seats.
The holding of a one-person-one-vote election as planned should remain a priority. It
is necessary to mitigate the potential impacts of COVID-19 so that the elections can
continue as planned. It is also important to make progress on critical State-building
priorities, such as the Constitutional Court and the judicial service. An enabling
environment is important for democracy to prevail.
Secondly, we remain concerned by the security situation. We once again
condemn all recent attacks by Al-Shabaab, which mainly targeted the African
Union Mission and the Somali National Army, and would like to express our deepest
condolences to the families of the victims. We heard the briefing by the Director of
the United Nations Mine Action Service, which showed that the threat of Al-Shabaab
has not lessened. I thank UNMAS for the information.
We would like to reiterate that any attack on United Nations personnel is
unacceptable and that perpetrators must be brought to justice. Al-Shabaab remains
capable to conduct larger, more complex and high-profile attacks, including with
improvised explosive devices (IEDs) and vehicle-borne IEDs. We regret that
Al-Shabaab has not embraced the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire.
Therefore, it is important to provide the Somali National Army (SNA)
with the necessary training in countering IEDs and with capacity-building. We
commend the SNA and AMISOM on their continued operations and stabilization
activities undertaken in areas previously controlled by Al-Shabaab and welcome
the contribution of UNMAS. Furthermore, we pay tribute to the efforts of Blue
Helmets and the African Union Mission in Somalia in the pursuit of peace. We also
welcome the commitment by the Government to update the transition plan to ensure
a comprehensive collective security plan for Somalia.
Thirdly, the COVID-19 pandemic is happening amid an already dire
humanitarian situation in Somalia coupled with severely negative economic impacts,
20-0710519/34

S/2020/436

as stated by Special Representative Swan. With at least 2.6 million people displaced,
high levels of food insecurity, recent flooding and a locust outbreak, scaled up
efforts are needed to alleviate the plight of the Somali people. We are glad that a
United Nations country preparedness and response plan for COVID-19 is in place.
We call on all international partners to provide the much-needed funding for the
humanitarian response plan in order to ensure the long-term recovery and resilience
of the people of Somalia. It is also crucial to facilitate and maintain unimpeded
access for humanitarian assistance and relief, including in hard-to-reach areas.
Lastly, it is our hope that, despite the COVID-19 pandemic, all actors in
Somalia will remain committed to its peace and development efforts. Dialogue
and reconciliation among all parties are crucial to ensuring a prosperous and
peaceful Somalia.
I reaffirm Indonesia’s respect for Somalia’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity, and convey our utmost tribute to UNSOM, UNSOS, AMISOM, and all
actors working to ensure lasting peace and stability in Somalia.
As we approach the end of Ramadan, we wish all our brothers and sisters
in Somalia a blessed Eid al-Fitr. Indonesia continues to support a prosperous and
peaceful Somalia.

20/34

20-07105

S/2020/436

Annex XI
Statement by the First Deputy Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation to the United Nations, Dmitry Polyanskiy
We thank Mr. James Swan, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Somalia, and Mr. Francisco Madeira, Special Representative of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission for Somalia and Head of the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM), for their detailed briefings on the situation in Somalia. We
also thank Ms. Agnès Marcaillou, Director of the United Nations Mine Action
Service (UNMAS), for her useful update on our delegation’s request regarding the
situation with the improvised explosive device (IED) threat.
We have carefully studied the Secretary-General’s recent report (S/2020/398)
and share its conclusion that the country’s security situation remains turbulent.
The Federal Government faces numerous challenges, including the need to restore
State institutions and establish dialogue between the centre and the regions and
among the regions. Lack of progress in preparing for the general elections and on
constitutional review is really worrisome. We deplore the continuing tensions in
Jubaland and Galmudug. All those issues are now further exacerbated by the spread
of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
Particularly worrisome is the ceaseless terrorist activity of Al-Shabaab
and its fighters’ growing reliance on the use of IEDs, mortar attacks and political
assassinations. Importantly, the Somalis themselves recognize that IEDs have
already caused more fatalities to the Somali National Army (SNA) and the population
than bullets. We fully appreciate the picture that Ms. Marcaillou has presented to
the Council and hope that it will contribute to better identifying the appropriate
response for the international community to the IED threat.
We also note some positive developments in Mogadishu. The Federal
Parliament had a productive winter session. We commend the establishment of an
ad hoc parliamentary committee to address key issues concerning the electoral law
and the continued work of the National Electoral Security Task Force. We welcome
the communication between President Farmajo and President Bihi of Somaliland, as
well as the positive political changes in South-West state and Hirshabelle. We urge
Special Representative Swan to continue his efforts to foster dialogue between and
within federal member states with a view to holding an all-Somalia summit.
In view of the upcoming AMISOM mandate renewal, we believe that
the Mission continues to be critical to the country’s stabilization. Considering
the upcoming general elections and the COVID-19 pandemic, a reduction in the
number of peacekeepers is unacceptable. Both AMISOM and the SNA should build
on the progress demonstrated in the transition operations in the town of Janaale.
Regarding the AMISOM resolution itself, we see it as a concise document that sends
a clear message to the Somali people — that they will have the full backing of the
international community both prior to and during the upcoming general elections,
which are an important milestone in the country’s modern history.
In general, we are convinced that effective collaborative work in building a
unified national security architecture is necessary if we are to address the persistent
security challenges in Somalia. The international community should continue to
take measures to increase the operational readiness of the African peacekeeping
units and the SNA. Progress in that arena will be decisive in ensuring the effective
transition of security responsibilities to the Somalis.

20-0710521/34

S/2020/436

In conclusion, let me reiterate my country’s firm commitment to continue
to work efficiently in the Security Council to solve the crisis in Somalia, while
respecting its sovereignty and territorial integrity.
I also have a couple of questions for Ms. Marcaillou. We know that UNMAS
is conducting very useful awareness-raising work on the IED threat worldwide,
particularly in Geneva through the annual conference on the Convention on Certain
Conventional Weapons. How does Ms. Marcaillou think the mechanisms under this
Convention could be used to assist Somalia to address the issue of IEDs?
In her view, what else can be done to deny Al-Shabaab access to explosives
and ammunition abandoned on battlefields and to mitigate the explosive ordnance
threat? Does she think that AMISOM and the SNA are doing enough in that regard?
Finally, what can the States Members of the United Nations do to assist Somalis to
be better prepared and trained to overcome these challenges?

22/34

20-07105

S/2020/436

Annex XII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of South Africa to the
United Nations, Jerry Matjila
I would like to thank the President of the Security Council for convening this
important and timely meeting on Somalia. I have the honour to deliver this statement
on behalf of the three African members of the Council — the Niger, South Africa
and Tunisia — and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines.
At the outset, we would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (S/2020/398) on the situation in Somalia. We would also
like to thank Mr. James Swan, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Somalia and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM),
Mr. Francisco Madeira, Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission for Somalia and Head of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), and Ms. Agnès Marcaillou, Director of the United Nations Mine Action
Service (UNMAS), for their briefings.
The three African members of the Council and Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines wish to address the situation in Somalia, the role of the United Nations
through UNSOM and the United Nations Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS), as
well as the role of AMISOM.
On the political front, we agree with the Secretary-General’s observation
that this year marks a critical period for the advancement of national priorities in
Somalia. A number of targets and benchmarks in various policy documents, such as
the Mutual Accountability Framework and the Somali transition plan, were set to be
achieved this year. The concerted efforts of all Somalis is needed in order to realize
those national priorities. However, that requires constructive dialogue between the
Federal Government of Somalia and the federal member states if they are to resolve
their differences — starting with tackling the challenge posed by the spread of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic in an already fragile situation.
The three African members of the Council and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
echo the sentiments of the Secretary-General that political differences must not
be addressed through violence. We are therefore concerned about the unfortunate
armed clashes that erupted in the Gedo region of Jubaland and in Galmudug during
the period under review. We urge the Somali parties to use dialogue as a peaceful
means to settle disputes and as a tool for cooperation, which is critical to achieving
national priorities, including the holding of general elections in 2020-2021.
In that regard, we welcome the positive development of the meeting between
President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo and Somaliland President Muse
Bihi Abdi. We also welcome the announcement by President Said Abdullahi
Mohamed Deni of Puntland of his intention to travel to Mogadishu and to other
federal member states to advance dialogue. We view those overtures as positive
steps towards addressing the lingering tensions between the Federal Government
of Somalia and the federal member states, and an indication of the will of Somali
parties to address their differences.
One of Somalia’s critical priorities is the preparation and holding of oneperson-one-vote elections. The three African members of the Council and Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines underline that dialogue, inclusive political participation
and the resolution of political differences between the Federal Government of
Somalia and the federal member states is critical to the success of those elections
and to national cohesion.
Furthermore, we commend the enactment of the electoral law and encourage
the expeditious formulation of regulations necessary to ensure its implementation
20-0710523/34

S/2020/436

and the broad support of all federal member states. It is also important to ensure
the participation and representation of women, youth and all members of the
Somali population, and to prepare and secure the electoral process. We encourage
the international community to continue to mobilize resources to help the Federal
Government of Somalia finance the elections.
We remain deeply concerned about the volatile security situation due to the
persistent terrorist threat posed by Al-Shabaab and the elements of the pro-Islamic
State in Iraq and the Shams in Somalia, who continue to carry out targeted terrorist
attacks against the Somali National Army (SNA), AMISOM, local security forces,
civilians and the United Nations.
Despite the commendable progress and success of joint operations conducted
by the SNA and AMISOM to recapture towns from Al-Shabaab in south Somalia,
the terrorist group continues to launch attacks and carry out assassinations using
mortars and improvised explosive devices (IEDs). More has to be done to improve
security in Somalia in general, and to mitigate mortar and IED attacks in particular.
We agree with calls to strengthen the IED threat-mitigation capabilities of
the Somali security forces with a view to better protecting themselves from the
increased deployment of IED attacks and preventing harm to civilians and critical
infrastructure. We highly appreciate the close cooperation and support among the
SNA, AMISOM and the United Nations — particularly UNSOM, UNSOS and
UNMAS — as well as the support of international partners for the national security
architecture and national transitional plan.
Since its deployment in 2007, AMISOM has been playing an important role in
supporting the SNA’s efforts to restore security and stability in Somalia. The recent
success of joint AMISOM and SNA operations in Lower Shabelle in recovering
territory attests to the valuable role of AMISOM. There is, however, a need for
continued efforts to stabilize the recovered territories and to generate troops and
capacities within the SNA and the police in order to secure recovered areas, facilitate
stabilization activities, consolidate gains and avoid setbacks.
We urge the Federal Government of Somalia — with the support of the United
Nations, AMISOM and international partners — to continue the generation, training
and resourcing of capable and effective Somali national security forces that will
ultimately take over the security responsibilities, in line with the transitional plan
and the national security architecture. To that end, we reiterate our previous calls for
the international community and international partners to mobilize the necessary
resources, including the replenishment of the Trust Fund for AMISOM, in order to
support the Somali security forces as they continue to make commendable progress
in weakening Al-Shabaab and securing and stabilizing liberated areas.
On the humanitarian front, Somalia continues to be mired in a grave
humanitarian crisis. Somalia is facing a triple shock — floods, desert locust
infestation and the COVID-19 pandemic. The threat to food insecurity remains high,
despite the favourable seasonal rains. In some parts, unpredictable rainfall due to
climate change has resulted in flash flooding, which not only impacts food security
but also leads to death, displacement and the risk of water-borne diseases. The rains
have further exacerbated conditions and accelerated the locust infestation that has
affected the entire Horn of Africa.
We are concerned that the security situation continues to impede humanitarian
operations and thwart assistance to people in need in Somalia. We call upon the
international community and humanitarian organizations to continue supporting the
Federal Government of Somalia and the Somali people in their quest for a peaceful
and stable Somalia, including through the provision of prompt and adequate funding,
as well as through contributions to the 2020 Somalia humanitarian response plan.
24/34

20-07105

S/2020/436

The year 2020 will be remembered in history as the greatest challenge of
our generation — the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic. Like all of us around
the globe, Somalia has not been spared from the pandemic. As of mid-May, it has
recorded over 1,400 cases of COVID-19. Given the country’s numerous challenges
and vulnerabilities, this pandemic presents specific risks. Measures must be taken
to mitigate the impact of COVID-19 for the sake of the continuity of peacebuilding
and State-building activities in Somalia. We commend the efforts of the Somali
Government, United Nations agencies and partners in launching the Somalia
COVID-19 country preparedness and response plan. We note that the coronavirus
may exacerbate the already dire humanitarian situation, as well as the socioeconomic,
development coordination and security challenges facing Somalia. In addition, it
is important to safeguard the well-being of those under the employ of AMISOM,
the SNA and other partners as they continue to provide security, including by
facilitating the provision of the humanitarian assistance so critically needed by
vulnerable Somalis.
With respect to economic developments, we note that Somalia has made
significant strides in the past few years in improving its economic prospects. All
interventions undertaken by the Federal Government of Somalia have yielded
positive results. We therefore commend the Federal Government for reaching the
decision point under the World Bank and International Monetary Fund (IMF) Highly
Indebted Poor Countries Initiative. That has facilitated the clearing of Somalia’s
arrears. It is also a matter of great satisfaction that the World Bank and the IMF have
issued a joint staff advisory note on the ninth national development plan, for the
period 2020 to 2024, noting that the plan exceeded the standards of a typical interim
poverty reduction strategy. That is a positive and welcome development given the
humanitarian, socioeconomic, resource-related and other challenges that Somalia
faces in the period ahead.
It is critical now, more than ever, that the international community join hands
in support of Somalia, including through cooperation, coordination and resource
mobilization, so as to mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and ensure
that Somalia continues on its positive trajectory of State-building and peacebuilding.
We wish to underline the importance of fostering strong and effective regional
cooperation in the Horn of Africa, particularly between Somalia and its neighbours.
That is necessary if we are to bring peace, stability and development to Somalia
and across the region. In that regard, we call on the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, the African Union, the United Nations and the international
community to continue to support efforts to foster strong and effective regional
cooperation in the Horn of Africa.
Finally, we commend the constant efforts and commitment of the United
Nations, AMISOM, the Federal Government of Somalia and international partners
to promote stabilization, federalism and State-building in Somalia.
In view of the approaching end of AMISOM’s mandate on 31 May, the three
African members of the Council and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines would like
to reaffirm their support of maintaining an AMISOM presence in Somalia as a
stabilizing force for the SNA. We look forward to constructive engagement on a
new resolution that will reaffirm the Council’s commitment to support the activities
of AMISOM by maintaining the Mission’s current capabilities and authorizing its
deployment for another 12 months. It is our view that the 12-month extension will
provide the necessary space for Somalia, AMISOM, the United Nations and other
partners to assess and deal with the impact of COVID-19, the security situation
on the ground, the upcoming elections, the comprehensive review of the Somali
transition plan, effective force generation and the need to preserve the gains made
thus far.
20-0710525/34

S/2020/436

Annex XIII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations, Jonathan Allen
Let me, if I might, thank our briefers and commend Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Swan for his relentless professionalism and commitment
in difficult circumstances. I also want to thank Ambassador Madeira and
Director Marcaillou.
In the light of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), let me start by expressing
our solidarity with Somalia in facing this global pandemic and by commending
Somalia for the measures they have taken to contain the spread of the virus. I also
want to welcome the work of the United Nations in coordinating a coherent response
among international organizations, including the World Food Programme, the World
Health Organization, UNICEF and non-governmental organization partners.
We want to urge all partners to respond to Somalia’s COVID-19 response
plan, which calls for additional, aligned and coordinated funding. The United
Kingdom gave $420 million in the last financial year to Somalia and, in the light of
the response plan, we are now considering what more we can do. And I would also
just like to mention that today the United Kingdom has announced a $25 million
contribution to the African Union fund set up last month by President Ramaphosa to
tackle COVID-19.
Despite the pandemic and the Secretary-General’s calls for a ceasefire,
Al-Shabaab continues to launch attacks. We strongly condemn the recent attacks
in Mogadishu, including against the United Nations, the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and the international community. And I want to pay tribute to
the ongoing commitment and sacrifices of AMISOM troop-contributing countries
and the efforts of the Somali security forces. I want to echo the concerns of the United
Nations Mine Action Service regarding the use of improvised explosive devices in
Somalia. Such use is why the Security Council imposed a ban on components of such
devices, and why we have recommended strengthening support on tackling IEDs in
the AMISOM text.
It is clear that COVID-19 poses significant challenges to Somalia. We need
to recognize as much and that it should not distract us from supporting Somalia
in safeguarding the gains made and making further progress on security, greater
political engagement and elections.
On security reform, there has been important progress over the last year.
Somalia has recovered additional territory from Al-Shabaab, trained Somali security
forces, developed a threat assessment and become a member of INTERPOL. There
is now greater international engagement on the question of what security support in
Somalia will look like after 2021. In March, the United Kingdom supported a Wilton
Park-convened conference in Ethiopia. In April, the African Union and Somalia
chaired a ministerial conference. We should build on that momentum.
Somalia has also started the process of updating the Somali transition plan.
Rapid progress in updating and, above all, implementing the transition plan is vital if
Somalia is to meet its own December 2021 deadline to take over lead responsibility
for national security. The independent assessment requested by the Security Council
will help us decide how best to support Somalia’s post-2021 vision. Both the revised
security strategy and the independent review should guide our decision-making in
a timely fashion.

26/34

20-07105

S/2020/436

The long-term goals of a Somali political settlement, including one-personone-vote elections and progress on the constitutional review, remain unchanged. We
are seeing progress on technical preparations for elections, and we welcome the
United Nations efforts to enable Parliament to reconvene virtually, and AMISOM’s
support on security. It is vital that the Government, Parliament, the electoral
committee, the joint parliamentary committee and the federal member states work
together and take urgent and inclusive steps to help facilitate timely, constitutional
and inclusive one-person-one-vote elections.
There is no reason that COVID-19 should prevent the key preparatory work
from taking place. This is the time for Government and opposition to put aside
differences and find compromise. Decisions on the electoral code, seat allocation,
the definition of constituencies and women’s quota and provisions for Somaliland
and Benadir are needed urgently, and it is good to hear that we should see progress
on these issues in the next few weeks.
I want to express deep concern about recent actions taken to repress the media,
with the arrest of journalists in Somalia. We welcome the recent positive steps to
facilitate accurate reporting on COVID-19 by the Office of the Prime Minister. The
media has a vital role to play in Somalia. We call for Somali journalists to be able to
perform their work, and we call also on Somali leaders to ensure the political space
is kept open.
Reconciliation is central to Somalia’s State-building efforts. There has been
some progress in Jubaland, South West state and Galmudug, but critical issues
remain. We look to the Federal Government to drive forward reconciliation efforts,
and we need to see high-level political dialogue with the federal member states. Such
dialogue was already urgent, and it is even more urgent in the light of COVID-19.
There is no room for division in the face of a common enemy.
In conclusion, let me emphasize three points.
First is the importance of an enhanced and coordinated response to supporting
Somalia in its fight against COVID-19. We should all do what we can.
Second is the importance of the Security Council, the United Nations, the
region, the African Union and the wider international community continuing to
support Somalia to achieve progress on holding timely one-person-one-vote elections
and moving ahead on security reform. Somalia’s future security and development
depend on continued progress.
And, finally, I reiterate our call — a call that the Council has made many
times — for the Federal Government and the federal member states to work together
to build a stronger and more peaceful Somalia.

20-0710527/34

S/2020/436

Annex XIV
Statement by the Acting Deputy Permanent Representative of the
United States of America to the United Nations, Cherith Norman Chalet
I thank Special Representative Swan for joining us today and for his leadership
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia.
The United States welcomes the positive developments Somalia has made so
far this year. Debt relief has opened new access to international grants to support
economic growth, development and reform. The Somali National Army and the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) have continued to gain ground south
of Mogadishu against Al-Shabaab. And the meeting between President Farmajo and
Somaliland President Bihi on the margins of the African Union Summit in February
holds promise for reconciliation between Somalia and Somaliland. It also gives hope
for ongoing reconciliation efforts in Jubaland and Galmudug.
However, there are also challenges and obstacles that require further attention,
as many of the other Council members have highlighted today.
The United States condemns the ongoing campaigns of violence and terror by
Al-Shabaab and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Somalia. We express our
deepest condolences to victims and their families, and remain committed to working
with Somalia and our international partners to counter their threat. We acknowledge
the tremendous sacrifices that AMISOM troop-contributing countries have made in
this important fight.
While the progress made by the Somali National Army and AMISOM to
clear and hold territory in the Lower Shabelle is historic, much work remains to be
done, including the expansion of their control of other areas. We call on the Federal
Government of Somalia to equip and deploy a police presence to liberated towns in
order to maintain security and re-establish Government services in Lower Shabelle
and beyond.
We welcome Somalia’s continued commitment to holding elections on schedule
beginning later this year, but we are concerned that planning and implementation is
falling far behind schedule. We call on the Parliament to pass outstanding electoral
legislation, and on Mogadishu to bring together federal member states, civil society
and other relevant stakeholders to reach consensus on the electoral process. We
encourage each of these parties to work together and to agree on a practical model
for peaceful, timely, inclusive and credible elections.
We regret that the Federal Government of Somalia and federal member state
leaders still have not met at the leadership level to discuss national priorities and
reforms, despite repeated calls from the Security Council. We urge President Farmajo
to call a meeting of the National Security Council, as required by the Constitution, as
soon as possible to discuss election planning, security cooperation and other urgent
national priorities. We also remain concerned that security resources needed to fight
Al-Shabaab are being misused for political rivalries in certain regions.
Federal cooperation is all the more critical given the multitude of humanitarian
crises facing Somalia as a result of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), flooding
and locusts. COVID-19 appears to be spreading rapidly in Somalia, which lacks
the resources and health infrastructure to respond effectively. We underscore
the need for timely, reliable and more equitable humanitarian assistance, and we
encourage other Governments to join us as we pledge our ongoing support to assist
with humanitarian aid and to help mitigate the crop damage and food insecurity the
swarms and flooding are causing.
28/34

20-07105

S/2020/436

Considering these many challenges, looking to the AMISOM mandate
renewal this month, we must consider how AMISOM can more effectively respond
to the persistent threat of Al-Shabaab. Elements include strengthening its commandand-control structure, prioritizing more mobile combat operations and increasing its
focus on mentoring and advising Somali National Army forces in the field.
The AMISOM mandate renewal is also an opportunity for the Security Council
to send a strong message to all stakeholders in the region that transitioning security
responsibilities to the Somalis remains a priority. We are still very concerned that
the Somali transition plan remains off track. Implementation of the transition plan
must accelerate this year to prepare for the transition of security responsibilities
from AMISOM to Somali forces in 2021. We welcome efforts to update the plan, but
meeting the existing benchmarks remains the primary challenge. We urge that the
plan assess impediments to progress and lay out steps to meet benchmarks for force
generation, security-sector reform and civilian security.
The United States remains a steadfast partner in its commitment to promoting
peace and stability in Somalia, and to working with our international partners in
assisting the country reach its goals for a peaceful and prosperous future. And we
also welcome the presence with us today of the Permanent Representative of Somalia
and the other briefers.

20-0710529/34

S/2020/436

Annex XV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam to the United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
At the outset, I would like to thank the briefers for their informative briefings
and to highly commend their work on the ground. I welcome the Permanent
Representative of Somalia to our meeting today.
We are encouraged by some positive developments in Somalia vis-à-vis the
fight against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the maintenance of
security, economic recovery and preparations for the forthcoming elections. On
the overall situation in Somalia and the way forward, I would like to share the
following points.
First, we are concerned by the recent serious developments in the relations
between the Federal Government of Somalia and the federal member states,
especially the armed clashes between the federal and state forces in Jubbaland. We
support the efforts of the Government and political leaders of Somalia to maintain
a stable environment for national unity and reconciliation. We call on all parties
concerned to make further efforts to strengthen relations between the Government
and the federal member states and to engage in constructive dialogue, for the sake of
security, sustained stability and the development of Somalia, and to refrain from any
act that may escalate tensions or see them spill over into a regional conflict.
Secondly, the COVID-19 pandemic continues to have adverse impacts,
delaying the resumption of Parliament and preparations for national elections in
2020. We emphasize the need for the National Independent Electoral Commission
to adopt the draft amendments to the political parties law and to step up protection
measures needed for civilians in the electoral process. We call on the Government
of Somalia and other stakeholders to fully comply with the electoral law to ensure
the preparations and the participation in one-person-one-vote elections for all people
and political parties. We are of the view that the political representation of women
and minorities must be strengthened, including in all decision-making processes.
Thirdly, the COVID-19 pandemic also has caused severe consequences for the
livelihoods of the people of Somalia, aggravating food insecurity and humanitarian
difficulties in areas affected by flooding and the desert locust outbreak. It has also
compounded the magnitude of the dire humanitarian issues, as 30 per cent of the
population is in need of assistance.
We commend the Government’s swift measures to fight COVID-19, but
we would like to emphasize that the risk of exponential increase in infections is
high across countries. It is therefore necessary to maintain the precautionary and
preventive steps, as well as to address economic and social consequences.
In this regard, we welcome the statement by the Secretary-General reiterating
the commitment of the United Nations to working closely with Somalia, and calling
on international partners to unite in the fight of the COVID19 pandemic and support
the Federal Government of Somalia in mitigating current and future risks and
alleviating the suffering of the people of Somalia caused by COVID-19 pandemic
and weather-related crises.
Fourthly, we condemn the terrorist attacks by Al-Shabaab against the United
Nations and personnel and facilities of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) as well as local security forces in Mogadishu and other regions. In
this connection, we urge the Government of Somalia continue to work closely
with AMISOM to take all necessary security measures. It is also incumbent
on international partners and relevant parties to uphold their responsibilities to
30/34

20-07105

S/2020/436

strengthen cooperation measures against Al-Shabaab to protect civilians, especially
women and children.
Fifthly, in March 2020, AMISOM completed the reduction in its troop ceiling
as provided for in resolution 2472 (2019). But many more efforts are needed for
AMISOM to assist the Somali security forces in providing security for the political
process at all levels and relevant support to the Somali police and authorities to create
a secure environment in the run-up to the election. We look forward to the handover
of security responsibility to Somali security forces, in line with the transition plan,
by 2021, and call on international partners, the Federal Government of Somalia and
Member States to assist AMISOM in fulfilling its mandate to support Somalia and
its people.
In conclusion, we reiterate the importance of the assistance of, and coordination
with, regional and international partners in these important undertakings by the
Somali Government. We commend the tireless work and efforts of AMISOM, the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, the United Nations country team and
the Special Representative, and reiterate our support for their continued assistance to
Somalia in maintaining peace and stability and pursuing development.

20-0710531/34

S/2020/436

Annex XVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Federal Republic
of Somalia to the United Nations, Abukar Dahir Osman
Allow me to congratulate the Permanent Representative of Estonia, Mr. Sven
Jürgenson, on his leadership as President of the Council for this month of May 2020.
The Federal Republic of Somalia reiterates its unwavering commitment to
continuing to work closely with the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia,
alongside the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), to help it accomplish its
mandate. I therefore extend gratitude to the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing and the increased understanding and closer cooperation
between my Government and the Mission. On the same note, I would like to thank
the Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
his briefing.
Our security sector reform is in earnest progress. We have virtually completed
the verification exercise. We have managed to increase the salaries of the Somali
national armed forces by 70 per cent and also ensured timely, accurate and inter-bank
payments that are easily verifiable. Our comprehensive security sector reform
continues to gain momentum. Having streamlined and standardized the Somali
national armed forces, the Government continues to generate and integrate forces,
enabling us to continue degrading the terrorist groups and liberate more areas.
Through a Somali-led operation, we managed to liberate Janaale, a strategic
town that was providing a safe hideout from which Al-Shabaab launched attacks
against other parts of the country, including the capital city, Mogadishu. This follows
the liberation of a series of other towns and settlements from which Al-Shabaab
used to carry out wanton attacks against the Government and international partners.
Indeed, it is as a result of these liberations that the Government was able to prevent
major terror attacks in the city during the reporting period.
The latest operations are in line with the longer-term Somali transition plan,
which is meant to hand over the responsibility to protect Somali citizens to the
Somali national armed forces as AMISOM peacekeeping troops continue to transit
out of the country. The national armed forces are effectively holding areas previously
liberated within the same region.
Al-Shabaab has resorted to using sleeper cells on a hit-and-run basis, such
as the despicable attacks against El-Adde and the United Nations compound. Such
heinous acts underpin the significant need to redouble the efforts of the Somali
Government and international partners to build on the current progress.
In order for the national armed forces to be able to be fully prepared to take
over from AMISOM, there is a need to empower and invest more in the advancement,
training, mobility and equipment of the Somali National Army (SNA). The arms
embargo is greatly hindering the capabilities of the SNA to be able to effectively
eradicate terrorist groups from our country.
Somalia’s economic and financial sector reform initiative has been a priority
project whose realization is prerequisite to the success of our other national reforms.
The Finance Minister’s fiscal forum, which has been chaired by Minister Beileh,
has been held four times in different locations since September 2019, including
Kismayo, Jubbaland.
The forum has been a very successful platform for advancing financial
reforms, fiscal federalism and resource-sharing. Formulas for budget support and
other resource-sharing have been agreed. The forum also recognizes that a political
32/34

20-07105

S/2020/436

settlement and increased security in the country rest with reaching agreement on the
federal model, particularly fiscal federalism, in the new constitution.
We have now fully formalized our engagement with international financial
institutions, having also reconstructed and validated our external debts. The recently
adopted ninth national development plan provides for an interim poverty reduction
strategy that seeks to present sustainable measures to mitigate countrywide
poverty challenges.
On 26 February, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) announced that it had secured sufficient pledges, to the tune of £334 million
in financing from over 100 countries, enabling the Fund to provide comprehensive
debt relief to Somalia. This was followed by the World Bank Group’s announcement
on 27 February that it would re-establish financial relations with Somalia,
paving the way for the full resumption of operations via the Bank’s International
Development Association. Similar re-engagement was announced by the African
Development Bank.
Our stringent economic and financial sector reforms paid dividends on
25 March, when Somalia attained the debt-relief decision point under the Highly
Indebted Poor Countries Initiative, thereby effectively re-establishing relations
with the IMF and the World Bank. On 5 March, Somalia’s arrears with the World
Bank and the African Development Bank were cleared through bridge loans that we
secured from development partners Norway, the United Kingdom and the European
Union (EU).
With the reform fatigue associated with implementing IMF and EU benchmarks,
such as fiscal discipline and the civil service recruitment cap, additional resources
also provide opportunities for Somali citizens to reap the development dividend from
the implemented reforms and align it with incentives for further reforms. Enhancing
the provision of social services, protecting human rights, guaranteeing the freedom
of expression and ensuring political inclusion will all be premised on the aforesaid
national reforms.
Economic reforms under the IMF debt relief process is not over yet. The
IMF staff-monitored programme has been replaced by the Extended Credit Facility
(ECF), plus additional completion point triggers. Under ECF and the completion
point triggers, we are committing to additional reforms in fiscal federalism, domestic
revenue mobilization, financial sector development, private sector development in
energy, socioeconomic investment in social protection, fiscal foundations for the
extractive industry and the strengthening of anti-corruption measures.
Somalia has been grappling with cyclic climate emergencies as the country
oscillates between floods and droughts virtually every season. We are now faced
with the worst medical crisis in a century. Somalia’s weak health infrastructure
and limited resources have curtailed our efforts to contain the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic.
The pandemic is threatening to derail our reform efforts. COVID-19 poses
a serious security challenge to a context that is already marked by fragility. In
Somalia, training by partners has been suspended to stall the spread of the disease.
There is a high risk that security personnel screening road-users may catch the
disease. Protective gear is in short supply. The Government is distributing masks
among front-line officers, but this is far from sufficient. The Somali national armed
forces are also involved in public-awareness campaigns against the disease. The
global shutdown has seen a ban on international and local flights, the imposition of a
partial curfew and the waiving of taxes on essential food and non-food items, among

20-0710533/34

S/2020/436

other measures. While food prices have skyrocketed, remittances have significantly
decreased and trading activities have declined considerably. All these factors have
caused a reduction of domestic revenue.
Families will need to be supported and small and medium-sized
business enterprises cushioned against the negative impacts associated with the
COVID-19 pandemic.

34/34

20-07105
