S/PV.9170

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9170th meeting

Thursday, 27 October 2022, 10.45 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Biang. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Gallagher
Mr. Ndung’u
Mr. Ochoa Martínez
Ms. Juul
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mr. Almazrouei
Mr. Eckersley
Mr. Wood

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Abyei (S/2022/760)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-65731 (E)
*2265731*

S/PV.9170

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

officials to enhance their joint cooperation on issues
related to Abyei and its final status, as well as the
willingness indicated to resume the meetings of the
Abyei Joint Oversight Committee (AJOC), which has
not met since 2017.

The meeting was called to order at 10.45 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Abyei (S/2022/760)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of the Sudan and
South Sudan to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Martha Ama
Akyaa Pobee, Assistant Secretary-General for Africa
in the Departments of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs and Peace Operations; and Ms. Hanna Serwaa
Tetteh, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Horn of Africa.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/760, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Abyei.
I now give the floor to Ms. Pobee.
Ms. Pobee: I thank everyone for this opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA), including
the mission’s support for the Joint Border Verification
and Monitoring Mechanism. I will also update
Council members on the latest developments since
the publication of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/760).
Today’s Security Council meeting comes at a time of
renewed engagement in the political process to address
the final status of Abyei and Sudan-South Sudan border
issues. While progress has yet to materialize in the form
of improvements in the lives and rights of the people
of Abyei, there have been significant steps towards
dialogue in the context of continued improvement in
the relationship between the Sudan and South Sudan.
We are also encouraged by the agreement earlier
this week between Sudanese and South Sudanese
2/19

27/10/2022

The African Union Peace and Security Council is
seized of the Abyei issue, having recently requested the
African Union Commission to nominate a facilitator
for the AJOC. We welcome the renewed efforts of
the African Union High-Level Implementation Panel,
chaired by former President Thabo Mbeki, to engage the
local communities, as well as the sustained engagement
by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Horn of Africa, Hanna Tetteh.
It is a welcome sign that the parties and regional
actors are now giving greater diplomatic attention to
the issue. I encourage all stakeholders, including the
international community, to sustain their support for
the ongoing efforts. UNISFA stands ready to play its
role in support of our shared objectives for Abyei.
While the security situation in the Abyei
Administrative Area has remained mostly calm, there
has been some shift in the conflict dynamics seen in
previous years. Despite the continued trust deficit
between the Misseriya and Ngok Dinka communities,
intercommunal violence between them declined
somewhat in 2022. UNISFA has worked continuously
to promote intercommunal dialogue. After a failed
attempt earlier this year, the mission was successful
in facilitating the convening of a joint traditional
leaders peace conference in Entebbe in May, which
brought together the leaders of both communities and
led to a joint communiqué, in which they recommitted
to peace while also noting their remaining points
of disagreement.
The mission continues to engage both communities,
as well as leaders in Khartoum and Juba, with the
aim of holding seasonal peace conferences to discuss
modalities during the transhumance season. Critical
to the success of such dialogues, as well as grassroots conflict-resolution mechanisms, will be the full,
equal and meaningful participation of women, which
has been lacking to date. UNISFA will work with both
communities to ensure the integration of the women
and peace and security agenda into the substantive
results of conferences and other engagements, as a vital
tool for advancing peace.
22-65731

27/10/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The year 2022 has seen a new conflict emerging
between the Ngok Dinka and Twic Dinka communities
in southern Abyei. Since the outbreak of clashes
in February, much of the intercommunal violence
witnessed in Abyei has been related to that conflict,
with the loss of lives on both sides and the displacement
of thousands of civilians, including many who sought
sanctuary next to UNISFA bases. Despite the mobility
challenges due to flooding during the rainy season,
UNISFA responded to the clashes by intensifying
patrols to deter further violence, offering protection
to the displaced and providing medical services to the
wounded. The mission continues to engage with local
authorities and community leaders to restore calm and
provide a secure environment for displaced families to
return home.
After a lull in the violence during the rainy season,
clashes resumed in late September and October. That
worrying development potentially foreshadows further
violence during the upcoming dry season, as conditions
for mobility improve. In that regard, UNISFA, in
coordination with the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan, has maintained close contact with the
Government of South Sudan to support mediation
efforts and, in particular, plans for a Governmentfacilitated peace conference to be held in South Sudan.
We are particularly concerned that, amid the
tensions between the Ngok Dinka and Twic Dinka
communities, there were attacks and threats against
UNISFA peacekeepers, staff and contractors. A total of
seven attacks on peacekeepers were recorded during the
reporting period, including against patrols responding
to intercommunal violence at Amiet market, Athony
and Malual Aleu, the targeting of UNISFA observation
posts and attacks on UNISFA bases at Athony, Tajalei
and Marial Achak. The use of high-calibre weapons,
such as rocket-propelled grenades, against UNISFA
troops in those attacks was of concern to the mission.
While those incidents did not result in serious injuries to
peacekeepers, we condemn the attacks in the strongest
terms and remind all parties that such violence may
constitute crimes under international law.
Most recently, starting on 16 October, the safety and
security of UNISFA personnel once again came under
threat during protests by local community members
demanding the removal of Twic Dinka employees and
some international staff members from the UNISFA
headquarters camp in Abyei. The mission’s prompt
engagement with local community leaders to seek

S/PV.9170

a peaceful solution and their support in that regard
helped to calm the situation. We would like to reiterate
that the safety and security of our peacekeepers, staff
and contractors remain a top priority, and we urge the
Government of South Sudan to continue its engagement
with the local community to ensure that such threats do
not reoccur.
The humanitarian community continued to assist
250,000 vulnerable people in central and southern
Abyei, including people displaced by intercommunal
clashes. In late August, there was significant flooding
in a large part of the Abyei Area, affecting some
91,000 people. UNISFA supported the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and other
partners in delivering humanitarian assistance by air to
some of those who remained cut off by road.
I am pleased to report that the reconfiguration
of the mission into a multinational peacekeeping
force continued during the reporting period, and it
is near completion, with 2,567 military personnel
out of the authorized 3,250 personnel in place. The
reconfiguration process is expected to be finalized in the
coming months with the arrival of the remaining troops
and equipment during the upcoming dry season. As the
new force establishes itself on the ground, the mission
is collaborating with United Nations Headquarters to
develop a new mission concept, the mission plan and
the military and police concept of operations to direct
the strategy of UNISFA in implementing its mandate.
The new force is also carrying out civilian and military
coordination activities to help to meet some of the basic
needs of the local population and build support for
the UNISFA mandate. A remaining challenge for the
mission is the relatively low number of women among
military personnel, at only 7 per cent, and I urge all
stakeholders to work with UNISFA to prioritize the
deployment of women troops.
With the Ngok-Twic conflict creating new
protection needs in the south, the new force must be
better equipped to cover a wider area. Force mobility in
the context of the reduced helicopter capacity and the
terrain being flooded for half of the year is a further
challenge. At the same time, the mission continues
to face other capacity challenges with regard to its
support to the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism, where no progress has been made on
reoperationalization in Sector 1, including the Sector
headquarters in Gok Machar, South Sudan, and its team
sites 11 and 12 after its forced withdrawal in 2021. It is

22-657313/19

S/PV.9170

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

critical that the Government of South Sudan continue
its efforts to enable the re-establishment of those
locations as soon as possible, as underscored by the
Security Council in its press statement of 15 October
2021 (SC/14666).
During the reporting period, there was also no
progress on the deployment of the three formed police
units and individual police officers, as mandated
by the Security Council, owing to the continued
non-issuance of visas. I appeal to the members of the
Security Council for their support in facilitating the
deployment of those valuable assets. In the meantime,
United Nations police continue to mentor and monitor
the community protection committees and the joint
protection committee in the absence of the Abyei
Police Service.
Two encouraging developments took place in June,
when UNISFA inaugurated the first-ever gender desk
to report cases of gender-based violence 24/7 and when
community protection committees were established
in some areas in northern Abyei for the first time
since 2015.
The Security Council has clearly indicated that
our efforts must focus on improving the rights and
livelihoods of people in Abyei. To that end, the mission
continues to work closely with the United Nations
country teams in the Sudan and South Sudan on the
Abyei joint programme. Following a productive visit
by the resident and humanitarian coordinators of the
Sudan and South Sudan, the programme document
has nearly been completed, and implementation of the
activities planned is expected to commence during
the next reporting period. The joint programme will
help to create an enabling environment for peace by
focusing on services in the areas of water management,
health, livelihoods and conflict resolution skills. It also
focuses on creating opportunities for young people and
women as central actors in peacebuilding. I am grateful
for the Council’s continued political support for that
important initiative.
The visit to Abyei by Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix, accompanied by Special Envoy Tetteh, will
provide an opportunity to address some of the political
and logistical challenges that I mentioned today.
I would like to end my remarks by thanking Major
General Benjamin Sawyerr and the women and men of
UNISFA for their tireless work in the service of peace
in Abyei. I would also like to thank the Security Council
4/19

27/10/2022

members for their continued support to UNISFA, and I
seek the Council’s support for the Secretary-General’s
recommendation to extend the mandate of UNISFA for
a period of one year.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Pobee
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Tetteh.
Ms. Tetteh: I am grateful for the opportunity to brief
the Security Council on the progress in implementing
resolution 2046 (2012), which relates to outstanding
bilateral issues between the Sudan and South Sudan.
I do not want to repeat the points that my colleague
Assistant Secretary-General Pobee has already made,
and I will therefore be brief.
The Sudan and South Sudan continue to enjoy
improved relations and have made some headway
through regular bilateral meetings. They also held a
Joint Political and Security Mechanism meeting in
Khartoum in May this year. However, even as they
continue exchanging high-level visits, each country’s
priority seems to be its domestic challenges. In the
Sudan, the parties have yet to agree on the way
forward to restore a democratic transition after the
coup d’état of 25 October 2021. In South Kordofan
and Blue Nile states, the stalemate in talks between
the Government of the Sudan and the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement-North, led by Abdelaziz Al-Hilu,
has persisted. In South Sudan, some progress has
been registered in the peace process, that is, in the
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan, as the graduation of forces finally took place
on 30 August, nearly three years after they completed
their training.
High-level engagements between the Sudan and
South Sudan are a regular feature of their bilateral
relations. The South Sudan national unified force’s
graduation on 30 August allowed President Salva Kiir
Mayardit to meet and discuss bilateral issues with
General Abdel Fattah Al-Burhan, Chairperson of the
Sudan’s Sovereign Council and current Chairperson
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD). Earlier in the process, General Al-Burhan
was instrumental in unblocking the stalemate over the
command structure of the unified army by presenting
a proposal acceptable to the parties, thereby paving
the way for the graduation of forces. The Sudan has
expressed interest in training South Sudanese forces on
22-65731

27/10/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

security and defence, the rule of law and maintaining
order. In early August, the Deputy Chairperson of
the Sovereign Council, Lieutenant General Mohamed
Hamdan Dagalo, also known as Hemedti, travelled
to Juba, where he expressed that wish and IGAD’s
support for the decision by the South Sudanese parties
to the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in South Sudan to extend the transition period
to 2025. He urged the parties to maximize the extension
by implementing all outstanding tasks.
The two countries also meet periodically to address
outstanding issues. On 24 May, the Sudan’s Minister
of Defence, Lieutenant General Yassin Ibrahim Yassin,
and his South Sudan counterpart, Angelina Teny,
chaired a meeting of the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism in Khartoum, at which they agreed to
re-establish the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee,
activate river transport and immediately open border
crossings, while controlling and monitoring the
movements of citizens at the borders. They also
recommitted to withdrawing their forces from the safe
demilitarized border zone, as agreed at previous Joint
Political and Security Mechanism meetings. On 28 May,
Tut Gatluak, South Sudan’s Presidential Adviser on
Security Affairs, and Omar Al-Khalifa Abdullah,
Governor of the Sudan’s White Nile state, launched the
reopening of the river transport route in Kosti, 11 years
after it was closed. However, the four border-crossing
points of Jebelain-Renk, Meiram, Buram-Timsah and
Kharsana-Panakuac have not yet been opened, due to
disputes over land attributed to the local communities.
Building on the agreement reached in March
between President Kiir and General Al-Burhan to resolve
their outstanding issues through economic and political
cooperation, the two countries have been meeting
regularly, including at the technical level. On 12 May,
a South Sudanese delegation, led by Mr. Gatluak and
accompanied by the Minister of Finance, met with the
leadership of the Sovereign Council in Khartoum. They
reviewed progress on the implementation of the peace
agreements in both countries and the enhancement of
economic cooperation, especially in the oil sector and
trade, including the border opening to ease trade flow.
The discussions also focused on technical and financial
arrangements, increased oil production and a review
of the challenges faced in implementing previous
agreements. On 22 May, at a technical meeting in
Khartoum between the Sudanese Minister of Energy and
Petroleum, Muhammad Abdullah, and South Sudan’s

S/PV.9170

Undersecretary at the Ministry of Petroleum, Awow
Daniel Chuang, the two countries agreed to develop
a cooperation framework in the field of petroleum
for their mutual benefit. On 27 September, President
Kiir reiterated the decision of both countries to use the
cooperation framework to resolve bilateral disputes,
including over Abyei, and suggested that all questions
relevant to Abyei be addressed to the Committee on
Abyei that he established in May 2021.
Following the African Union Peace and Security
Council meeting held on 29 September on the political
and security situation in Abyei, President Kiir
reconstituted the Committee on 4 October by creating
a subcommittee on development and natural resources.
Among other things, the subcommittee is mandated to
create a cooperation framework for the development
of oil and other natural resources in the Abyei Area
and to report to the Abyei Committee responsible for
pursuing negotiations on the final status of the Abyei
Area, through engagement with the Government of
the Sudan.
In the meantime, since May, working with
the Chairperson of the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel, I have been holding separate
consultations with the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya
communities to find a way out of the stalemate in
the settlement of the final status. In addition to the
communities, our consultations involved Mr. Deng
Alor, Minister of East African Community Affairs of
South Sudan and head of the Ngok Dinka delegation,
Mr. Francis Deng, former South Sudan Permanent
Representative to the United Nations, and Mr. Luka
Biong, an eminent Abyei academic and the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei. We are
currently working to achieve a face-to-face engagement
between the two communities at the request of one
of them, and both Governments have been informed
accordingly by the High-Level Implementation Panel.
As previously stated, when the African Union Peace
and Security Council met on 29 September to consider
the political and security situation in the Abyei region,
it appointed a facilitator for the Abyei Joint Oversight
Committee. We hope that all of those collective efforts
will help the parties to re-engage proactively to address
existing challenges within the region, but also to
find a solution to the status of Abyei. Ahead of that
meeting, I visited Juba on 19 and 20 October and had
a meeting with President Kiir, who confirmed to me
his determination to work cooperatively with the Sudan

22-657315/19

S/PV.9170

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

to expeditiously resolve the issue of the final status of
Abyei. He also stressed that conflicts are better settled
through peaceful means to enable communities and
their respective countries to enjoy healthier relations.
On 24 October, a delegation led by Mr. Gatluak,
in his role as Chairman of South Sudan’s Abyei
Committee, met with General Dagalo and members
of the Sudan Abyei Committee in Khartoum. Both
countries agreed to jointly expedite the provision of
services to the citizens of Abyei and activate joint
mechanisms to provide the necessary humanitarian
services by creating an appropriate environment
for the communities in the Area. They also agreed
to encourage social peace and community dialogue
among communities in Abyei as a gesture of trustbuilding. Earlier today, I met with senior officials of the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Sudan, the Minister
of Defence and General Dagalo, who all confirmed to
me their commitment to working closely with their
South Sudanese counterparts on the final resolution of
the status of Abyei. They referenced the meeting held
on 24 October and noted their commitment to using
this opportunity for re-engagement to meet regularly
on issues relating to Abyei on a quarterly basis.
In conclusion, progress in improving bilateral
relations between the Sudan and South Sudan has been
positive, and we believe that it will have a stabilizing
effect on the dispute between the two countries.
Nevertheless, a renewed commitment regarding the
implementation of transitional arrangements, as well
as the dispute resolution over Abyei’s final status,
cannot be set apart from the fragile internal situations
in both countries. My office will continue to engage
with the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan,
as well as the African Union and IGAD, to maintain the
international community’s support for fully normalizing
the relationship between the two countries. We will
also continue to offer assistance to the parties as they
take these encouraging steps to find ways of working
towards a definitive resolution of Abyei’s status.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Tetteh
for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I would
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Pobee and
Special Envoy Tetteh for sharing the progress of the
United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
6/19

27/10/2022

(UNISFA) on mandate implementation, and for their
updates on Abyei.
The United States deeply appreciates UNISFA’s
tireless efforts to implement its mandated tasks
to protect civilians and facilitate the delivery of
humanitarian aid throughout its troop reconfiguration
and in the face of unprecedented challenges. In line
with the Secretary-General’s recommendation in
his 13 October report (S/2022/760), we support a
one-year extension of UNISFA’s mandate. We hope
the Secretary-General’s recommendation will have the
Council’s support as well. A one-year mandate would
allow UNISFA to complete its troop reconfiguration
and give the mission adequate time to receive visas,
identify key stakeholders and develop the essential
relationships that it needs to implement its mandate.
We also continue to urge the Sudan and South Sudan
to facilitate the smooth functioning of all UNISFA
bases and Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism team sites and provide full support for
UNISFA in the implementation of its mandate.
The United States is gravely concerned about
the re-emergence of deadly violence between Dinka
communities. More than 20 civilians have been killed
and thousands remain forcibly displaced following the
destruction of their property and homes. We condemn
those acts of violence and urgently call on the two
Governments to intensify their efforts to end those
violent clashes. Similarly, we call on both Governments
to do their utmost to prevent seasonal clashes among
local communities. Given that Abyei continues to
lack United Nations police and a joint police service,
it will likely continue to experience violent clashes
and criminality. The formation of joint security and
administration institutions, the issuance of visas for
United Nations police and the deployment of a civilian
deputy would allow for more non-military approaches
to mitigating conflict and building peace among
communities. We again strongly urge the Sudan to issue
visas for United Nations police in a timely manner,
allow for the appointment of a civilian Deputy Head
of UNISFA and allow UNISFA the use of the Athony
airfield. Finally, we ask both the Sudan and South
Sudan to make progress towards the establishment of
Abyei’s joint police service, which will be a critical tool
for quelling violence in Abyei.
Those political impasses, which have continued
for the past 11 years, remain a great disappointment
because the people of Abyei continue to suffer from
22-65731

27/10/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

violence, mass displacement and a lack of basic needs
and humanitarian aid. We reiterate our call to the
parties to renew their diplomatic engagement in order to
achieve a peaceful and mutually acceptable resolution
of Abyei’s final status and to participate in the Joint
Political and Security Mechanism and the Abyei Joint
Oversight Committee meetings. We welcomed the
announcement of an agreement on 24 October and note
that the implementation of its commitments could be
essential in bringing peace and security to the people
of Abyei. We look forward to more information on
their specific plans and details on which institutions
and mechanisms will be activated, as well as plans
for discussions on a final status. We commend
and support the African Union Peace and Security
Council’s 29 September communiqué, which appealed
to the Sudan and South Sudan to hasten their efforts to
establish joint institutions, and we strongly encourage
the African Union to intensify those engagements in
order to make progress towards a solution in Abyei.
Lastly, we continue to encourage UNISFA initiatives
to support community dialogue aimed at strengthening
intercommunal relationships that promote and facilitate
stability in the Abyei Area and stress the importance
of women’s full, equal and meaningful participation in
those processes. We encourage UNISFA to continue its
efforts to protect women and children from violence,
particularly sexual and gender-based violence. The
United States also calls on UNISFA to provide more
extensive mission activity reporting focused on
UNISFA’s effectiveness, and more qualitative measures
in implementing its mandate.
We reiterate our commitment to working with the
Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan and the
people in the region, our fellow Council members, the
African Union, and other international and regional
partners with the goal of achieving peace, security, and
the prosperity of the region.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the three African members
of the Security Council (A3), Gabon, Kenya and Ghana.
At the outset, we would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2022/760), as well as Assistant
Secretary-General Martha Pobee and Special Envoy
Hanna Serwaa Tetteh for their insightful briefings on
the situation in Abyei and the activities of the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNIFSA).

S/PV.9170

Our statement will focus on the political, security and
humanitarian situations.
On the political front, the A3 welcomes the growing
positive relations between the Sudan and South Sudan
and their commitment to good-neighbourliness, as
demonstrated by their continued mutual support for
resolving their respective internal political and security
challenges. We urge the two countries to use that new
positive momentum to seek a peaceful settlement on
the final status of Abyei, as provided for in the 2005
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. The A3 discourages
any unilateral action by either of the parties and
urges them to seek mutual agreement on the Abyei
referendum as part of the overall objective of the
stabilization process.
While the A3 welcomes the two countries’ efforts to
re-establish discussions on Abyei, it is regrettable that
during the reporting period there was no progress on
the implementation of the 2011 agreement on temporary
arrangements for the administration and security of the
Abyei Area. There was also no progress in facilitating
the long-standing requests of UNISFA that affect the
mission’s performance, including for the use of the
Athony airstrip, the issuance of visas for formed police
units, the appointment of a UNISFA civilian Deputy
Head of Mission and the redeployment of Sector 1 of the
Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism.
Regrettably, the people who continue to be negatively
affected by the stand-off are the desperate civilians in
Abyei, who are still not being provided with any reliable
basic essential services.
The A3 takes note of the convening in May of a
meeting of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism
and the recommitment to past agreements, including
the reopening of the border crossings. Indeed, the
realization of soft borders should remain a strategic
objective between the two countries owing to their
strong mutual interdependence. We therefore urge
them to expedite the implementation of all the previous
recommendations and conclusions of the meetings of
the Joint Political and Security Mechanism and the
Abyei Joint Oversight Committee. Moreover, the two
parties should jointly and in a coordinated manner
implement all the protocols of the September 2012
cooperation agreements, especially the demarcation of
the safe demilitarized border zone, in order to enable the
Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
to discharge its mandate effectively.

22-657317/19

S/PV.9170

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The A3 welcomes the communiqué issued at
the 1108th meeting of the African Union Peace and
Security Council held on 29 September, on Abyei, and
reiterates its full support to the work of the African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel. We reiterate
our call to all international partners to remain engaged
diplomatically and politically in support of the dialogue
efforts between the two countries and to offer any
required technical support in the implementation of the
existing framework agreement.
With regard to the security situation in Abyei,
the A3 is deeply concerned about the resurgence
of armed violence and intercommunal attacks in
Abyei. We strongly condemn the reported violent
confrontations, destruction of property and loss of life.
We urge the parties to the conflict to cease hostilities,
exercise restraint and pursue dialogue to address their
grievances. The A3 welcomes the establishment of the
community protection committees and the convening of
the Abyei Joint Traditional Leaders’ Peace Conference,
held in Kampala in May. It is our belief that frequent
and broad-based intercommunal dialogues can go a
long way to addressing the existing grievances and
tensions among the communities.
On the humanitarian situation, the A3 is deeply
concerned by the worsening humanitarian situation
evidenced by the displacement of the population and
the lack of access to essential social services, which
has added to the hardship in the Abyei Administrative
Area. We are also concerned by the devastating
impacts of climate change, which have caused floods,
diminished livelihoods and increased the competition
for scarce resources, thereby further driving conflicts
and insecurity in Abyei.
The A3 therefore welcomes the completion of the
document on the Abyei joint programme of the United
Nations country teams of the Sudan and South Sudan,
and it looks forward to the expeditious implementation
of the identified quick-impact projects. We further
call on Member States and humanitarian agencies
to continue to provide the necessary support for the
people of Abyei to accord them dignity and alleviate
their suffering. As the dry season approaches, we urge
UNISFA to implement early interventions, including
facilitating intercommunal dialogues on transhumance.
Finally, the A3 commends UNISFA and the troopcontributing countries for their continued commitment
to execute the mandate of the mission despite the
8/19

27/10/2022

existing challenges. We condemn the reported attacks
directed against UNISFA personnel and facilities.
As noted in our statement of 21 April to the
Council (see S/PV.9020), we remain convinced that the
realization of the final status of Abyei is the key to any
future decision on the withdrawal of UNISFA, taking
into account the safety and security of Abyei residents.
The A3 therefore reiterates the need to maintain
the presence of UNISFA and welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal for a 12-month mandate cycle for
UNISFA in lieu of the current six months, which we
believe would greatly help for planning and operational
purposes. We also urge the Sudan and South
Sudan to fully cooperate with UNISFA, including
through ensuring full respect of the status-of-forces
agreement in order to enable implementation of the
mission’s mandate.
In conclusion, the A3 wishes to recognize with
gratitude the sustained efforts over the years by the
African Union High-Level Implementation Panel,
chaired by former President Thabo Mbeki; the role
of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Horn of Africa; the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development; and the regional leaders who
have contributed to the stabilization of the Abyei
Administrative Area. We encourage the African Union
to sustain its efforts to ensure the success of that
undertaking, aimed at finding peaceful solutions to the
challenges in Abyei.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Pobee and Special Envoy Tetteh
for their briefings, and I welcome the participation of
the representatives of the Sudan and South Sudan in
this meeting.
Albania strongly supports the efforts of the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA)
personnel operating in the Abyei Administrative Area to
ensure the protection of civilians and promote dialogue
between the two Governments and the implementation
of their mandates.
In that regard, attacks against UNISFA personnel
and restrictions of movement against the mission are
unacceptable. We strongly condemn the violence
against peacekeepers and call on all stakeholders to
enable the mission’s freedom of movement. We also call
on the Sudan to facilitate the issuance of the necessary
visas for UNSIFA to complete its troop reconfiguration.
22-65731

27/10/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

We are concerned about the humanitarian crisis,
the security and socioeconomic situation, as well as
the absence of a functional justice system. Regarding
the recent local community tensions and the political
situation in Khartoum, we urge the parties to cease
hostilities and address the root causes in order to
achieve sustainable peace.
Also, the situation has been worsened by the
recent flooding in South Sudan, which affected the
Abyei Administrative Area.
We welcome the agreement by both Governments
to strengthen cooperation on Abyei. The holding of
the Joint Political and Security Mechanism meeting in
May was a positive step, but all parties must further
participate and hold Abyei Joint Oversight Committee
meetings. Those talks remain crucial for resolving the
border-crossing corridors, restoring the operation of
the Athony airstrip and establishing the joint border
verification and monitoring mechanism.
In that regard, Albania calls on the Sudan and
South Sudan to take concrete action to strengthen
their engagement to enhance dialogue among all
stakeholders. We must see serious commitment and
political will to implement the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan and to
build joint structures.
Furthermore, we welcome the recent communiqué
adopted by the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union. We commend its efforts and call for
further mediation engagement to find a way forward on
the political stalemate.
In conclusion, it is clear that the final status of
Abyei is dependent upon the Sudan and South Sudan.
Therefore, we urge that concrete and constructive
action be taken to resolve the final status and bring
peace and stability to Abyei.

S/PV.9170

China welcomes the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism meeting between the Sudan and South
Sudan held last May. Among other things, it resulted
in progress in opening transit corridors. We are
also pleased with the interaction between the two
parties in preparation for the upcoming Abyei Joint
Oversight Committee meeting. We hope that they will
continue to increase their political input on the Abyei
question, maintain their dialogue and consultation
and, with the support of the African Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, speed
up the implementation of the agreement on temporary
arrangements for the administration and security of
the Abyei Administrative Area in order to continue to
move towards the settlement of the Abyei question.
The sporadic outbreaks of intercommunal clashes
and security incidents in Abyei are disconcerting.
However, it is reassuring that thanks to the joint
response of the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei (UNISFA), the Abyei administration and the
Sudan and South Sudan, the security situation in Abyei
has remained generally stable and under control.
China welcomes the seasonal peace conference and
the resumption of consultations between the Misseriya
and Ngok Dinka communities. We encourage all tribes
in Abyei to actively participate in the seasonal peace
conferences convened by UNISFA and the International
Organization for Migration, in order to reach consensus
on arrangements for transhumance during the next
grazing period, and to work together to reduce tension
and achieve harmonious coexistence.
The people of Abyei are experiencing multiple
challenges, such as violent crime, flooding and difficulty
in terms of livelihoods. They lack basic public services,
including water, public health, education, assistance in
agriculture and animal husbandry, and are in dire need
of targeted relief from the international community.

Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Pobee and Special Envoy
Tetteh for their briefings. I also welcome the Permanent
Representatives of the Sudan and South Sudan to the
meeting today.

China supports the United Nations in carrying out
peacebuilding projects in Abyei, helping to improve
the situation of the people there, properly handling
the violent clashes triggered by the competition for
resources and building a solid foundation for lasting
peace through sustainable development.

In recent years, the bilateral relations between the
Sudan and South Sudan have been improving. That
is conducive to stability in the region and settling the
question of Abyei question.

UNISFA is an important force for maintaining peace
and stability in Abyei, and it plays an indispensable role
in the political settlement of the Abyei question. China
supports UNISFA in continuing to perform its duties

22-657319/19

S/PV.9170

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

and encourages both parties to continue to cooperate
with UNISFA.
In that regard, we welcome the near completion of
the reconfiguration of UNISFA and thank the Ethiopian
peacekeepers for their efforts over the years to promote
Abyei’s stability.

27/10/2022

those circumstances, ensuring unrestricted access is
vital. The United Kingdom urges all parties to fully
respect international humanitarian law and to protect
and enable humanitarian staff, assets and operations in
order to deliver aid to those in need in all parts of Abyei
without hindrance.

As one of the troop-contributing countries of
UNISFA, China dispatched a peacekeeping helicopter
contingent to Abyei, which has since its deployment
actively met the needs of the peacekeeping mandate
and spared no efforts to complete a range of flights and
ground-support tasks. The Chinese peacekeepers will
continue to support the work of UNISFA with practical
action and will resolutely fulfil their peace mission.

Thirdly, we remain concerned about the lack of
progress on a political solution for Abyei. We therefore
welcome the increased focus on the issue from the
Sudan and South Sudan. We call on both Governments
to seize that momentum and deliver measurable
positive change for the people of Abyei. As a next step,
we urge both countries to organize a further meeting of
the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee as a sign of their
recommitment to reaching an agreement.

Mr. Eckersley (United Kingdom): I thank the
Assistant Secretary-General and the Special Envoy
for their very helpful briefings. I would also like to
welcome the representatives of the Sudan and South
Sudan to this meeting.

Lastly, we welcome the recent communiqué of the
African Union (AU) regarding Abyei, and encourage
the AU to intensify its mediation efforts to help reach
an agreement on its final status.

We would like to make three brief points today.
First, the United Kingdom commends the tireless
efforts of the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei (UNISFA) to deliver its mandate under
such challenging circumstances, and we also thank
the troop-contributing countries. We fully support the
extension of the mission’s mandate for 12 months. We
fully support the extension of the mission’s mandate for
12 months, and we join our fellow Council members in
reiterating the call on the Governments of the Sudan and
South Sudan to remove the long-standing obstacles that
limit the full implementation of UNISFA’s mandate.
In particular, we are concerned about the restrictions
on the mission’s freedom of movement and the attacks
on UNISFA personnel. We urge the Government of
South Sudan to ensure the re-operationalization of the
Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
headquarters in Gok Machar.
Secondly, we must continue to watch the situation
on the ground in Abyei carefully. Civilians continue
to suffer due to the absence of basic services and the
limited rule of law. We are concerned about the ongoing
intercommunal violence across Abyei, including the
worrying increase in tensions between the Dinka
communities. Recent flooding has also compounded
the worsening humanitarian situation. In addition to
insecurity and a lack of infrastructure, it is putting
huge pressure on the humanitarian response. Given
10/19

Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault (France) (spoke in French):
I thank Ms. Martha Pobee and Ms. Hanna Tetteh for
their briefings. I also welcome the participation of the
Sudan and South Sudan in this meeting. I would like to
highlight three points.
We are concerned about the changing nature of
intercommunal violence, with clashes between the Ngok
Dinka and Twic Dinka communities. That violence is
going hand in hand with an upsurge in attacks on Blue
Helmets that is also unacceptable. We call on the Sudan
and South Sudan to reduce those tensions. The two
countries are bound by the status-of-forces agreement.
They must allow the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA) to carry out its mandate
safely in all of its areas of deployment. I refer here in
particular to support for the Joint Border Verification
and Monitoring Mechanism, as well as the use of the
Athony airstrip. Those difficulties show that the status
quo in Abyei is at a tipping point. The accumulated
tensions and fragility of institutions could lead to an
escalation at any time. We call on Khartoum and Juba
to take advantage of their warming relations to reach a
final-status settlement for Abyei. At a minimum, it must
be possible to meet the basic needs of populations and
reduce intercommunal tensions. We therefore welcome
the agreement signed on 24 October in Khartoum and
call for its implementation.
UNISFA can support a positive dynamic through its
peacebuilding activities and its support for community
22-65731

27/10/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

protection committees. If that approach is to be scaled
up it requires that progress be made with regard to the
appointment of a civilian Deputy Head of UNISFA and
the deployment of United Nations Police units.
The stalemate of the situation in Abyei reflects
the fragility of a region where crises are multiplying
and protracted. A year has passed since the 25 October
2021 coup in the Sudan. That political crisis continues
to hamper the peace process in Darfur, as well as the
settlement of the status of Abyei. It also hinders the
response to intercommunal violence, which has recently
re-emerged in West Kordofan and Blue Nile, worryingly.
France reiterates its call on all the parties to identify a
way out of the political crisis and make progress on the
formation of a credible civilian Government. In South
Sudan, closing the gaps in the implementation of the
2018 Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan must remain a
priority. We encourage the authorities to show unity and
accelerate the implementation of security arrangements
in accordance with the road map adopted in August.
Finally, we encourage the States of the region to
resolve their differences through dialogue, whether in
relation to Abyei, the Al-Fashaga triangle, the Grand
Ethiopian Renaissance Dam or the conflict in Tigray.
In that context, we reiterate our support for Special
Envoy Tetteh and are in favour of bolstering her
team’s resources.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): We thank
Assistant Secretary-General Pobee and Special Envoy
Tetteh for the valuable information they have provided,
and welcome the delegations of the Sudan and South
Sudan to this meeting.
Brazil remains concerned about the situation
on the ground, which has been marked by recurring
waves of violence in Abyei. We are apprehensive
about the persistently tense relations among the
local communities. The ongoing hostilities make
humanitarian assistance in remote areas even more
dangerous. The persistence of armed conflict also
threatens the livelihoods of civilians, who already face
substantial socioeconomic challenges, and we echo
the Secretary-General’s worries about the enduring
hardships that the people of Abyei face.
The precarious situation on the ground makes the
work of the United Nations Interim Security Force for
Abyei (UNISFA) even more critical. We deplore the
attacks on peacekeepers and the restrictions on the

S/PV.9170

mission’s freedom of movement. We thank UNISFA’s
leadership and personnel for the substantial endeavours
they have made so far and continue to accomplish
every day. In particular, we thank Special Envoy Tetteh
and Major General Sawyerr for their critical efforts.
As the time to renew UNISFA’s mandate approaches,
we should ensure that the mission has the means to
perform its crucial functions, including with regard
to the protection of civilians and peacekeepers. In
that connection, Brazil highlights the importance of
strategic communications to support the mission’s
activities, counter misinformation, garner trust among
the relevant stakeholders and safeguard the protection
of Blue Helmets. That is especially relevant in light of
recent attacks on United Nations personnel.
Regarding the status of the Abyei Area, we
reiterate that common ground between the Sudan and
South Sudan will only emerge through fair, credible
negotiations. We support additional dialogue between
the Sudan and South Sudan and further contact between
the two parties at various levels. We also welcome the
friendlier relations between the two Governments in
recent years. The domestic challenges in the Sudan
and South Sudan should not derail bilateral dynamics.
Those positive bilateral developments are why we call
on the leaders of both countries to seize the opportunity
to progress towards a long-term political settlement
of the Abyei Area’s status. We underline the African
Union’s legitimacy in intensifying its mediation efforts
between the Sudan and South Sudan and highlight
the critical support provided by the African Union
High-Level Implementation Panel. In his latest report
(S/2022/760), the Secretary-General supports a more
significant role for the African Union on the issue. As
we advance towards a settlement of the Abyei situation,
we reiterate that positive synergy among the United
Nations, the African Union, the Sudan and South Sudan
is a critical factor.
We welcome the agreement between the Sudanese
and South Sudanese authorities announced earlier this
week in Khartoum. We call on the Sudan and South
Sudan to seize this window of opportunity.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank the briefers for their
insights. I particularly commend Special Envoy Hanna
Tetteh for her efforts to revitalize the political process.
We also want to commend her collaboration with the
African Union (AU) Peace and Security Council and
the AU High-Level Implementation Panel for the Sudan
and South Sudan.

22-6573111/19

S/PV.9170

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Norway remains deeply concerned about the high
level of tensions in and around Abyei. We note with
particular concern the report’s reference to
“coordinated attacks on Ngok Dinka communities
by Twic Dinka and Misseriya” (S/2022/760, para.
10).
The repeated cycles of violence between communities
make development impossible and have a devastating
effect on civilians, including children. We call on the
Misseriya, the Ngok Dinka and all neighbouring groups
to show restraint and engage in efforts to decrease
tensions ahead of the next dry season.
We are also concerned about the continued attacks
on the peacekeepers of the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA). UNISFA must
remain operational, willing and ready to implement
its full Chapter VII mandate to protect civilians under
threat of physical violence.
Let me add three points to today’s discussion on
UNISFA and the situation in Abyei.
First, we need to see progress on the most contested
issue — will Abyei belong to the Sudan or South Sudan?
While that remains unresolved, the implementation of
the joint mechanisms, as stipulated in the June 2011
agreement, is essential for ensuring stability and
providing services for the people. That will strengthen
cooperation and build trust between the communities
on the ground. We welcome the high-level meeting held
between the Sudan and South Sudan earlier this week
and urge the parties to commit to regular meetings
within the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee. It is
also critical that efficient visa procedures be applied
to ensure the timely recruitment and replacement of
police and military personnel, as well as human rights
experts and other civilian personnel, for UNISFA. In
addition, the Athony airstrip should be accessible.
Secondly, we commend UNISFA’s efforts to
build peace and support reconciliation among the
communities in Abyei, including through the Abyei
joint programme. Women’s voices are important.
Enhancing their participation in those processes must
remain a top priority. We also commend the efforts of
UNISFA to promote human rights and the rule of law.
The pilot referral pathway for survivors of sexual and
gender-based violence is a great example. However,
more could and would be achieved if the authorized
12/19

27/10/2022

number of police personnel and the appropriate human
rights capacity were in place.
Thirdly, it is important to recognize that the
current impasse on the final status of Abyei reflects the
severe democratic challenges that mark the transitions
in both the Sudan and South Sudan. We encourage
the Governments of both countries to promote
inclusive political processes that consider the views
of the local populations and ensure the protection of
civilians, including children. Cross-border cooperation
is, and will continue to be, key for a future in which
people enjoy security and development. Practical
confidence-building measures create a conducive
environment. Neither side should see the final solution
as a zero-sum game.
In conclusion, Norway strongly supports the
renewal of UNISFA’s mandate. We urge the parties to
implement the joint mechanisms. We call on the leaders
of the Sudan and South Sudan to redouble their efforts
to reach an agreement on the final status of Abyei.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): At the outset, let me
thank Assistant Secretary-General Martha Pobee and
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Horn of Africa, Ms. Hanna Tetteh, for their respective
briefings on the developments concerning the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA),
its support for the Joint Border Verification Monitoring
Mechanism and progress in the implementation of
resolution 2609 (2021).
I also welcome the presence of the Permanent
Representatives of the Sudan and South Sudan at
today’s meeting.
The peaceful resolution of the final status of
Abyei, in conformity with the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, remains fundamental for achieving durable
peace, stability and development in the region. We
believe that developments during the reporting period
provide hope for both the Sudan and South Sudan in
moving forward on the political settlement. We also
welcome the role of the African Union in that regard.
The convening of the meeting of the Joint Political
and Security Mechanism, which was long overdue,
and the opening of border-crossing corridors are
noteworthy developments. We believe that regular
meetings of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee are
important for effective administration and addressing
the security challenges in Abyei. The Joint Traditional
22-65731

27/10/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Leaders’ Peace Conference held in Entebbe also brought
together the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya communities,
which provided a list of pending matters that could
be considered by the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism at its future meetings. There is also a
positive indication for the convening of meetings of the
Abyei Joint Oversight Committee in the coming months.
The security situation has largely remained calm,
although violent incidents have continued. We note with
concern the armed attacks and freedom-of-movement
violations against UNISFA troops. It is important that
those issues, including the operationalization of the
Athony airstrip and visas for formed police units, be
earnestly addressed by South Sudan and the Sudan. We
also call for the establishment of an Abyei police service.
Despite those operational challenges, UNISFA
has continued to support and enhance the rule of
law in the Abyei Administrative Area, through the
involvement of community protection committees
and the joint protection committee. UNISFA has also
supported the communities through quick-impact
projects. The situation in the Joint Border Verification
Monitoring Mechanism area has remained calm. We
hope that it will be reoperationalized in Sector 1 in
the coming days. We believe that raising awareness
among the local population will play an important role
in the reactivation of the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism.
We also welcome the progress made in the ongoing
process of UNISFA reconfiguration. The deployment of
an Indian contingent of 570 peacekeepers is currently
under way, which reflects India’s commitment to the
peace, stability and development of Abyei.
In conclusion, let me highlight that India has longstanding and friendly relations with both the Sudan and
South Sudan. We are confident that both countries will
successfully resolve all outstanding issues and continue
to emerge stronger. For our part, we will continue to
support Juba and Khartoum in the peaceful resolution
of the status of Abyei.
Mr. Ochoa Martínez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): First of all, we would like to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Pobee and Special Envoy Tetteh for
their briefings.
We also welcome the presence of the representatives
of the Sudan and South Sudan at today’s meeting.

S/PV.9170

Mexico believes that the improved relations between
the Sudan and South Sudan and the relative stability of
the security situation provide an opportunity that the
parties should seize to reach a settlement on the final
status of Abyei. In that regard, a meeting of the Abyei
Joint Oversight Committee must be held to enable the
parties to agree on a process and timetable for reaching
a political agreement to resolve the issue of the final
status of Abyei.
We closely monitor the work of the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei, the International
Organization for Migration and the African Union,
including the High-Level Implementation Panel on
the Sudan and South Sudan, to facilitate dialogue
between communities. We acknowledge in particular
the exchange in Entebbe in May, which was
mentioned earlier.
Dialogue is essential for preventing intercommunal
clashes that lead to mass population displacement
and numerous consequences for the security and
humanitarian situation. For example, they increase the
risk of sexual and gender-based violence and impede
humanitarian assistance.
It is also critical that the Sudan and South
Sudan move forward in establishing rule-of-law and
accountability institutions and providing basic services
in Abyei. We acknowledge the efforts of the United
Nations to implement the Abyei joint programme,
which will provide the population with support for the
management of water and health resources.
With regard to the climate situation, floods have
had a negative impact on food security, in addition to
hampering humanitarian aid. In that regard, we also
regret that the provision of humanitarian assistance
has been affected in some areas by the presence of
armed groups.
Concerning the security situation, we regret that
the issuance of visas for the Abyei police service by
the Sudan remains pending and that the road map for
the establishment of the Abyei police service has yet to
be agreed. Initiatives such as the community protection
committees, in which women are widely involved, are
welcome. However, they are not a substitute for the role
of the Abyei police service.
We acknowledge the significant work that has
gone into the reconfiguration of the Force. We must
ensure its freedom of movement, as well as counter

22-6573113/19

S/PV.9170

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

misinformation and negative perceptions about its role
through quick-impact projects that address the needs
of more-disadvantaged communities. We note the
establishment of processes to support victims of sexual
and gender-based violence in Abyei and reiterate the
importance of human rights expertise within the Force
so that it can document violations and abuses.
In conclusion, we condemn the attacks against
UNISFA personnel, and we reiterate our full support
for the Force and the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism in fulfilling their respective
mandates, which are vital to stabilizing the situation
in Abyei.
Mr. Almazrouei (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank
Assistant-Secretary-General Martha Pobee and Special
Envoy Hanna Tetteh for their thorough briefings and
tireless efforts in the Abyei Area. I also welcome
the representatives of the Sudan and South Sudan at
this meeting.
Promoting dialogue and peaceful coexistence
are key pillars to building peaceful and prosperous
societies. The United Arab Emirates therefore continues
to urge the United Nations Interim Security Force for
Abyei (UNISFA) to engage with local communities
in the Abyei Area to reduce current tensions. In that
regard, we are encouraged by the recent initiatives and
developments in the region, most notably the conference
held under the theme “Peace for dialogue”, which took
place in May and brought together tribal leaders and
women and youth representatives.
We believe that such inclusive exchanges must
continue regularly to take stock of the progress made
on the implementation of the principles agreed upon
at the conference. We also commend the leadership
of UNISFA in delivering quick-impact projects and
working jointly with United Nations police to refer
survivors of sexual and gender-based violence in Abyei
to the Experimental Gender Bureau, which works 24/7.
We commend the efforts made by the community
protection committees and joint protection committees
for supporting UNISFA to respond to incidents
in a timely manner, including armed attacks and
intercommunal violence.
Despite those positive developments, the United
Arab Emirates remains concerned about the continued
intercommunal clashes and violence, including
14/19

27/10/2022

incidents that have hampered UNISFA’s operations
and targeted its forces. That further complicates
the dire humanitarian situation in the Abyei Area,
especially in the light of the floods that have caused
recent displacements and washed away farmlands,
exacerbating food insecurity. That highlights once
more the extremely important role played by UNISFA
in facilitating the delivery of humanitarian assistance to
those in need and affected, including through the Abyei
joint programme supervised by the United Nations
Resident Coordinators for the Sudan and South Sudan,
which is pivotal to supporting people’s livelihoods in the
region. As the seasonal migration period approaches,
intercommunal tensions may increase. We believe that
addressing those challenges requires communicating
with all relevant stakeholders. Therefore, convening
a seasonal peace conference is an important step in
that regard.
Concerning the Sudan and South Sudan, we note
that their relations have continued to improve, including
through the Joint Peace and Security Mechanism
meeting held in Khartoum in May, which led to achieving
progress on the opening of border-crossing corridors
in addition to urging the parties to resume regular
meetings of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee.
In that regard, an agreement on the final status
of Abyei can only be reached through dialogue. We
also encourage the continuation of diplomatic efforts
to accelerate the implementation of the arrangements
for the administration and security of the Abyei Area,
as well as redoubling efforts to achieve a peaceful and
mutually acceptable settlement by the parties involving
Abyei’s final status.
In conclusion, as we prepare to consider UNISFA’s
mandate in the upcoming period, we look forward
to holding constructive discussions. We take this
opportunity to thank UNISFA, the troop-contributing
countries and the African Union for their tireless efforts
to maintain peace and security in the Abyei Area.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian) We are grateful to Assistant Secretary-General
Martha Pobee and Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Horn of Africa Hanna Tetteh for their
informative briefings. We welcome the Permanent
Representatives of South Sudan and the Sudan at
this meeting.
We are pleased to note that, according to the latest
report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/760), the
22-65731

27/10/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.9170

situation in Abyei has remained generally stable in recent
months and that relations between the Sudan and South
Sudan have continued to improve. We welcomed the
meeting of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism
in May, which confirmed agreement between Khartoum
and Juba on a number of issues, including resolving the
issue of border crossings. We also welcome the declared
readiness of the two States to resume the work of the
Abyei Joint Oversight Committee, which has not met
since 2017. We also note the meeting that took place in
Khartoum at the beginning of this week. We hope that
the dialogue will facilitate agreement on determining
the final status of Abyei.

Mr. Gallagher (Ireland): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Pobee and Special Envoy Tetteh for
their briefings today. I also welcome the representatives
of South Sudan and the Sudan to the Chamber.

At the same time, we are concerned about the status
of intercommunal dialogue. New outbreaks of violence
between the Twic Dinka and Ngok Dinka, in violation
of the cessation of hostilities agreement signed between
the communities in April, cannot but cause concern.
We continue to believe that joint efforts by the parties
are critical to successfully making progress towards
an inter-Sudanese settlement that would result in the
determination of Abyei’s final status. In our view, it
is imperative that the status of the disputed Area be
resolved based on international law and agreements
between the two States.

We cannot let it become a forgotten crisis. The
people of Abyei need access to State services. They
deserve justice, security and the opportunity for
economic development. It is beyond time for the
Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan to live
up to their responsibilities. We are encouraged by
the indications from the co-Chairs of the Abyei Joint
Oversight Committee that they are ready to meet.

We consider the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA) as an important factor
in ensuring stability in the region. The main goal of
the United Nations presence in the Area is to help
the Sudan and South Sudan in their efforts to find a
mutually acceptable solution to the Abyei and border
issues. We are also convinced of the need for strict
compliance with the UNISFA mandate. We support the
extension of the Force’s mandate. We welcomed the
mission’s facilitation of the joint traditional leaders’
peace conference, which brought together traditional
Ngok Dinka and Misseriya leaders in Entebbe. We look
forward to continuing efforts to strengthen relations
among local communities, including through the
planned next regional conference on transhumance.
We note that the reconfiguration of UNISFA into a
multinational mission is in its final stages. We call on
the leadership of the peacekeeping mission to continue
to work with Khartoum and Juba to resolve ongoing
issues pertaining to the work of the Blue Helmets, as
well as to implement the benchmarks in the work of the
Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism.
The positions of the Sudan and South Sudan, as well as
their concerns, must be duly taken into account.

The humanitarian situation in Abyei is exacerbated
by frequent outbreaks of violence and insecurity and the
ongoing challenge of sexual and gender-based violence.
Conditions are further worsened by the impacts of
flooding, other climate-related issues and the global
food crisis. Those circumstances make it all the more
urgent that the Sudan and South Sudan redouble their
efforts to find a mutually agreed solution for Abyei.

There are no short cuts to lasting peace.
Nevertheless, we are encouraged by the leadership of the
African Union (AU) and its commitment to supporting
the parties and communities on the ground in finding a
lasting solution. In particular, we are impressed by the
AU plans to actively engage with local communities to
help tackle the root causes of the conflict and to appoint
a facilitator for the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee.
Ireland welcomes the traditional leaders’ dialogue
that took place earlier this year, supported by the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA).
That can be a platform to be built on, and it should
be accompanied by a commitment to refraining from
violence, including during the upcoming dry season.
We also welcome the efforts of the mission and
the South Sudanese authorities to forge peace between
the Ngok Dinka and the Twic Dinka. It is critically
important that all dialogue efforts benefit from the
full and unhindered participation of women and the
inclusion of young people, both of which are key to
inclusive and sustainable peace. We also welcome
the inaugural opening of a pilot gender desk referral
pathway for survivors of sexual and gender-based
violence in Abyei in June.
Ireland welcomes the progress made in the
reconfiguration of UNISFA to a multinational force and
the mission’s increased engagement with communities.

22-6573115/19

S/PV.9170

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

While some operational issues must still be resolved,
the rapid progress on reconfiguration is laudable.
Ireland once again calls on both the Sudan and South
Sudan to address outstanding operational issues, such
as the issuance of visas and access to Athony airstrip.
The Sudan, for example, has been unable to facilitate
the deployment of critical mission personnel. That
leaves the mission with only 50 police personnel — a
fraction of the 640 police officers authorized by the
Security Council.
The progress achieved on the reconfiguration took
place despite the continued attacks on peacekeepers.
We were very disturbed by Assistant Secretary-General
Pobee speaking earlier of rockets and grenades being
used against United Nations peacekeepers. Ireland
condemns all such attacks. We commend the bravery
and sacrifices of the UNISFA troops, and we call for
them to be protected. We appreciate the efforts of the
mission to continue to foster positive relations with
local communities and address their concerns.
Ireland remains concerned that the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism does not
have access to all areas under its mandate. While there
have been some welcome positive signals, we call on
South Sudan to help to deliver concrete progress on
the ground.
Ireland looks forward to engaging in the upcoming
mandate renewal. The renewal should support the
recent mission configuration and allow adequate time
to consolidate the progress already made.
This is the last scheduled meeting in relation to
UNISFA during Ireland’s current term on the Security
Council. It is disappointing that we have seen only
marginal progress towards a comprehensive political
agreement on the final status of Abyei. I again call for
all parties to find a peaceful and lasting solution to the
final status of Abyei and the demarcation of the border.
The people of Abyei deserve no less.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): Allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month.
At the same time, I would like to welcome today’s
briefers, Ms. Martha Ama Akyaa Pobee. Assistant
Secretary-General for Africa, and Ms. Hanna Serwaa
Tetteh, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
16/19

27/10/2022

Horn of Africa. Their work is integral to the success
of the mission and the maintenance of stability in
South Sudan.
Today’s briefing comes at a time when the region
is facing challenging security dynamics, particularly
since the multinational force is not fully deployed and
retreated to the areas where the Ethiopian forces were
previously deployed north and south of Diffra. In our
view, that has created more insecurity for the Ngok
Dinka, as they are left exposed to random attacks from
the Misseriya nomads in the Area.
Furthermore, the regrettable intercommunal
clashes between the Twic Dinka and the Ngok Dinka has
created a more challenging environment in which the
United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei must
carry out its mandate, especially with regard to keeping
the box a weapon-free zone. Nevertheless, through its
investigating committee, under the leadership of His
Excellency Vice-President Hussein Abdelbagi Akol
Agany, my Government is working around the clock
to address the root causes of the conflict in order to
restore and foster intercommunal harmony between the
two communities.
Despite the incomplete deployment of the
multinational force, we call for the reconfiguration to
allow for a rapid response to any security situation that
may arise, taking into account the changing terrain
dictated by the rainy season, in which some roads
are completely cut off by either floods or mud, which
renders the mobility of vehicles impossible. There is
also the need for an early warning system to be put
in place to complement the proposed rapid response,
so as to defuse tensions and prevent clashes before
they happen.
The question of development remains more crucial
in the box, and the Security Council has adopted
resolutions that call on the United Nations country
teams in both South Sudan and the Sudan to join hands
and effect some changes. We applaud them for their
efforts. We are aware of both the arbitration in The
Hague and its resolution, which calls for the Misseriya
to be consulted in Muglad. Any development must
therefore be carried out in the respective territories of
the two countries.
Allow me to conclude by highlighting the renewed
spirit of cooperation and engagement between the
leadership of our two countries on the issue of the
final status of Abyei. As all Council members may be
22-65731

27/10/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

aware, the high-level delegation from South Sudan has
been in Khartoum for the past few days with the sole
mission of initiating discussions towards an agreed
resolution of the status of Abyei. Encouraged by that
new atmosphere of positive engagement between the
two sisterly countries, my delegation would like to take
this opportunity to call on the Security Council, the
African Union and the wider international community
to play their fundamental role in giving support and
encouragement to the leadership of the two countries
in order to maintain that spirit of engagement until they
reach a mutually acceptable agreement on the final
status of Abyei.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
and your friendly country on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for October. We pay tribute
to your leadership and conduct of the work of the
Council in a month when its agenda has been full of
important items.
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Martha Ama
Akyaa Pobee for her briefing on the implementation
of the mandate of the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA), as well as the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Horn of Africa,
Ms. Hanna Serwaa Tetteh. We also take note of the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/760).
As is well known, there are political and legal terms
of reference that govern the current situation in Abyei,
including the presence of UNISFA and, most important
of all, the Agreement on Temporary Arrangements for
the Administration and Security of the Abyei Area, of
June 2011, and the cooperation agreements between the
Sudan and South Sudan.
All those terms of reference require the
implementation of many political, security and
administrative arrangements and measures, including
the formation of a joint administration, a joint legislative
council and a joint police force for Abyei until the Sudan
and South Sudan can reach an agreement on the final
status of Abyei in a realistic and mutually acceptable
way to address the situation there that is accepted and
trusted by all social segments of the region in order to
ensure a sustainable peace and social harmony. The
Sudan has currently no other alternative but to commit
to upholding those terms of reference by implementing

S/PV.9170

their provisions in letter and spirit, as they are supported
by international legitimacy.
The Sudan has repeatedly declared that it is
committed to establishing temporary administrative
measures, including a police force and a legislative
council. I would therefore like to emphasize the
following three points.
First, the Government of the Sudan reaffirms once
more its commitment and willingness to implement
temporary administrative and security mechanisms,
pursuant to the agreement signed by the two parties on
20 June 2011, and its commitment to the delineation of
borders within the region without encroaching on other
territories or undermining the current demographic
nature of the region. The Sudan welcomes the sincere
efforts of all actors, in particular of the African Union
and others. However, we stress that a settlement on the
issue of Abyei cannot be reached without an agreement
between the two States that would be acceptable to the
stakeholders and social constituencies.
Secondly, while the Sudan is committed to
maintaining security and stability in Abyei, we are
concerned about some incidents that have occurred
in the region, such as those that led to the withdrawal
and closure of a number positions pertaining to the
Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism,
in addition to tribal clashes and tensions between
the Ngok and Twic communities. The Sudan calls
for de-escalation and the reduction of tensions in the
region by refraining from any act that could threaten
stability and affect the work of the mission. We stress
that Abyei must be free of any armed presence in the
buffer zone north and south of the zero line, according
to the agreements signed by the two countries.
Thirdly, UNISFA continues to play an important
role in maintaining security and stability in Abyei
until there is consensus on a final resolution of the
outstanding issues. The Sudan will spare no effort
to enable the mission to play its role pursuant to
relevant Security Council resolutions. We welcome
the Secretary-General’s recommendation to renew the
mission’s mandate for one year until 15 November 2023.
In response to a number of queries raised in the
Council, the Sudan wishes to note that it is committed
to the following legal terms of reference on the current
status of Abyei: the Abyei protocol annexed to the 2005
Comprehensive Peace Agreement; the Agreement on
Temporary Arrangements for the Administrative and

22-6573117/19

S/PV.9170

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

27/10/2022

Security Measures of the Abyei Area, which was signed
by the Sudan and South Sudan on 20 June 2011; the
bilateral dimension of resolving the problem peacefully
pursuant to the agreement supported by resolution
1990 (2011) — therefore, to shift the resolution of the
problem from that bilateral framework to a multilateral
framework without the consent of the two sides would
be unacceptable and would constitute a clear violation
of the commitments and resolution 1990 (2011); and
the fact that the nature of the United Nations mission
in Abyei is temporary to allow it to carry out specific
security tasks in accordance with paragraph 29 of the
bilateral agreement of 20 June 2011, which cannot be
amended without the consent of the relevant parties.

with the United Nations and helping the United Nations
police units in peacekeeping operations and the
protection of civilians within Abyei Area, as well as
providing technical and logistical support to the joint
police force upon its formation, there are obvious flaws
in allowing the other party to evade the implementation
of the agreement of 20 June 2011.

The Sudan calls for efforts to be focused on
supporting and strengthening the joint mechanisms,
including the Legislative Council, the current Joint
Administration of Abyei and the police, while
consolidating the communal administrations until
the final status is peacefully established by the
two countries.

The formation of a joint police force will enable
the Sudanese parties to enter the central and southern
sectors of Abyei. If the entry of some United Nations
police personnel is approved, the formation of local
community police will be conducted under the
supervision of the Ministry of the Interior. Therefore,
we are of the view that the formation of the joint police
force should precede the arrival of the United Nations
police force due to the need for provision of technical
and logistical support.

The peaceful coexistence of the communities of
the region must be consolidated, while addressing
the humanitarian situation, providing services and
implementing quick-impact projects.
The Sudan does not recognize the outcome of the
unilateral referendum conducted in 2013 by certain
elements to annex Abyei to South Sudan.
The communities of the region must be granted
safety pursuant to paragraph 39 of Abyei Protocol of
2005. The determination of the final status will be
based on a bilateral sovereign decision and until then
the Abyei Area remains purely Sudanese, pursuant
to the decision of the Permanent Court of Arbitration
at The Hague, the Abyei Protocol of 2005 and the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. I hope that answers
the question of the representative of Norway.

The presence of United Nations police units and
a community police force belonging to South Sudan,
without the presence of a Sudanese police force, is not
an exemplary situation, because it will be difficult
for the United Nations police force to work in the
absence of one party and of executive and legislative
governance institutions.

With regard to the question of the delayed
appointment of a civilian Deputy Head of UNIFSA,
as noted in paragraph 5 of the report of the SecretaryGeneral, we believe that such an appointment would
constitute a change in the mission. The Sudan is of the
view that there is a need to maintain the status quo.

The following are my comments on the report of
the Secretary-General.

With regard to the question of operationalizing the
Athony airstrip, as noted in paragraph 3 of the report of
the Secretary-General, that was raised at the tripartite
meeting of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism
held in Khartoum in May and was referred for discussion
by the presidential summit of both countries so that a
presidential decision may be taken on the matter. We
stress the continued willingness of the Sudanese side to
attend joint meetings on Abyei, which demonstrates the
commitment of the Sudan to the agreements concluded.

The additional United Nations police units at a
strength of 590 personnel, which increases the police
force to 640 personnel, is considered an amendment
to the mission’s mandate. Before the entry of those
police units, the joint police force must first be
formed. Although there are advantages, including the
implementation of the Security Council mandate and a
demonstration of good faith by the Sudan in cooperating

With regard to the activity of the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism in Sector 1
in Gok Machar, as noted in paragraph 4 of his report,
the Secretary-General calls on South Sudan to raise
awareness among local authorities and reopen the
monitoring sector. That issue requires exerting more
pressure on the State of South Sudan to respond,
because it is hindering the activities of the Joint Border

18/19

22-65731

27/10/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Verification and Monitoring Mechanism. Any delay
in the establishment and formation of Abyei’s joint
police service and rule-of-law institutions within the
Abyei Area is always attributed to the Government of
South Sudan. For its part, the Sudan is fully prepared to
establish such a police service in Abyei.
Paragraph 7 of the Secretary-General’s report
mentions the presence of Sudanese armed forces
personnel inside the Abyei Area. We would like to
stress that that is not true, and that Sudan’s armed
forces have not been present in that location since their
withdrawal in 2012.
Paragraph 17 of the report of the Secretary-General
notes freedom of movement violations against UNISFA
and mentions that the Sudanese armed forces denied
access to a water point to a UNISFA water truck in
Tishwin. However, it is well-known that the Sudanese
authorities grant that service free of charge in support
of UNISFA. We provide the mission with two water
trucks per week, upon request.
Finally, in the meeting between the two parties
on 24 October, namely, Lieutenant General Mohamed
Hamdan Dagalo, Deputy Chair of the Sovereign
Council, and Mr. Tut Gatluak, Adviser to the President
of South Sudan, both sides agreed to hold joint
cooperation mechanisms on Abyei on a quarterly basis,
or whenever is necessary, to present proposals to the
leadership of both countries in order to reach a solution
on Abyei’s final status.
The two parties also agreed on mutual cooperation
in order to create a healthy and appropriate environment

S/PV.9170

for the communities in both the Sudan and South Sudan,
with the aim of activating the bilateral cooperation
mechanisms between the two States and supporting
security, development and stability in the Abyei
region, for the benefit of the local communities and
the two countries. They also stressed the importance
of committing to a peaceful, negotiated and mutually
agreed solution on Abyei’s final status.
I reiterate the Government of the Sudan’s
commitment to strengthening cooperation with the
Government of brotherly South Sudan, with a view to
enhancing the work of the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism and the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee.
We are eager to establish joint mechanisms between the
two countries, based on the terms of the agreements
signed between both sides, in order to achieve a solution
on Abyei’s final status in accordance with the agreed
terms of reference. From this United Nations organ,
we call on the regional and international communities
to support the two parties in their efforts to achieve
security, stability and development, as well as to reach
an agreed solution on Abyei’s final status. I also thank
the United States for providing financial support to both
parties to improve conditions for local communities
in Abyei.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite the Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

22-6573119/19
