S/2022/31

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 January 2022
Original: English

United Nations Support Mission in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to Security Council resolutions 2510
(2020), 2542 (2020), 2570 (2021) and 2599 (2021), covers political, security and
economic developments in Libya. It provides an overview of the human rights and
humanitarian situation in the country and of the activities of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) since the issuance of the previous report
(S/2021/752) on 25 August 2021.

II. Political, security-related and economic developments
2.
During the reporting period, legislative and technical preparations continued for
the national elections initially scheduled to be held on 24 December. However,
persistent disagreements over the legal framework for elections passed by the House
of Representatives, political and legal disputes related to the eligibility of several
presidential candidates, and reported security threats against the High National
Election Commission resulted in the Commission delaying the release of the final list
of eligible presidential candidates, effectively postponing the elections.
3.
On 17 November, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on Libya, Ján
Kubiš, tendered his resignation, which the Secretary -General accepted effective
10 December. On 6 December, he appointed Stephanie Williams as his Special
Adviser on Libya. He asked her to work closely with UNSMIL in cooperation with
Libyan, regional and international actors. She took up her functions on 10 December.
4.
From 12 to 23 December, the Special Adviser held meetings with political,
security, economic and civil society representatives in Tripoli, Misratah, Sirte and
Benghazi, including members of the Presidency Council, the Government of National
Unity, the High National Election Commission, the House of Repre sentatives, the
High State Council and the Supreme Judicial Council, and candidates for the
presidential and parliamentary elections. She focused her consultations on the
challenges affecting the electoral process and explored ways to address them while
sustaining the momentum towards holding the elections.
5.
On 19 December, the Special Adviser hosted a meeting with the Chair of the
High National Election Commission, the Minister of Interior and the acting head of
parliament to take stock of the situation and identify a way forward. She subsequently

22-00409 (E)

210122

*2200409*

S/2022/31

encouraged the House of Representatives to focus its efforts on holding the national
elections, noting that, in amending the electoral framework, the House should adhere
strictly to the provisions of the 2015 Libyan Political Agreement and comply with its
own rules of procedures and act transparently.
6.
On 22 December, the High National Election Commission informed the House
of Representatives of the inability of the Commission to organize elections in line
with the road map of the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum and relevant Security
Council resolutions and asked the House to set a new date for the elections. On
23 December, the Secretary-General issued a statement in which he commended the
2.8 million Libyans who had registered to vote and stated that presidential and
parliamentary elections must be held in Libya in the appropriate conditions to
peacefully end the political transition and transfer power to democratically elected
institutions.
7.
On 27 and 28 December, the House of Representatives convened a session in
Tobruk to discuss the most recent developments concerning the electoral process and
the way forward, including a report of the committee established by the House on the
electoral process. As a result, the House established a new committee to develop
recommendations on the way forward for the electoral process.
8.
On 3 January, the Chair of the High National Election Commission briefed the
House of Representatives on why it was unable to conduct elections on 24 December.
He cited inconsistencies in the legal framework and irregularities in the judicial appeal
process for the selection of candidates to the presidential elections. He also reported that
the Commission had received threats warning against the names of certain individuals
appearing on the final list of candidates for the presidential elections.
9.
Meanwhile, efforts towards the full implementation of the Agreement for a
complete and permanent ceasefire in Libya between the Libyan Army of the Government
of National Accord and the Libyan National Army of the General Command of the
Armed Forces (S/2020/1043, annex), which was signed on 23 October 2020, continued
throughout the reporting period, with a specific focus on the withdrawal of foreign
forces, foreign fighters and mercenaries from Libya. On 8 October, the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission, with the support of the United Nations, adopted an action plan for
a gradual, balanced and sequenced process of withdrawal of mercenaries, foreign
fighters and foreign forces from Libyan territory. The plan specifically references the
role of United Nations ceasefire monitors in supporting its implementation. On 10
October, the first team of United Nations monitors was deployed as part of the UNSMIL
ceasefire monitoring component. The action plan was formally endorsed during the
Libya Stabilization Conference held in Tripoli on 21 October.
Implementation of the intra-Libyan dialogue tracks
10. The Special Envoy visited Libya from 18 to 27 October and from 15 November
to 3 December to engage with key political actors on the implementation of the
political road map, including the holding of presidential and parliamentary elections.
He discussed the legal framework for the elections as adopted by the House of
Representatives. He also discussed the Presidency Council dialogue initiative as a
means to bridge differences and create an environment conducive for elections.
11. On 22 September, the Commander of the Libyan National Army, General
Khalifa Haftar, temporarily stepped down from his functions in order to regis ter as a
candidate in the presidential elections. On 21 September, the Speaker of the House of
Representatives, Agila Saleh Gwaider, stepped down to run for the presidential
elections, a day after overseeing a contested House of Representatives vote to
withdraw confidence in the Government of National Unity. The High State Council
rejected the vote of no-confidence as “null and void”.
2/16

22-00409

S/2022/31

12. On 30 September and 1 October, six representatives each from the House of
Representatives and the High State Council met in Rabat to discuss the electoral laws.
UNSMIL participated in a technical advisory capacity. The delegation from the House
declined to discuss proposals and amendments put forward by the Council, noting
that the laws had already been issued and transmitted to the High National Election
Commission for implementation. In a joint press statement following the meeting, the
House and the Council delegations called for the holding of elections on 24 December
and for the deployment of international observers.
13. On 10 October in Benghazi, the First Deputy Prime Minister, Hussein Attiya,
convened a meeting of 5 of 11 ministers and several deputy ministers from eastern
Libya to express discontent with the reported marginalization of the east by the
Government of National Unity. A statement that was critical of the Government for
not adhering to the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum political road map and failing to
unify the country’s institutions was issued at the end of the meeting. In parallel,
UNSMIL issued a statement in which it called upon all parties to avoid escalation and
engage in dialogue to resolve their differences, in accordance with the road map.
14. On 6 November in Tripoli, a group of 30 of 100 registered political parties
signed a charter, which included commitments to continuing discussions on a
constitutional basis for elections and to accepting the election results.
15. On 8 November, the High National Election Commission announced the start of
a three-week process of issuance of voter cards in 1,906 locations across Libya; a
two-week registration process for presidential candidates at the Commission’s offices
in Tripoli, Benghazi and Sabha; and a one-month registration process for
parliamentary candidates at the Commission’s 25 field offices.
16. Following the registration period, several appeals were filed in favour or against
various presidential candidates based on the provisions of Law 9/2021, including
against the Prime Minister, Abdul Hamid Mohammed Al Dabiba, Saif al -Islam
Qadhafi and General Haftar. On 8 December, the House of Representatives
established a committee tasked with monitoring the electoral process in collaboration
with the High National Election Commission and the Supreme Judiciary Council,
including with respect to the handling of legal challenges against various presidential
candidacies. The Commission subsequently disputed rulings that had overturned its
decisions and issued a statement in which it asserted that it would pursue further
litigation.
17. With regard to the security track, UNSMIL continued to facilitate the
implementation of the ceasefire agreement signed on 23 October 2020 ( S/2020/1043).
In that regard, the Mission facilitated the organization of a meeting of the 5 +5 Joint
Military Commission from 5 to 8 October at the United Nations Office at Geneva. As
a result, the Commission adopted an action plan that provides for a gradual, balanced
and sequenced process of withdrawal of mercenaries, foreign fighters and forei gn
forces from Libyan territory. It is noted in the action plan that its implementation will
be “under the full supervision of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission local monitors
and UNSMIL international monitors”, in coordination with the relevant
subcommittees of the 5 Commission.
18. In addition, UNSMIL facilitated a series of consultations of the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission with relevant stakeholders on the action plan. On 1 November,
the Commission concluded a three-day meeting held in Cairo with representatives of
Chad, the Niger and the Sudan, during which they agreed to establish a
communication and coordination mechanism to support the implementation of the
action plan. On 11 November, the eastern delegation of the Commission announced
the repatriation of 300 foreign fighters from Libya. On 23 November in Tunis, the
Commission met with a delegation of the African Union led by the Minister for
22-00409

3/16

S/2022/31

Foreign Affairs of the Congo, representing the Chair of the African Union High -Level
Committee on Libya. The Commission sought the African Union’s support for
collecting data regarding the number of foreign forces, foreign fighters and
mercenaries in Libya. It also requested the African Union to facilitate communication
and information-sharing among Chad, Libya, the Niger and the Sudan related to the
departure and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of foreign fighters in
their countries of return.
19. From 3 to 8 December, the 5+5 Joint Military Commission conducted meetings
in Ankara and Moscow, during which it sought the support of Turkey and Russia to
establish a communication mechanism for the withdrawal of mercenaries, foreign
forces and foreign fighters from Libya. On 16 December, the Commission held a
meeting with the Special Adviser in Sirte to update her on progress made to date on
the implementation of the ceasefire agreement and proposed next steps.
International Follow-up Committee on Libya
20. The International Follow-up Committee on Libya of the Berlin Process and its
working groups continued to serve as the overall framework for international support
to the intra-Libyan dialogue tracks.
21. On 16 and 24 November, the co-Chairs of the political working group, namely,
the United Nations, Algeria, Germany and the League of Arab S tates, met to assess
political and electoral developments and mitigating measures to ensure the holding
of elections in accordance with the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum road map.
22. Throughout the reporting period, the economic working group, co -chaired by
the United Nations, Egypt, the United States of America and the European Union,
worked closely to support the Central Bank of Libya in moving forward with
reunification of the bank pursuant to the recommendations of the audit report finalized
in July 2021 (S/2021/752, para. 9). On 9 September, the economic working group
held a plenary session focused on the reunification of the Central Bank. On
12 October, UNSMIL facilitated a meeting of the Prime Min ister’s newly established
Economic Advisory Commission with the economic working group co-Chairs and the
leadership of the Libyan Expert Economic Commission to identify economic reform
priorities. The group met again on 15 December with the Governor of the Central
Bank and his Deputy and addressed plans for the unification of the Central Bank in
more detail. On 6 December, the Governor and Deputy Governor of the Central Bank,
with support from UNSMIL and the co-Chairs of the economic working group, held
talks to implement the recommendations of the international financial audit of the
Central Bank, focusing on the reunification of the Libyan banking system.
23. The security working group, co-chaired by the United Nations, France, Italy,
Turkey, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the African
Union, held meetings on 14 and 30 September and 27 October to discuss progress in
the implementation of the ceasefire agreement. On 24 November, the security
working group held a plenary meeting in Tunis, with the participation of the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission, to discuss progress, challenges and coordination in the
implementation of the action plan for the withdrawal of foreign forces, foreign
fighters and mercenaries. On 16 December, the security working group co-Chairs held
a meeting, during which the Commission reported on its recent meetings with
neighbouring countries, the African Union, Turkey and Russia, including on the
establishment of a coordination and communication mechanism with Ch ad, the Niger
and the Sudan.
24. On 28 October, the international humanitarian law and human rights working
group, co-chaired by the United Nations, the Netherlands and Switzerland, met to
discuss violence against women. On 16 December, members convened in plenary to
4/16

22-00409

S/2022/31

initiate a national dialogue on human rights in Libya. Government and civil society
actors in the field of human rights stressed the need for a dialogue on human rights
between citizens and relevant State institutions, and to promote a culture of human
rights in Libya.
International and regional engagement
25. From 30 to 31 August, Algeria hosted a two-day ministerial meeting with the
United Nations, Libya, neighbouring countries, the African Union and the League of
Arab States. The meeting concluded with an agreement to activate political and
security committees, headed by Egypt and Algeria, respectively, and called for the
implementation of the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum political road map leading to
elections and the withdrawal of foreign forces and mercenaries.
26. On 22 September, France, Germany and Italy co-chaired a ministerial meeting
on Libya on the margins of the seventy-sixth session of the General Assembly, with
the participation of States members of the Berlin Process and Li bya’s neighbouring
countries, as well as the United Nations, the African Union and the European Union.
Participants welcomed the adoption of Security Council resolution 2570 (2021) and
called for presidential and parliamentary elections to be held on 24 December.
27. From 18 to 21 October, the Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs visited Libya to engage with key Libyan political and security
actors and represent the United Nations at the Libya Stabilization Conference on
21 October. In her interactions, she highlighted the importance of holding elections
in accordance with the political road map and relevant Security Council resolutions.
She stressed the importance of dialogue and consensus among Libyan actors. She also
reminded her interlocutors of the need to ensure the meaningful participation of
women and young people in political processes, including elections, both as voters
and candidates. She called for concrete and swift action by the authorities to help to
alleviate the plight of migrants in Libya.
28. On 21 October, the Libyan Minister for Foreign Affairs hosted the Libya
Stabilization Conference in Tripoli. The gathering was attended by representatives of
27 countries, the United Nations, the African Union, the League of Arab States and
the European Union. Participants welcomed progress made to advance the
implementation of the ceasefire agreement, including the reopening of the coastal
road, and the adoption of the action plan on the withdrawal of mercenaries, foreign
fighters and foreign forces. They called for upholding the commitment for elections
on 24 December.
29. On 12 November, France, Germany, Italy, Libya and the United Nations
convened an international conference on Libya in Paris. The final communiqué
reaffirmed the need to uphold the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum road map, the full
implementation of the 23 October 2020 Libyan ceasefire agreement, and respect for
international humanitarian law and human rights, and for all actors to commit
themselves to national reconciliation.
Situation in the western region
30. Competition among armed groups over territorial control continued to have an
impact on security in Tripoli and towns in the north-west. On 1 October, a dispute in
Zawiyah between members of the central investigations directorate and members of
the counter-terrorism forces escalated, resulting in one member of the counterterrorism forces being injured.
31. On 8 October, clashes in Tripoli were reported on the airport road between
armed elements of the 301 Brigade affiliated with the Ministry of Defence and forces
22-00409

5/16

S/2022/31

affiliated with the Ministry of Interior. In response, Stability Support Apparatus forces
mobilized in support of the Ministry, while the 444 Fighting Brigade reportedly
mobilized to assist the 301 Brigade. Tensions subsided following the intervention of
tribal elders and security officials from the Government of National Unity.
32. On 26 October, clashes between the central investigations directorate and
Petroleum Facilities Guards in Zawiyah resulted in damage to the National Oil
Corporation facilities. On 27 October and 2 November in Tripoli, the 444 Fighting
Brigade reportedly invaded the residence of a military region com mander and of the
4th Infantry Brigade commander, respectively. No casualties were reported. On
30 October, the Chair of the National Oil Corporation informed UNSMIL that a
member of the Corporation’s board of directors had been detained by an armed group
at Mitiga airport. He was released on 12 December.
33. On 15 December, the President of the Presidency Council, Mohammad Younes
Menfi, in his capacity as the Supreme Commander of the Libyan National Army,
appointed a new commander of the Tripoli Military Z one. The decision prompted the
mobilization of multiple Tripoli armed groups in a “show of force” around the office
of the Presidency Council, the Office of the Prime Minister and the Ministry of
Defence.
Situation in the eastern region
34. The status of forces along the Sirte-Jufrah axis remained unchanged, with the
Libyan National Army as the sole security actor.
35. On 25 October, in Jabal al-Akhdar province in eastern Libya, the director of the
Shahhat security directorate, appointed by the Minister of Interior, was forcefully
expelled from the directorate by a person claiming to be the new director. On
29 October, the heads of the eastern police directorates announced that they would
take orders only from the Deputy Minister of Interior, w ho hails from the east and has
accused the Government of National Unity of neglecting the east of Libya.
36. On 27 October, a convoy of 150 vehicles led by the under-secretary of the
Ministry of Interior, Major General Mahmoud Saeed, was stopped in al-Shwayrif area
by an armed group affiliated with the Libyan National Army, citing lack of prior
coordination with the 5+5 Joint Military Commission. Ministry elements were
reportedly being deployed to provide security at polling stations in Sabha, Murzuq
and other towns in southern Libya.
Situation in the southern region
37. The authority of the Government of National Unity continued to be challenged
in southern Libya by the Libyan National Army and affiliated groups. On 12 and
16 October, Libyan National Army units prevented the Prime Minister from landing
in Sabha, on his way to visit the towns of Ghat and Kufrah. On 13 September, the
member of the House of Representatives representing Ghat and elders from Ghat
issued a statement protesting against the incident.
38. On 12 September, the Libyan National Army reportedly ordered the 116th
Brigade, based in southern Libya, to be disbanded and its members and equipment
integrated into the Sabha Military Zone. The decision appeared to be a reaction to the
Government of National Unity’s decision to appoint the 116th Brigade, previously
affiliated with the Libyan National Army, as the Government’s counter-terrorism unit
for southern Libya.
39. The presence of mercenaries continued to play a destabilizing role in the south.
On 14 September in the vicinity of Tarbu, Murzuq province, an armed confrontation
erupted between elements affiliated with the Libyan National Army, supported by
6/16

22-00409

S/2022/31

Sudanese mercenaries, and a Chadian armed opposition group, Front pour l’alternance
et la concorde au Tchad. Subsequently, the Libyan National Army conducted air strikes
targeting Front pour l’alternance et la concorde au Tchad positions. On 17 September,
following three days of clashes, the parties agreed to a cessation of hostilities. On
7 November, the Front pour l’alternance et la concorde au Tchad announced the
graduation of its fourteenth cohort of fighters in Libya, estimated at 200 cadets,
reportedly stationed in the vicinity of the Tibesti mountains along the Libya -Chad
border. On 8 November, confrontations were reported between Chadian elements from
the Zaghawa tribe and Chadians from the Tebu tribe at the El Salvador triangle along
the Libya, Niger and Algeria borders. On 21 November, a group of Chadian and
Sudanese mercenaries reportedly attempted to take control of Sidra checkpoint, east
of Umm al-Aranib, but were repelled by the Libyan National Army.
40. On 14 December, clashes were reported between forces affiliated with the
Ministry of Interior and elements affiliated with the Libyan National Army in Sabha,
reportedly resulting in two people killed and five injured. Clashes reportedly erupted
following the Libyan National Army’s seizure of 11 Ministry vehicles on
13 December at the Birak al-Shati’ checkpoint; the vehicles had reportedly been
deployed to provide security at polling stations in the south. On 16 December, after
mediation with local tribal leaders and military leaders in Sabha, Ministry forces
agreed to hand over all heavy weapons and military assets to the Libyan Nat ional
Army southern command.
Violent extremist organizations
41. On 18 October, Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant – Libya released photos
through the Shura Media Foundation of the “graduation” of a new unit of jihadist
operatives indicating training locations in southern Libya near the Haruj mountains,
Ghadduwah and southern Sabha.
42. The Government of National Unity pursued counter-terrorism operations in
western Libya, while the Libyan National Army continued counter-terrorism
operations in southern Libya. On 23 October, the western military forces reportedly
arrested an alleged member of a sleeper cell linked to Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant – Libya in Msallata. Subsequently, one member of the western military forces
was killed and three others injured when an unidentified armed group attacked a
security checkpoint in the Hayrah/Espiaa area. On 27 November, elements affiliated
with the Libyan National Army, supported by an unmanned aerial vehicle, conducted
an operation in Sabha capturing three Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant – Libya
militants. One Libyan National Army sergeant was reportedly killed during the
operation.
43. On 5 November, the Sirte security directorate reported the arrest of two
individuals allegedly affiliated with Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant – Libya in
Khums. According to preliminary reports, the individuals were transferred to
Benghazi for questioning.
Economic situation
44. Libyan oil revenue increased from $1.8 billion in September to $1.9 billion in
October and $2.1 billion in November owing to a rise in global oil prices. As a result
of the failure by the House of Representatives to adopt a national budget, the
Government of National Unity continued to acquire funds from the Central Bank of
Libya through special arrangements to fund development projects and social benefit
programmes.

22-00409

7/16

S/2022/31

III. Other activities of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya
A.

Electoral support
45. On 9 September and 5 October, the House of Representatives issued Laws 1/2021
and 2/2021 setting out the legal framework for presidential and parliamentary elections,
respectively, and subsequently transmitted them to the High National Election
Commission. The laws stipulate the eligibility criteria and prerogatives of the President
and the timeline of the elections. The presidential election law requires candidates who
hold public office to temporarily recuse themselves from their positions at least three
months prior to the election date. According to the law, the House has the right to set the
date of the presidential poll on the basis of a proposal from the Commission.
46. The two laws were issued following a disputed process, resulting in questions over
their legality. On 25 October, the President of the High State Council, supported by
mayors, representatives of civil society and some armed groups, submitted a challenge
against Law 1/2021 before the Supreme Court of Libya in Tripoli, arguing that the
Council had not been consulted in the drafting of the law, in violation of the Libyan
Political Agreement of 2015. On 26 October, two members of the Council submitted a
challenge to Law 2/2021 before the Constitutional Chamber of the Supreme Court.
47. On 5 October, the High National Election Commission began to accredit
domestic and international observers and media for the elections. To date, more than
5,000 domestic observers, 450 national and 150 international media representatives
and 40 international observers have been accredited. Civil society groups wishing to
operate as election observers were reportedly required to re -register with the civil
society regulatory body, presenting an additional hurdle to their participation.
48. On 24 November, the High National Election Commission published a
preliminary list of presidential candidates following verification by relevant Libyan
institutions of all the candidacies submitted. A total of 25 of 98 registered candidates
were initially disqualified by the Commission for failure to meet the required
eligibility criteria. Challenges and appeals to the eligibility of several presidential
candidates were submitted in the appeals courts, including against Prime Minister Al
Dabiba, Saif al-Islam Qadhafi and General Haftar. The relevant appeals courts ruled
in favour of all said candidates. More than 5,366 candidates registered to run in the
parliamentary elections, including 760 women candidates.
49. On 1 December, the High National Election Commission completed the
distribution of 2.5 million voter cards at 1,906 electoral centres across the country,
including approximately 1 million to women voters, accounting for 87 per cent of the
total number of registered voters (more than 2.8 million). In cooperation with the
Commission, the Ministry of Interior rolled out an election security plan. Security
incidents were recorded at a few electoral centres in the western and southern parts
of the country.
50. The UNSMIL-led integrated electoral team continued to provide technical
support and advice to the High National Election Commission, including on the
electoral legal framework, voter awareness and promotion of gender equality.

B.

Human rights, transitional justice and the rule of law
51. During the reporting period, UNSMIL documented killings, enforced
disappearances, conflict-related sexual violence, including rape, and arbitrary arrests
and detention. UNSMIL observed a sharp increase in the targeting of journalists, civil

8/16

22-00409

S/2022/31

society activists and individuals expressing political views, with abductions and
disappearances perpetrated on a weekly basis across the country. UNSMIL also
documented an upward trend in election-related violence and attacks based on
political affiliation or support for specific candidates, and threats of violence against
members of the judiciary involved in ruling on the eligibility of various presidential
candidates.
Rule of law
52. On 26 October, the House of Representatives adopted new legislation on
cybercrimes, which includes provisions for prohibiting speech that may “contribute
to the weakening of the State and State institutions”. Libyan human rights lawyers
and civil society representatives expressed fears that some of the new provisions
would unduly restrict freedom of expression.
53. Legal measures to curtail the activities of civil society organizations continued
to be imposed, including denying the registration of civil society organizations,
allowing the executive authority to suspend and/or cease their activities on overly
broad grounds, and requiring them to report any interaction with United Nations
officials.
Unlawful deprivation of liberty, detention and torture
54. UNSMIL continued to document cases of arbitrary detention in facilities
operated by State and non-State actors across the country, as well as incidents in
which detainees were subjected to torture, sexual violence and other serious
violations of international law. In western Libya, thousands of detainees continued to
be held in prolonged, arbitrary detention, many without a legal basis, includ ing in
Mitiga prison controlled by the deterrence agency to combat terrorism and organized
crime. In eastern Libya, individuals, including children, were detained without legal
basis in military detention facilities, including the Tariq Ibn Ziyad, Kuwayfiy ah and
Gernada facilities.
55. According to statistics provided by Libyan authorities, more than 12,000
detainees are held in 27 prisons and places of detention across Libya. Thousands of
additional detainees do not appear in official statistics and are he ld illegally and often
in inhumane conditions in facilities controlled by armed groups, or “secret” facilities,
unable to challenge the legal basis for their continued detention.
56. On 26 September, the president and a member of the National Youth League
were abducted from their office in Tripoli by unidentified perpetrators, reportedly
after the National Youth League had called for a demonstration in support of the
upcoming elections. Their whereabouts remain unknown. On 22 November, a
journalist was abducted from the offices of Al-Hayat newspaper in Benghazi by
unidentified perpetrators. His whereabouts also remain unknown. UNSMIL also
documented the continued arbitrary and incommunicado detention and alleged torture
of the head of the Libyan Red Crescent branch at Tarik Ibn Ziyad detention facility
in Ajdabiya.
Migrants and refugees
57. Female and male migrants and refugees continued to face heightened risks of
rape, sexual harassment and trafficking by armed groups, transnational smugglers and
traffickers, and officials from the Directorate for Combating Illegal Migration, which
operates under the Ministry of Interior. UNSMIL documented threats and incidents
of conflict-related sexual violence and rape in detention facilities. Cases were
documented in Mitiga prison facility, as well as several official detention centres run
by the Directorate in Zawiyah and in and around Tripoli. UNSMIL also received
22-00409

9/16

S/2022/31

credible information on trafficking and sexual abuse of approximately 30 Nigerian
women and children. The widespread arbitrary detention of migrants and refugees
continued, including of those intercepted or rescued at sea and returned to Libya by
the Libyan Coast Guard.
58. On 1 October, Libyan authorities conducted widespread operations in which
excessive and disproportionate force was used, purportedly for security reasons. The
operations targeted more than 5,150 migrants and refugees, including at least 1,000
women and children. Families were separated as a result and children remain missing.
At least one migrant was killed and scores of others injured as raids continued in Abu
Salim, Janzur and Suq al-Jum‘ah in Tripoli. The Resident and Humanitarian
Coordinator for Libya, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and the International Organization for Migration (IOM) released
statements urging the Libyan authorities to cease the raids and refrain from excessive
use of force and arbitrary detention. Most of the migrants and refugees arbitrarily
detained during the operations were transferred to detention centres run by the
Directorate for Combatting Illegal Migration, increasing the overall number of
detainees from 4,531 on 26 September to more than 1 0,000 by 3 October.
59. On 8 October, deteriorating conditions and rising tensions at the Mabani
detention centre led to the mass escape of some 2,000 people and the subsequent
excessive use of force by Libyan authorities, who shot and killed 5 people and injured
several others. Dozens of migrants and refugees were rearrested and returned to the
detention centre.
60. Between 2,000 and 3,000 refugees and migrants, many of whom were left
homeless following the October security operations, regularly congregate d at the
Community Day Centre managed by UNHCR and partners in Janzur municipality.
Owing to increasing crowds, which included violent elements, UNHCR was forced
to suspend activities at the Centre in November. Distribution of emergency cash and
other assistance continued in alternative locations, with many migrants remaining in
hiding following the security operations.
61. Beginning on 1 December, groups of individuals blocked the entrance of the
UNHCR registration centre in Tripoli, preventing refugees fr om gaining access to
UNHCR premises for resettlement and evacuation processing. My former Special
Envoy, the Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator for Libya, heads of United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes, Member States and regional organizations
urged the Ministry of Interior to ensure the security of UNHCR premises to enable
safe access to humanitarian and protection assistance. On 10 January, UNHCR
received reports that the Libyan security forces were undertaking operations to clear
protesters, including asylum seekers and migrants who had been camping outside the
UNHCR office and former Community Day Centre in Sarraj, supported by UNHCR.
Reports indicate that individuals were given the option to leave the area or face arrest.
Those who refused to leave were taken to the Ayn Zarah detention centre.
62. During the reporting period, hundreds of nationals from Chad, Egypt, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Somalia and the Sudan were expelled from the eastern and southern borders
of Libya to Chad and the Sudan without due process. The expulsions did not respect
the prohibition of collective expulsion and the principle of non -refoulement and
placed many asylum seekers and migrants in extremely vulnerable situations.
Transitional justice and rights-based reconciliation
63. UNSMIL continued discussions with the Decision Support Unit of the Office of
the Prime Minister to launch a national centre for transitional justice, which would
focus on training national actors, strengthening capacities within national institutio ns
10/16

22-00409

S/2022/31

and preparing laws on transitional justice. UNSMIL was requested to provide
assistance to further develop the proposal.
64. UNSMIL also continued to monitor developments regarding case no. 630 (2012)
involving senior officials of the former Qadhafi regime. During the reporting period,
the newly assigned court of appeals held three sessions, although the defendants were
not present for reasons related to coronavirus disease (COVID -19) mitigation
measures and security conditions.
Support and capacity-building for national non-governmental organizations
65. On 28 September, with technical support from UNSMIL, the council of the
Libyan Bar Association established a committee composed of 2 0 experienced women
lawyers, with the aim of strengthening its focus on women’s rights.
66. From 2 to 4 November, UNSMIL conducted a high-level seminar to address
arbitrary detention with senior officials from the east and the west. Officials
representing the Ministries of Justice and Interior, the Office of the Attorney General,
the Office of the Military Prosecutor and the Office of the First Deputy Prime Minister
agreed that arbitrary detention remained widespread and that critical preventive
measures were urgently needed.
67. On 8 and 9 November, UNSMIL, the United Nations Population Fund and the
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women), under the auspices of the Ministry of State for Women’s Affairs,
organized a meeting in Istanbul, Turkey, to facilitate discussions among key Libyan
stakeholders on a draft law on violence against women. The meeting was attended by
19 women members of parliament, the Minister of State for Women Affairs, the Chief
Justice, the President of the Libyan Supreme Court, the head of the Libyan Bar
Association and the Committee of Libyan Experts on Combating Violence against
Women.
68. On 8 and 9 November, UNSMIL organized a seminar for members of the Civil
Society Commission, as well as a wide range of civil society organizations.
Participants reviewed Libyan national legislation regulating the role of civil society
organizations and discussed a protection strategy for human rights defenders, in
particular women. The Special Rapporteur on the rights to freedom of peaceful
assembly and of association and experts participated virtually.
Human rights due diligence policy
69. The United Nations system in Libya continued to implement the human rights
due diligence policy on United Nations support for non-United Nations security
forces (see A/67/775-S/2013/110, annex), with a view to preventing and mitigating
the identified risks of grave violations of international humanitarian law, human rights
law or refugee law by Libyan security forces receiving United Nations support.

C.

Security sector
Support for Libyan planning for interim security arrangements and the
unification of security forces
70. From 11 to 13 October, the United Kingdom hosted a Wilton Park dialogue to
consider possible support for disarmament, demobilization and reinte gration, as well
as security sector reform, in Libya. Participants included the Libyan Minister for
Foreign Affairs, the Deputy Minister of Interior, the Chief of General Staff, the 5+5
Joint Military Commission, as well as United Nations, non -governmental and
governmental experts.

22-00409

11/16

S/2022/31

71. The Commander of the Government of National Unity army and the acting
General Commander of the Libyan National Army met in Sirte on 11 December and
8 January to discuss the unification of the national security forces, as well as the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of armed groups.
Arms and ammunition management
72. While no significant new contamination from mines and explosive devices was
reported, existing contamination continued to pose constraints to retu rning
populations. From 22 May 2020 to 26 December 2021, 298 victims (278 men and 20
women) were reported in 152 incidents, of whom 174 people were injured and 124
killed. Of the 298 victims, 220 were civilian and 78 were national specialists in the
field of removal. The death and injury of 78 Libyan clearance personnel had an impact
on national capacity to address the threat.
Implementation of the ceasefire agreement
73. The nationwide ceasefire continued to hold and the road between Sirte and
Misratah remained open. The 5+5 Joint Military Commission continued to take steps
to advance the implementation of the ceasefire agreement. Following the opening of
the coastal road in July (S/2021/752, paras. 16–20), the Commission turned to the
withdrawal of foreign forces, foreign fighters and mercenaries from Libya as the next
priority for the implementation of the ceasefire. UNSMIL assisted in the development
of the Commission’s action plan on the withdrawal of foreign forces, foreign fighters
and mercenaries, and in relevant consultations with Member States and the African
Union.
74. In accordance with Security Council resolutions 2570 (2021), 2595 (2021) and
2599 (2021), the United Nations deployed a first team of ceasefire monitors on
10 October to establish the UNSMIL ceasefire monitoring component. The first team
of 10 monitors, composed of existing United Nations civilian, military and police
personnel, rotated in two teams of 5 monitors, who are currently based in Tripoli. The
monitors were supported by security, logistical and ope rational personnel who also
started deploying to Libya on 10 October as part of the UNSMIL ceasefire monitoring
component.
75. Upon their arrival, the UNSMIL ceasefire monitors began consultations with the
5+5 Joint Military Commission to operationalize their support for the Libyan
Ceasefire Monitoring Mechanism. They initiated the development of an internal
operational plan to assist in the implementation of the Commission’s action plan on
the withdrawal of mercenaries, foreign fighters an d foreign forces. They also started
to identify and design capacity building initiatives for the Mechanism.
76. The Mission also continued preparations to establish a United Nations presence
in Sirte for its ceasefire monitoring component, in cooperation w ith the Libyan
authorities.

D.

Women’s empowerment
77. Women activists and officials continued to be subjected to hate speech and the
spread of vilifying propaganda on social media platforms. In October, UNSMIL
documented propaganda and hate speech against the Minister of Women’s Affairs and
two of her senior advisers posted on several social media pages. The Minister’s senior
advisers were also targeted with vilification, including manipulated photographic
material.

12/16

22-00409

S/2022/31

78. On 17 November, UNSMIL held a series of webinars, hosting former women
candidates and politicians, in support of women’s electoral participation and to
address issues of electoral violence. On 30 November, the women and children unit
of the House of Representatives launched an initiative aimed at unifying various
women’s groups and establishing a “Supreme Council of Women in Libya”.
79. On 13 and 20 November, UNSMIL, in coordination with Libyan women in
academia, held a series of meetings to establish an academic hub to address issues of
women’s empowerment and gender equality.

E.

Youth and peace and security
80. The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) Stabilization Facility for
Libya continued to support projects in the education, water, sanitation and hygiene,
health and public services sectors in addressing and/or targeting youth, peace and
security concerns. These included a project to establish a training centre for young
people and women in Sabha, projected to train 2,000 women and young people
annually, and an initiative to support Bani Walid, Darnah and Ghat municipalities in
preparing five-year development plans. In addition, an initiative bringing together
municipalities and service providers to support election security, the unification of
national services and municipal dialogue was launched, in coordination with the local
election project.

F.

Coordination of international assistance
81. According to IOM, the number of internally displaced persons decreased from
278,000 at the start of 2021 to 199,949 as of September 2021, with the majority of
displaced persons located in Benghazi, Tripoli and Misratah. However, systemic
impediments to returns remained for those still displaced and for whom durable solutions
and an increased allocation of resources from national authorities are required.
82. Planned and often forced evictions targeting internally displaced persons also
remained of critical concern. Forced evictions of individuals and families living in
collective and informal settlements increased significantl y in 2021, leading to a
heightened risk of multiple displacement and tenure insecurity. United Nations
agencies are supporting the Ministry of Displaced Persons and Human Rights in
developing and implementing a national strategy on durable solutions for in ternally
displaced persons, as part of the Centrality of Protection Framework to ensure the
voluntary, safe and sustainable return of displaced communities, as appropriate.
83. On 9 October, the Ministry of Interior called upon relevant international
organizations to assist in the voluntary return of migrants as soon as possible. Since the
Government’s approval of the resumption of humanitarian flights in October, more than
1,300 asylum seekers and refugees departed for resettlement or evacuation out o f Libya.
UNHCR evacuated 571 refugees to Italy and to the emergency transit mechanism the
Niger and Rwanda, with another 780 people resettled to Canada, Norway and Sweden,
in partnership with IOM. The IOM Voluntary Humanitarian Return programme also
resumed. A total of 2,931 migrants from 17 countries, mainly Bangladesh, Ghana, Mali,
the Niger and Nigeria, were assisted in returning to their home countries. The number
of migrants assisted through the programme in 2021 stood at 4,246.
84. The number of migrants and refugees attempting to cross the Mediterranean Sea
continued to increase. As of 14 December, the Libyan Coast Guard had intercepted
30,990 migrants and refugees and returned them to Libya, almost three times the total
number of people returned in 2020 (12,000 people). An increased number of children

22-00409

13/16

S/2022/31

were reportedly rescued at sea. The Libyan Coast Guard reportedly undertook several
interceptions that put the lives and well-being of migrants and refugees attempting the
journey at grave risk. More than 1,300 people have died or disappeared since the
beginning of the year. On 17 November, IOM reported that 75 migrants had drowned
off the Libyan coast. IOM, UNHCR and the International Rescue Committee continued
to provide emergency and life-saving assistance to people upon disembarkation.
85. The World Health Organization reported that, while the number of confirmed cases
of COVID-19 decreased, community transmission remained high across Libya. The lack
of sufficient funding affected the ability of health-care facilities to remain fully
operational, with isolation centres and case management facilities overwhelmed and
facing shortages in medical personnel and supplies. As of 16 December, the National
Centre for Disease Control reported 381,023 cumulative COVID-19 cases, including
5,589 deaths, and 6,580 active cases. Although vaccine supplies were adequate and no
vaccination centre reported shortages, the utilization rate of available vaccines was only
49 per cent. Overall vaccination rates remained low, with 24 per cent of the population
inoculated with the first dose and only 11 per cent fully vaccinated.

G.

Humanitarian, stabilization and development assistance
86. By mid-December, humanitarian organizations assisted more than 446,000
people, representing 99 per cent of the target group identified in the 2021
Humanitarian Response Plan. Of the $189 million requested in the Plan, $138 million
(73 per cent) was secured, with an additional $36.3 million received outside the Plan.
The United Nations country team sought an extension of the current Plan from
January to May 2022 in order to support 803,000 people in need and ensure targeted
humanitarian assistance for 211,000 people with the most severe needs, requiring
$75.3 million.
87. On 18 October, the Government of National Unity formally endorsed the United
Nations-European Union-World Bank recovery and peacebuilding assessment. The
assessment is intended to assist the Government in identifying and implementing
longer-term recovery, development and peacebuilding priorities.
88. From 29 November to 1 December, the United Nations country team convened
a workshop to finalize the common country analysis and the process to take forward
a United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework.
89. As part of the “Re-Start-Up” marathon, which is intended to address local
economic recovery and development of communities that were affected by the
conflict or COVID-19, UNDP supported 26 start-ups and micro-, small and mediumsized enterprises in re-establishing their businesses through grants in Tripoli,
Benghazi and Tawurgha.
90. The UNDP “Strengthening local capacities for resilience and recovery” project
continued to operate in 52 municipalities (almost 52 per cent of the country) to
strengthen the responsiveness of local institutions in delivering basic services,
enhancing social cohesion and community security, and promoting local economic
recovery across Libya.

IV. Deployment of the Mission and security arrangements
91. UNSMIL maintained, on average, an international staff presence of some 120
staff members, allowing for continued engagement with Libyan interlocutors across
the Mission’s area of responsibility, including the political, security, economic and
international human rights law and humanitarian law tracks, as well on the provision
14/16

22-00409

S/2022/31

of humanitarian and development assistance. All international staff in Tripoli
continued to be accommodated at the Oea compound, protected by the United Nations
Guard Unit. National staff continued to report to work in the compound on a rotational
basis or, alternatively, work remotely. Road movements in Libya were conducted in
compliance with security risk management measures.
92. The United Nations in Libya regularly reviewed and adjuste d applicable
COVID-19 protection and prevention measures, including on all United Nations
flights, on the basis of evolving advice by World Health Organization and UNSMIL
medical staff, and to ensure alignment with measures put in place by the Libyan and
Tunisian authorities. As of 14 December, under the COVID-19 vaccination
programme for personnel of the United Nations in Libya and of international
non-governmental organization partners, 1,359 staff members had been fully
vaccinated, 322 were scheduled to receive their second dose and 453 were registered
and awaiting scheduling of their first dose.
93. As of 3 January, preparations were under way to conduct the rotation of the
United Nations Guard Unit between Kathmandu and Tripoli.

V. Observations and recommendations
94. The Libya Stabilization Conference was the first high-level international
meeting held in Tripoli since 2011. The Conference demonstrated that a Libyan -led
and Libyan-owned dialogue process remained the only way to achieve a united, stable
and peaceful Libya. It provided international endorsement of the work of the 5+5
Joint Military Commission. The United Nations remains committed to assisting the
Libyan people on their path to lasting peace and stability.
95. The 2.8 million Libyans who have registered to vote must be commended and
their will respected. It is critical for all Libyan stakeholders to commit themselves
unequivocally to and continue to focus on the holding of free, fair, inclusive and
credible presidential and parliamentary elections as soon as possible, as stipulated in
the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum road map and endorsed in Security Council
resolutions 2570 (2021) and 2571 (2021), as well as in the conclusions of the second
Berlin conference, of 2021.
96. I commend the High National Election Commission for its work to implement
the electoral process in a challenging political and security context. This includes the
distribution of some 2.5 million voter cards – more than 1 million of them to women –
across the country.
97. Relevant Libyan authorities and institutions must now work together to address
the fundamental issues that have resulted in the postponement and create the political
and security conditions necessary for holding the presidential and parliamentary
elections without further delay. I call upon them to work together, in compliance with
applicable laws and rules and procedures of their relevant institutions, and to provide
the High National Election Commission with the support required to deliver free, fair,
inclusive and credible elections in a safe and peaceful environment and with the full,
equal and meaningful participation of women and young people.
98. I also call upon Libyan actors to respect the rights of their political opponents
before, during and after the elections, to accept the results, to commit to the code of
conduct prepared by the High National Election Commission, and to respect and
support the independence and unity of the judiciary. To enhance the credibility and
acceptance of the result of the ballot, I encourage regional and international
organizations to send observers for the elections.

22-00409

15/16

S/2022/31

99. The implementation of the ceasefire agreement must continue, including the full
withdrawal of mercenaries, foreign fighters and foreign forces in accordance with the
action plan agreed by the 5+5 Joint Military Commission and in line with re solutions
2570 (2021) and 2571 (2021). UNSMIL ceasefire monitors are ready to provide
support in close coordination with all countries concerned, including countries of
return, and the African Union. I am encouraged by the initial consultations held in
Cairo, Tunis, Ankara and Moscow towards establishing coordination and
communication mechanisms.
100. The unification of the Central Bank of Libya is an important step towards
restoring the integrity of the banking system. I call upon all actors to continue efforts
in this regard and to achieve other much-needed economic and financial sector
reforms.
101. I remain gravely concerned by the continuing violations of the human rights of
migrants, refugees and asylum seekers in Libya, including restrictions by the Libyan
authorities of humanitarian and protection assistance for several thousand migrants
and refugees arbitrarily detained in detention centr es and those who remain homeless
following October’s security operations. I urge the Ministry of Interior to ensure the
security of all United Nations offices in Libya, including the UNHCR premises in
Tripoli, while guaranteeing unhindered access of people to humanitarian and
protection assistance.
102. The establishment, on 4 November, of a high-level committee to end arbitrary
detention in Libya is a welcome development. I encourage Libyan authorities to do
more to prevent sexual violence, torture and extortion of migrants and refugees in
detention. However, Libya is not a safe port of disembarkation for refugees and
migrants. I reiterate my call upon relevant Member States to re -examine policies that
support interception at sea and return of refugees an d migrants to Libya.
103. Further steps are needed to protect human rights defenders, journalists and civil
society representatives, in particular women, from violence and intimidation,
including online violence and hate speech. Libyan authorities also n eed to adequately
protect members of the judiciary and judicial institutions and preserve their
independence, including to enhance the acceptance of electoral results. Armed actors
must also be prevented from influencing judicial decisions by threatening o r using
force, including in the context of the adjudication of electoral disputes.
104. I extend my thanks to my former Special Envoy on Libya, Ján Kubiš, for his
service. I also thank my Special Adviser on Libya, Stephanie Williams, and all United
Nations personnel working in Libya for their dedication and efforts to support
Libyans on the path to peace and stability. I reiterate my sincere appreciation to the
Government of Nepal for providing the vital personnel for the United Nations Guard
Unit in Libya.

16/16

22-00409
