United Nations

A/RES/60/138

General Assembly

Distr.: General
7 February 2006

Sixtieth session
Agenda item 64

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 16 December 2005
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/60/503)]

60/138. Improvement of the situation of women in rural areas
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 56/129 of 19 December 2001 and 58/146 of
22 December 2003,
Recalling also the importance attached to the problems of rural women in the
Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement of Women, 1 the Beijing
Declaration 2 and Platform for Action 3 adopted by the Fourth World Conference on
Women and their ten-year review and appraisal, the outcome documents of the
twenty-third special session of the General Assembly 4 and the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, 5
Recalling further the United Nations Millennium Declaration, 6 in which
Member States resolved, inter alia, to promote gender equality and the
empowerment of women as effective ways to combat poverty, hunger and disease
and to stimulate development that is truly sustainable, and the 2005 World Summit
Outcome, 7 in which they also resolved to promote gender equality and eliminate
pervasive gender discrimination by taking all necessary resolute action,
Welcoming the declaration adopted by the Commission on the Status of
Women at its forty-ninth session in the context of the review and appraisal of the
Beijing Platform for Action and the outcome documents of the twenty-third special
session of the General Assembly, 8
_______________
1
Report of the World Conference to Review and Appraise the Achievements of the United Nations Decade
for Women: Equality, Development and Peace, Nairobi, 15–26 July 1985 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.85.IV.10), chap. I, sect. A.
2
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
3
Ibid., annex II.
4
Resolution S-23/2, annex, and resolution S-23/3, annex.
5
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
6
See resolution 55/2.
7
See resolution 60/1.
8
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2005, Supplement No. 7 and corrigendum
(E/2005/27 and Corr.1), chap. I, sect. A; see also Economic and Social Council decision 2005/232.

05-49588

A/RES/60/138

Welcoming also the agreed conclusions on women’s participation in and access
to the media, and information and communication technologies and their impact on
and use as an instrument for the advancement and empowerment of women, adopted
by the Commission on the Status of Women at its forty-seventh session, 9
Welcoming further the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference
on Financing for Development, 10 as well as the Johannesburg Declaration on
Sustainable Development 11 and the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on
Sustainable Development (“Johannesburg Plan of Implementation”), 12 in which
Governments were called upon to mainstream the gender perspective into
development at all levels and in all sectors,
Welcoming the ministerial declaration of the high-level segment of the
substantive session of 2003 of the Economic and Social Council, adopted on 2 July
2003, 13 which stressed the need for rural development to become an integral part of
national and international development policies and of the activities and
programmes of the United Nations system, and called for an enhanced role for rural
women at all levels of rural development, including decision-making,
Recognizing the critical role and contribution of rural women, including
indigenous women, in enhancing agricultural and rural development, improving
food security and eradicating rural poverty,
Noting that some effects of globalization may deepen the socio-economic
marginalization of rural women,
Noting also that the globalization process has had some benefits by providing
opportunities for wage employment for rural women in new sectors,
Mindful of the fact that the available data and existing tools of measurement
and analysis are insufficient for a full understanding of the gender implications of
the processes of globalization and rural change and their impact on rural women,
Recognizing the urgent need to take appropriate measures aimed at further
improving the situation of women in rural areas,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; 14

2.
Invites Member States, in collaboration with the organizations of the
United Nations and civil society, as appropriate, to continue their efforts to
implement the outcome of and to ensure an integrated and coordinated follow-up to
United Nations conferences and summits, including their reviews, and to attach
greater importance to the improvement of the situation of rural women, including
indigenous women, in their national, regional and global development strategies by,
inter alia:
_______________
9
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 7 (E/2003/27), chap. I,
sect. A; see also Economic and Social Council resolution 2003/44.
10
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico,
18–22 March 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
11
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa,
26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum),
chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
12
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
13
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/58/3/Rev.1),
chap. III, para. 35.
14
A/60/165.

2

A/RES/60/138

(a) Creating an enabling environment for improving the situation of rural
women and ensuring attention to their needs and contributions, including through
enhanced cooperation and a gender perspective, and their full participation in the
development, implementation and monitoring of macroeconomic policies and
programmes and poverty reduction strategies, including poverty reduction strategy
papers, based on the Millennium Development Goals;
(b) Pursuing the political and socio-economic empowerment of rural women
and supporting their full and equal participation in decision-making at all levels,
including through affirmative action, where appropriate, and support for women’s
organizations, labour unions or other associations and civil society groups
promoting rural women’s rights;
(c) Integrating a gender perspective into the design, implementation,
monitoring and evaluation of development policies and programmes, including
budget policies, paying increased attention to the needs of rural women so as to
ensure that they benefit from policies and programmes adopted in all spheres and
that the disproportionate number of rural women living in poverty is reduced;
(d) Ensuring that the perspectives of rural women are taken into account and
that they participate in the design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of
policies and activities related to emergencies, natural disasters, humanitarian
assistance, peacebuilding and post-conflict reconstruction;
(e) Investing in and strengthening efforts to meet the basic needs of rural
women through improved availability, access to and use of critical rural
infrastructure, such as energy and transport, capacity-building and human
resources development measures and the provision of a safe and reliable water
supply and sanitation, nutritional programmes, affordable housing programmes,
education and literacy programmes and health and social support measures,
including in the area of sexual and reproductive health and HIV/AIDS treatment,
care and support;
(f) Designing and implementing policies that promote and protect the
enjoyment by rural women and girls of all human rights and fundamental freedoms
and creating an environment that does not tolerate violations of their rights,
including domestic violence, sexual violence and other forms of gender-based
violence;
(g) Developing specific assistance programmes and advisory services to
promote economic skills of rural women in banking, modern trading and financial
procedures and providing microcredit and other financial and business services to a
greater number of women in rural areas, in particular female-headed households, for
their economic empowerment;
(h) Considering adopting, where appropriate, national legislation to protect
the knowledge, innovations and practices of women in indigenous and local
communities relating to traditional medicines, biodiversity and indigenous
technologies;
(i) Taking steps towards ensuring that women’s unpaid work and
contributions to on-farm and off-farm production, including income generated in the
informal sector, are visible, and supporting remunerative non-agricultural
employment of rural women, improving working conditions and increasing access
to productive resources;

3

A/RES/60/138

(j) Addressing the lack of timely, reliable and sex-disaggregated data,
including by intensifying efforts to include women’s unpaid work in official
statistics, and developing a systematic and comparative research base on rural
women that will inform policy and programme decisions;
(k) Designing and revising laws to ensure that, where private ownership of
land and property exists, rural women are accorded full and equal rights to own land
and other property, including through the right to inheritance, and undertaking
administrative reforms and other necessary measures to give women the same right
as men to credit, capital, appropriate technologies and access to markets and
information;
(l) Promoting programmes to enable rural women and men to reconcile their
work and family responsibilities and to encourage men to share equally with women
household and childcare responsibilities;
(m) Mobilizing resources, including at the national level and through official
development assistance, for increasing women’s access to existing savings and
credit schemes, as well as targeted programmes that provide women with capital,
knowledge and tools that enhance their economic capacities;
(n) Supporting a gender-sensitive education system that considers rural
women’s specific needs in order to eliminate gender stereotypes and discriminatory
tendencies affecting them;
Invites the Commission on the Status of Women to continue to pay due
3.
attention to the situation of rural women in the consideration of its priority themes;
4.
Invites the relevant organizations and bodies of the United Nations
system, in particular those dealing with issues of development, to address and
support the empowerment of rural women and their specific needs in their
programmes and strategies, including in the context of globalization;
Stresses the need to identify the best practices for ensuring that rural
5.
women have access to and full participation in the area of information and
communication technologies, and invites the World Summit on the Information
Society, at its second phase in Tunis, to take into consideration, while addressing
gender issues, the priorities and needs of rural women and girls as active users of
information and ensure their participation in developing and implementing global
information and communication technology strategies;
Invites Member States, the United Nations and the relevant organizations
6.
of its system to ensure that the needs of rural women are mainstreamed into the
integrated process of follow-up to the major summits and conferences in the
economic and social fields, in particular the Millennium Summit, the World Summit
on Sustainable Development, the International Conference on Financing for
Development, the 2005 review of the progress achieved in implementing all the
commitments made in the Beijing Platform for Action3 and the outcome documents
of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly entitled “Women 2000:
gender equality, development and peace for the twenty-first century”,4 and the 2005
World Summit;
7.
Invites Member States to take into consideration the concluding
comments and recommendations of the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women concerning their reports to the Committee when
formulating policies and designing programmes focused on the improvement of the

4

A/RES/60/138

situation of rural women, including those to be developed and implemented in
cooperation with relevant international organizations;
8.
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
sixty-second session on the implementation of the present resolution, addressing
different aspects of the empowerment of rural women.
64th plenary meeting
16 December 2005

5
