Resolution .'!26 (t 966)

Resolution 226 (1966)

of 14 October 196/i

du 14 octobre 1966

The Security Council,
Having heard the s':at~m,:r:ts of the representative
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and of the
representative of Portugal,
Taking note of the statement of the representative
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo that Angola
under Portuguese administration is used as a base of
operation for foreign mercenaries for interfering in the
domestic affairs of (he Democratic Republic of the
Congo,
Taking note further of the statement of the representative of Portugal that there are no mercenaries in
Angola, nor camps, nor war material meant to disturb
the peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,

2. Calls upon all States to refrain or desist from
intervening in the domestic affairs of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to follow closely
the implementation of the present resolution.

Le Conseil de securite,
Ayant entendu les declarations du rcpresentant de la
Republique democratique du Congo et du representant
du Portugal,
Prenant note de la declaration du representant de la
Republique democratique du Congo selon laquelle
] 'Angola sous administration portugaise est utilise
comme base operationnelle de mercenaires etrangers
en vue d'une ingerence dans Jes affaircs interieures de la
Republique democratique du Congo,
Prenant note egalement de la declaration du representant du Portugal selon laquelle ii n 'y a en Angola ni
mercenaires, ni camps, ni materiel de guerre destines a
troubler la paix dans la Republique democratique du
Congo,
Profondement preoccupe par le cours des evenements
dans la region.
Rappe/ant Ies resolutions pertinentes du Conseil de
securite et de I' Assemblee generale,
I. Invite instamment le Gouvernement portugais, eu
egard a sa propre declaration, a ne pas permettre a des
r:iercenaires etrangers d'utiliser I' Angola comme base
operationnelle en vue d ·une ingerence dans Jes affaires
interieures de la Republique democratique du Congo;
2. Invite tous Jes Etats a s 'abstenir ou a cesser d 'intervenir dans Jes affaires interieures de la Republique
democratique du Congo;
3. Prie le Secretaire general de suivre de pres I 'application de la presente resolution.

Adopted unanimously at the
1306th meeting.

Adoptee d /'unanimite d la
1306• seance.

Deep.'y concerned over developments rn the area,
Reca!!ing the pertinent resolutions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly,
1. Urges the Government of Portugal, in view of
its own statement, not to allow foreign mercenaries
to use Angola as a base of operation for interfering
in the domestic affairs of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo;

13
