A /69/PV.90

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-ninth session

90th plenary meeting

Friday, 15 May 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kutesa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Uganda)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Imnadze
(Georgia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 136 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/69/722/Add.6)
The Acting President: Before proceeding to the
item on our agenda, I should like, in keeping with
established practice, to draw the attention of the General
Assembly to document A/69/722/Add.6, in which the
Secretary-General informs the President of the General
Assembly that, since the issuance of his communication
contained in document A/69/722/Add.5, Grenada has
made the payment necessary to reduce its arrears below
the amount specified in Article 19 of the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly
takes note of the information contained in document
A/69/722/Add.6?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 69 (continued)
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance
(c) Special economic assistance to individual
countries or regions
Draft resolution (A/69/L.66)
The Acting President: The General Assembly will
now resume its consideration of sub-item (c) of agenda

item 69 in order to take action on draft resolution
A/69/L.66, entitled “Strengthening emergency relief,
rehabilitation and reconstruction in response to the
devastating effects of the earthquake in Nepal”.
Members will recall that the Assembly held its debate on
agenda item 69 and its sub-items (a) to (c) at its 69th and
70th plenary meetings, on 11 and 12 December 2014.
I thank all present for attending this important
meeting on the urgent humanitarian situation affecting
Nepal and the surrounding region following the
devastating earthquake of 25 April and the subsequent
earthquake of 12 May.
I express my deepest condolences to all those who
have been affected by this terrible tragedy, including
the families of those who lost their lives in Nepal,
India, China and Bangladesh.
I commend the leadership demonstrated by the
Government of Nepal and its steadfast efforts to address
this challenging situation. I also thank all Member
States, including the neighbouring countries, and the
organizations that have responded to the crisis.
Nearly three weeks after the initial earthquake, the
situation in Nepal remains of grave concern. In many
places, the conditions on the ground are dire, with
relief efforts suffering a serious setback following the
second earthquake earlier this week. While long-term
recovery and rehabilitation efforts will play a crucial
role in rebuilding Nepal, there are immediate concerns
that warrant the full support of the international
community.
First, the humanitarian needs in the country are
urgent and significant. With some 2.8 million displaced

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-14223 (E)

*1514223*

A/69/PV.90

people, the provision of shelter is of the utmost
importance. Every effort must be made to ensure that
people living in open spaces have access to basic shelter
as soon as possible. Many of the displaced also need
food assistance as a vital necessity.
Secondly, access to health care, sanitation and
hygiene services are critical priorities that must be
addressed. As we have learned from similar natural
disasters, increases in mortality, morbidity and
outbreaks of communicable diseases can be prevented
through access to basic health care and clean water. It
is critical to improve sanitation and hygiene services
in order to avoid potential outbreaks of cholera and
diarrhoea, so as to prevent a second wave of fatalities.
Thirdly, beyond the needs of urban centres, people
displaced from rural villages need to be able to return
to their homes before the start of the planting season.
Failing to enable people to return to their respective
villages to plant crops could have severe consequences
for the country’s food security.
Finally, as we coordinate our relief efforts, we
must bear in mind that there is only a small window of
opportunity to assist the affected communities. With
the monsoon season set to start in June, it is of the
utmost importance that a comprehensive relief effort be
launched as quickly and efficiently as possible.
Since the initial earthquake, the international
community has put forth tremendous efforts to support
the people of Nepal. Within hours of the disaster,
neighbouring countries and other nations around
the world deployed substantial assets, personnel and
relief supplies. To date, more than 40 Member States
have pledged support to the Nepal earthquake flash
appeal launched by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, while dozens more have
provided in-kind assistance and personnel, field
hospitals, blankets and urban search-and-rescue teams.
I commend all those who have demonstrated solidarity
with the people and the Government of Nepal in the
wake of this horrific disaster. I urge their continued
support going forward.
I now give the floor to His Excellency SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: Over the past three
weeks, the lives of 8 million Nepalese people have been
changed beyond recognition. First, an earthquake of
magnitude 7.8 struck on 25 April, leaving some 8,000
people dead and more than double that number injured.
2/15

15/05/2015

A little more than two weeks later, a second earthquake
struck on 12 May, of magnitude 7.3. That powerful
tremor killed dozens of people and injured more than
2,000. I would like to express my sincere condolences
to everyone who lost beloved family members, friends
or colleagues.
A disaster of this scale affects every community
and every sector of society. Some 400,000 homes were
destroyed and another 280,000 damaged. Hundreds of
thousands of people were left homeless and in urgent
need of emergency shelter, food, clean water and
health care. The earthquakes affected 39 of Nepal’s
75 districts. Some of the hardest-hit villages are in the
most remote locations, on top of Nepal’s beautiful and
majestic mountains. Sadly, the number of people killed
is still rising as aid workers reach those communities.
The Government of Nepal has led the response
effort, and the Nepal Armed Forces have played a key
role in locating people in remote areas who have been
cut off from help. During the initial days, the Nepalese
army search-and-rescue teams evacuated more than
2,400 people from isolated communities to Kathmandu
and Pokhara. The army mobilized some 10,000 troops
to support the relief operation. We deployed a United
Nations disaster assessment coordination team within
24 hours to support the Government’s efforts. Among
other things, the team helped to coordinate the arrival
and deployment of 76 search-and-rescue teams from
31 countries, which arrived in the next few days. More
than 1,870 rescue and medical personnel and almost 120
search dogs were involved. I thank all the countries and
organizations that sent support in those vital hours after
the earthquake struck, including the States members of
the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation,
the European Union and other multilateral institutions.
Nearly three weeks since the first earthquake,
international search-and-rescue personnel and medical
teams are now leaving Nepal, but humanitarian
operations are intensifying. Under-Secretary-General
Valerie Amos has just returned from the disaster zone.
Relief goods are entering the country more quickly. Aid
routes are becoming more accessible. Humanitarian
agencies and their partners are relying on the resilience
of local communities. They are working at the local
level to get help to the most vulnerable. They are using
every means possible to reach communities that are
cut off from transportation networks. Members of the
Nepal Trekkers Association are climbing to the most
remote communities to distribute relief materials where

15-14223

15/05/2015

A/69/PV.90

there is no access by road or air. Overall, more than
1 million people have been reached with food, and
some 350,000 have been provided with clean water.
More than 150,000 families have been provided with
emergency shelter materials. Emergency health teams
are present across the country. Medical tents have been
provided to many of the 26 hospitals and more than 900
health centres that were damaged. Humanitarian aid is
making a difference, but we need to do more.

disaster needs assessment are in progress. This
assessment, covering both the economic and social
losses, will bring partners together behind a single,
Government-led recovery plan. Experience has shown
that the post-disaster period is an opportunity to
reassess vulnerabilities and to build back better. Our
efforts in Nepal, therefore, must be ambitious, longterm and risk-informed if they are to protect against
future losses.

With the monsoon season starting in June, there is
an urgent need to make sure that nearly half a million
people have emergency shelter before the rains start
in earnest. Heavy rain and hail are already affecting
people living in tents. The monsoon season is also the
planting season. If farmers are unable to prepare their
land and plant their fields, next year’s harvest will
be severely affected. The monsoon season will also
increase the danger of cholera and other water-borne
diseases. Some areas of Nepal have lost almost all their
water and sanitation facilities. There is a real danger
that heavy rains could result in a major epidemic.

This is the first major natural disaster to strike
since the international agreement on disaster risk
reduction was reached in Sendai in March. A key
component of that agreement was a commitment to
undertake a resilient recovery approach in the event of
a disaster. We must now support Nepal in translating
this new global framework into action. I am pleased
and encouraged by the solidarity shown by Member
States to Nepal at this critical time. I appreciate the
General Assembly’s efforts to help the people of Nepal
cope with their devastating loss. The flash appeal
launched on 28 April calls for $423 million to support
the people of Nepal through the immediate life-saving
response phase. I want to thank all Member States that
have contributed so far. However, without more robust
support, more lives will be lost.

I cannot stress enough the importance of getting
aid, including clean water and sanitation supplies, to
everyone in need within the next few weeks. Support
is also urgently needed to generate emergency
employment, promote local economic recovery and
ensure livelihood support. Even as we deal with those
pressing needs, we must look ahead, mindful of the
continuum from emergency assistance to support for
recovery and development. Emergency relief is never
enough. Saving people’s lives is important, but people
must also be able to sustain their livelihoods. They want
a future. Cash interventions and emergency employment
offer interim support, but efforts to stimulate small and
medium enterprises, and to use locally sourced skills
and materials, will have long-reaching benefits.
Nepal has been torn apart. Years of development
gains have been wiped out. Tens of thousands of
people who had been brought out of poverty are at
risk of falling back. Basic social services, in particular
health care and education, have been interrupted. The
housing sector, power generation, communications and
tourism have all suffered badly. There are clear lessons
emerging about building risk awareness and reduction
into the reconstruction effort.
Discussions among the Government, the European
Union, the development banks and the United Nations
are already under way and plans for an initial post-

The appeal is currently only 14 per cent funded, at
about $60 million. This includes $15 million allocated
from the Central Emergency Response Fund. An
additional $365 million is urgently needed. Needless to
say, the 14 per cent funding is far from sufficient. Let us
resolve to do more and better. We are overwhelmed by
an unprecedented number of humanitarian challenges
around the world. Humanitarian partners urgently need
funds to be able to do their work. In Nepal, we have an
opportunity to make a real difference in the next weeks
and months. With Member States’ continued help, the
United Nations and our partners will support the people
of Nepal as they recover and rebuild. I count on their
strong support and leadership.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I now give the floor to the representative of Spain
to introduce draft resolution A/69/L.66.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Sir, for convening this plenary meeting
on the aftermath of the earthquake, or rather I should
say the earthquakes, that have devastated Nepal and
affected several neighbouring countries since 25 April.

15-142233/15

A/69/PV.90

15/05/2015

I am making this statement in my national capacity,
but Spain aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
later by the observer of the European Union.

to combine the immediate rescue and rehabilitation
efforts with medium- and long-term reconstruction and
development efforts.

First and foremost, I wish to pay my heartfelt
respects to the memory of the victims and convey my
condolences and support to their families and other
loved ones. I also wish to express solidarity, hope and
confidence in the ability of the people and Government
of Nepal to overcome these dire circumstances. They
know they are not alone. We stand with Nepal in word
and we should stand with them even more, if possible,
in deed.

The experience of the United Nations and its main
humanitarian and development agencies in this field are
and will be crucial. We also underscore that mitigation
and preparation efforts made before such disasters
occur can prevent their effects from being even greater.
In this connection, the draft resolution also refers to the
relevance of the Sendai Declaration and Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030.

We must all respond as best we can to the call of
the Secretary-General and be generous to Nepal. Its
tragedy, which we all feel as our own, could at any time
be our own because all of us in one way or another are
exposed to natural disasters of similar magnitude. The
feelings of solidarity, hope and confidence to which I
alluded are what led my country and my delegation,
in full cooperation with Nepal, to introduce draft
resolution A/69/L.66 to the Assembly today for its
consideration and action. I am sure it will be strongly
supported.
The preamble of the draft resolution begins by
expressing our condolences for the more than 8,000
who died as a result of the earthquake of 25 April and its
after shocks. According to recent data, there are more
than 18,000 wounded and nearly 3 million internally
displaced persons. In total, more than 8 million people
are in need of assistance, many of them in hard-toreach areas. Given the scope of the disaster, could it
have been otherwise? The entire social and economic
fabric of Nepal has been affected, and more than 20 per
cent of the country’s economy has disappeared.
The draft resolution also recalls that Nepal has
special needs and is particularly vulnerable at this time
for various reasons. It is vulnerable not only because
it is geographically located on a powerful earthquake
fault line, but also because it is a landlocked developing
country and is still emerging from conflict. Nepal
is special above all because of its immense natural
attractions and its extraordinary contributions to the
cultural and spiritual heritage of humankind. This
makes it an undeniable tourist attraction. However, that
wealth is at the same time a source of vulnerability,
when, as has happened, an important part of its most
iconic monuments and natural parks have been seriously
damaged by the earthquake. Therefore, the operative
part of the draft resolution reminds us of the need
4/15

The draft resolution is thus not only timely but also
necessary. It was in that conviction that we submitted it
to the Assembly for adoption. I must say that the decision
to submit the draft resolution came directly from my
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation, who was
in the region when the earthquake struck on 25 April.
His first reaction was to make his official aeroplane
available to those who needed it and to mobilize
Spanish cooperation. In doing so, he expressed the
feelings of Spanish society as a whole — a society that
has repeatedly demonstrated its empathy and solidarity
with those who suffer most. His second reaction was
to instruct us to be in immediate contact with and to
make ourselves available to the Nepalese Mission in
order to jointly push forward this draft resolution, as
an expression of our support to that friendly country
and to encourage rescue, reconstruction and ongoing
development efforts. We have done this extremely
quickly, as the occasion demanded, with the active
participation and cooperation of many delegations and
the Secretariat itself.
We have been able to prepare and present to the
Assembly the draft we now have before us. We are
sincerely grateful for the excellent job done by the
experts on humanitarian issues from all the delegations,
beginning with my own mission’s splendid team. This
is an achievement for all of us that demonstrates that
at times such as these we can act as what we are, a
truly United Nations, united in the face of the adversity
confronting one of us, in compassion and in action.
I would like to share the fact that so far today’s
draft resolution has been sponsored by more than 110
countries. There is still time for those that have not
yet become sponsors to do so, but they should hurry,
because every vote for it sends a message of life and
hope to the people of Nepal. We owe it to them and to
ourselves.

15-14223

15/05/2015

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/69/L.66, entitled
“Strengthening emergency relief, rehabilitation and
reconstruction in response to the devastating effects of
the earthquake in Nepal”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Ms. Pollard (Department of General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed
in document A/69/L.66, the following countries have
also become sponsors of the draft resolution: Algeria,
Andorra, Armenia, Azerbaijan, the Bahamas, Belarus,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Fiji, France, Georgia, Ghana,
Guatemala, Jordan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon,
Liberia, Libya, Lichtenstein, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritius,
Montenegro, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru,
Nigeria, Poland, the Republic of Moldova, the Russian
Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San
Marino, Senegal, Seychelles, Solomon Islands, the
Sudan, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkmenistan, Ukraine,
the United Arab Emirates, the United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela, Yemen and Saudi Arabia.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/69/L.66?
Draft resolution A/69/L.66 was adopted (resolution
69/280).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the European Union to make a statement.
Mr. Vrailas (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and
its member States. The candidate countries the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and
Herzegovina; as well as the Republic of Moldova, align
themselves with this statement.
We wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing and you, Sir, for presiding over today’s meeting
on behalf of the President of the General Assembly.
What all of us here today are saying to the
Government and the people of Nepal is that they are

A/69/PV.90

not alone. Today the General Assembly has adopted
resolution 69/280, proposed jointly by Nepal and one
of the EU’s member States, Spain. The remaining
27 EU member States are sponsors of the resolution,
which also has massive support among the rest of the
United Nations membership. At moments like this,
such initiatives are tangible proof of global solidarity
and an expression of our common humanity.
The earthquake has killed more than 8,000 people,
wounded 18,000, displaced 2.8 million and affected as
many 8 million Nepalis. It has caused immense material
damage, not only to the country’s rich cultural heritage
but also to housing, health-care centres, schools and
other key parts of its infrastructure. Nepal needs more
than our expressions of sympathy. The other message
of the EU and its member States is one of continued
concrete support to the country in every possible
way that can help it help overcome the earthquake’s
devastating effects.
We started by supporting Nepal in the immediate
aftermath of the disaster by sending first-response
teams, with the EU and 16 of our member States
contributing search-and-rescue teams and other
experts and assets through the EU Civil Protection
Mechanism. We are now also supporting Nepal in its
immense humanitarian relief effort. European Union
Commissioner Christos Stylianides visited Nepal with
United Nations Emergency Relief Coordinator Valerie
Amos just a few days after the disaster, with €6 million
for humanitarian relief and with teams from the
European Commission’s Department of Humanitarian
Aid and Civil Protection on the ground to help identify
needs and prepare and monitor our support.
We are determined, with our partners, to help the
Nepalese authorities address the priority needs of the
affected population, such as emergency shelter, food
assistance and health care. Some of the initial challenges
to delivery, such as improving the airport’s operational
capacity and facilitating customs procedures, have
been successfully addressed. The remaining challenges
include optimizing the use of foreign military assets,
particularly airlift capacity. It is urgent that the
emergency humanitarian response be scaled up so that
it can reach remote villages beyond district centres,
where there are large areas that have still not been
accessed in what some are already describing as a rural
disaster. In providing aid, we must take into account the
specific assistance and protection needs of women and
men of all ages and particularly women and children’s

15-142235/15

A/69/PV.90

vulnerability to gender-based violence and trafficking.
Adequate support must reach people in need before the
monsoon season.
In parallel, the EU and its member States will continue
supporting Nepal in its recovery and reconstruction
process as well as its long-term development. We
expect the post-disaster needs assessment to start soon,
and that should help us to better identify some of the
needs and priorities for national and international
support. The EU has already appropriated €16.6 million
for recovery and reconstruction on top of significant
contributions from individual EU member States. We
support Nepal in its commitment to recovery. We also
support the country’s determination to strengthen its
resilience and capacity at all levels to withstand and
recover from future disasters of this kind. Finally, we
also support Nepal in its commitment to making the
drafting of a constitution a priority, thus contributing
to its longer-term stability, which is another crucial
condition for lasting recovery and development.
I would like to end by commending Nepal on
the leadership demonstrated by its authorities and
the resilience demonstrated by its people. We realize
that its remaining needs are huge. But the EU and its
member States will be there with both humanitarian
and development instruments for as long as it takes to
help the people of Nepal, including by providing our
share of the international effort in a possible future
pledging conference.
The Acting President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
position on the resolution just adopted. May I remind
delegations that such explanations are limited to
10 minutes.
Mr. Mukerji (India): Let me join other delegations
in conveying our deepest condolences to the Government
and the people of Nepal, who have endured large-scale
devastation in the aftermath of a massive earthquake
on 25 April and several aftershocks. While we share
the grief of the people of Nepal, we are gratified to see
the international community rise to the occasion and
assist in alleviating the suffering faced by the people
of Nepal. Today’s adoption of resolution 69/280 is an
expression of this strong support, and we are happy to
be one of its sponsors.
India has been responding to several global
humanitarian relief operations in keeping with our
resources and capabilities. We were at the forefront of

6/15

15/05/2015

providing support after the Asian tsunami, extending
assistance in the aftermath of the Fukushima disaster,
contributing to the Ebola Trust Fund and evacuating
Indians, as well as many foreign nationals, from wartorn Yemen recently. We have endeavoured to be the
early responders in cases of humanitarian crisis.
We are united with Nepal by history and a border,
an open border. The courage with which the people of
Nepal have handled the situation shows the vitality of the
people of that country. Our Prime Minister has visited
Nepal twice since assuming office around a year ago.
The visit of our Prime Minister in August 2014 further
strengthened the broad spectrum of political, economic,
social and cultural ties that are deep-rooted at the levels
of both the Government and the people. In many ways,
the destinies of our countries are interlinked, and
therefore we feel the pain of our Nepalese brethren even
more. Our Prime Minister spoke with both the President
and Prime Minister of Nepal soon after the earthquake
occurred. The relief and rescue work provided by India
was done in consultation and coordination with the
Nepalese Government.
As a close friend and neighbour, we launched
Operation Maitri, which means “friendship” in both
Nepali and Hindi, to aid the rescue and relief efforts
in Nepal. The Government of India swiftly swung into
action after the devastating earthquake by immediately
dispatching National Disaster Response Force teams
and special aircraft with rescue and relief materials.
The relief efforts from India were guided by a national
crisis-management committee, chaired by the Prime
Minister of India and continuously monitored by a
committee of senior Government officials.
Special flights were launched with teams from
our National Disaster Response Force with rescue and
relief materials. The first flight was dispatched with
relief materials within four hours of the earthquake.
There were 37 non-stop sorties of C-17 Globemaster,
IL-76 and C-130 aircrafts carrying 550 tons of relief
material. Thirteen helicopters of the Indian army were
operating from Kathmandu and Pokhara. We deployed
16 teams of the National Disaster Response Force
comprising over 700 trained personnel and 18 army
engineering teams. It was not just the Government;
650 trucks carrying 5,000 tons of relief material were
also sent by non-governmental organizations and state
governments.
With regard to medical assistance, the Indian army
set up three field hospitals, and the Air Force deployed
15-14223

15/05/2015

A/69/PV.90

a rapid-action team. Our medical personnel comprises
surgeons, anaesthetists, nurses and technicians drawn
from all our premier hospitals. A national trauma
center with five operation theatres was operationalized
by the team sent by our Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare. We have provided medical supplies, stretchers
and oxygen concentrators. We have helped with the
restoration of the electricity supply and have made an
operational query-based single database of missing
persons.

Nepal is a close and friendly neighbour to China.
Our two peoples are like brothers. The Chinese
Government and people share the pain of the Nepalese
people. Immediately after the disaster struck, Chinese
President Xi Jinping and Premier Li Keqiang sent
messages of condolence to their Nepalese counterparts
to express the solidarity of the Chinese Government
and people with the Nepalese Government and people,
and our readiness to provide all possible assistance to
rescue and relief efforts.

Finally, we would like to mention that we are also
closely engaged with the efforts of the United Nations
in Nepal. Now that the search-and-rescue phase is
over, our commitment extends to partnering with the
Government and the people of Nepal for rehabilitation
and reconstruction. In conclusion, I would like to quote
our honourable Prime Minister’s words: “India will
make all efforts to wipe the tears of every person in
Nepal, hold their hands and stand with them”.

The Chinese international rescue team, the Chinese
Government medical team and the Chinese military
rescue and relief and medical teams arrived in Nepal
shortly after the quake and immediately started work
in the areas of search and rescue, medical treatment,
epidemic prevention and control, and personnel
training. More than 1,000 rescue, medical, epidemic
prevention and control, and training pesonnel from
the Chinese Government, military and police are
working in Nepal, carrying out the largest international
humanitarian rescue and relief operation outside China
since the founding of the People’s Republic.

Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation wishes to thank you, Sir, for
having convened this meeting and Secretary-General
Mr. Ban Ki-moon for his briefing. We extend our
sincere condolences and sympathy to the Government
and the people of Nepal and express appreciation to the
countries, regional and international organizations and
all other parties that have been actively participating in
and supporting the rescue and relief efforts in Nepal.
The unanimous adoption of resolution 69/280,
initiated by Nepal and Spain and sponsored by China
and a large number of other countries to express support
for Nepal, shows the solidarity of the international
community in jointly overcoming the disaster. The
strong earthquake on 25 April and its aftershocks
have inflicted heavy human and economic losses on
Nepal and severely damaged its economic and social
development and infrastructure. As a least developed,
landlocked developing country, Nepal is in urgent need
of emergency international support as well as sustained
support and assistance, reconstruction and long-term
development.
While working to meet the urgent needs of
the disaster-affected population, the international
community should support the Nepalese Government’s
priority goals in disaster prevention, recovery and
reconstruction, help improve Nepal’s disaster resistance
and ensure the effective coordination of international
efforts with Nepal’s national endeavours.

After the earthquake, the Chinese Government
promptly announced two batches of emergency
humanitarian aid to Nepal totaling ¥60 million, or
about $10 million. More than 40 military flights were
dispatched, delivering 650 tons of tents, generators,
water-purification equipment, blankets and other
emergency supplies to Nepal. When Nepal was
struck by a strong aftershock on 12 May, the Chinese
Government announced another batch of emergency aid
totaling ¥80 million, or about $13 million. Supplies are
being collected and arranged and will reach disasterstricken areas as soon as possible.
In addition, many provincial governments;
non-governmental organizations such as the Red Cross
Society of China, the Chinese Foundation for Poverty
Alleviation and Blue Sky rescue and relief team;
and enterprises and individual citizens in China all
provided donations in cash and in kind, which fully
demonstrated the broad and solid social foundation for
China-Nepal friendship.
The Chinese Government will maintain close
communication with the Nepalese Government to get
updates about the disaster situation and the requirements
on the ground and on that basis provide help in various
forms for medical treatment, epidemic prevention and
control, temporary relocation of the disaster-affected
people and post-disaster reconstruction.

15-142237/15

A/69/PV.90

We are convinced that with the help of the
international community, the Nepalese Government
and people will surely overcome the disaster and
rebuild their homes.
Mr. Erdman (United States of America): On behalf
of the United States, I would like to express our deepest
condolences to all those affected by the earthquake in
Nepal, including the families of those in Nepal, both
Nepalese and visitors, who died or were injured in
the earthquake and its aftermath. There are no words
adequate to express our sense of loss.
We are working closely with the Government of
Nepal and the United Nations and non-governmental
organizations to provide assistance and support. The
United States commends the emergency and medical
responders from Nepal, the United Nations, Governments
and non-governmental organizations around the world
who have courageously stepped up to help those most
in need. We especially remember today — and extend
condolences to their families — those courageous
responders who have given their own lives in the
service of aiding their fellow human beings.
Our disaster assistance response team and urban
search-and-rescue personnel, along with the United
States military, have joined the response efforts and
have been helping to search for and rescue survivors,
provide logistics, conduct medical evacuations and
aerial surveys and airlift plastic sheeting and medical
supplies in support of the Government of Nepal and
the international humanitarian effort. To date, the
United States has pledged more than $32 million in
humanitarian assistance. We will continue to assist
Nepal during the emergency response phase and into
the process of rebuilding and reconstruction.
The United States also remains committed to
continuing our work with international organizations,
the Government of Nepal and the Kathmandu-based
National Society for Earthquake Technology on
disaster risk-reduction strategies for disaster resilience.
To the people in Nepal and the region affected by this
tragedy, we send our heartfelt sympathies. The United
States was a sponsor of the resolution adopted today
(resolution 69/280), and we stand with Nepal during
this difficult time.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I thank the President for
convening today’s meeting. I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing on the situation in
Nepal. And I would also like to express my gratitude

8/15

15/05/2015

to Spain for taking the initiative, together with Nepal,
to introduce the resolution just adopted (resolution
69/280).
On behalf of the people and the Government of
Japan, I would like to express our profound sympathy
and deepest condolences to the people of Nepal for the
lives lost and the destruction caused by the devastating
earthquake. My sympathy and condolences also go to
the neighbouring countries — Bangladesh, China and
India — that were hit by the same earthquake.
The second earthquake, or aftershock, of 12 May
showed that the people of Nepal still have to face the fear
of earthquakes. Japan has in the past also experienced
the devastation of innumerable earthquakes, most
recently the Great East Japan Earthquake of 2011. We
know very well that recovery and reconstruction from
such a disaster is not an easy task and will require efforts
over the long term. In our own experience, expressions
of international solidarity are also very important.
At the third United Nations World Conference on
Disaster Risk Reduction, which was held in Sendai,
Japan, in March 2015, the international community
reaffirmed the importance of disaster risk reduction
and resilience-building with the notion of “building
back better”. The resolution we have adopted today also
clearly reflects this idea.
With regard to emergency humanitarian assistance,
Japan dispatched disaster relief teams on 26 April, one
day after the earthquake. We also delivered emergency
relief goods, such as tents and blankets, on the same
day. In addition, Japan decided to extend emergency
assistance in the amount of $14 million to support
Nepal. That assistance will soon be provided through
international organizations, including United Nations
humanitarian and development agencies.
The international community must respond to
Nepal’s urgent needs for recovery and reconstruction.
In order to assist the country in its efforts towards
recovery and reconstruction in a coordinated and
effective manner, Japan announced its readiness to
co-organize a donor conference together with Nepal
and the Asian Development Bank. We also expect other
Member States and international agencies, including
the United Nations Development Programme and the
World Bank, to take part in the initiative.
I wish to conclude my statement by reaffirming our
determination to always stand by the Government and
the people of Nepal.
15-14223

15/05/2015

Mr. Anshor (Indonesia): I would like to begin by
expressing once again Indonesia’s deepest condolences
to the Government and the people of Nepal for their loss
and the unfolding impacts caused by the earthquakes,
which have resulted in an immeasurable amount of
destruction and casualties. Our thoughts and prayers
go out to all those who have felt the impact of the
earthquakes.
It is a difficult moment for the Government and the
people of Nepal. Yet it has often been in moments such
as this, when the human spirit is at its lowest ebb, that
we have witnessed tremendous resilience. We know
that the people of Nepal have a remarkable spirit and
that they will rise above this enormous test of will. We
hope that the international community will continue to
support the recovery and rebuilding of Nepal so that the
Government and its people will be able to restore their
lives to normalcy and attain resilience.
I would like to commend the Government of Nepal
for its continued commitment and leadership in rapidly
delivering humanitarian assistance and coordinating
the relief efforts in the country. In contribution to the
emergency relief efforts, Indonesia, like many other
countries, is sending medical, logistical and other
teams and supplies to Nepal.
The resolution that was just adopted (resolution
69/280) should help accelerate the delivery of assistance
by the United Nations system in Nepal so that the needs
of the people can be met. That assistance should further
strengthen the coordination within the United Nations
system to ensure the effectiveness of delivery on the
ground.
Indonesia is proud to have joined others in
sponsoring today’s resolution. I would like to express
my appreciation to the Permanent Missions of Nepal
and Spain for their commendable stewardship during
the informal negotiations. Indonesia hopes that the
resolution will provide a platform for partnership
between the United Nations system and all humanitarian
actors, including global and regional financial
institutions, as well as the private sector, with a view
to supporting the long-term efforts of the Government
and the people of Nepal in building back better and
strengthening their resilience to disasters.
Indonesia stands ready, together with the
Government of Nepal and others, to undertake further
cooperation, including in sharing best practices, and to
support the efforts to strengthen disaster risk-reduction
and resilience-building in Nepal.

A/69/PV.90

Mr. Shearman (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by expressing the heartfelt condolences of the
Government and the people of the United Kingdom
to the Government and the people of Nepal and to all
those who have lost family, friends and livelihoods in
this dreadful tragedy.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing and Spain for its leadership, together with
Nepal, on resolution 69/280, which we have adopted
today. The resolution is an important expression of
global solidarity with the people who have suffered
from this devastating disaster.
The United Kingdom is doing all it can to help
Nepal recover from the earthquake. We are the largest
international humanitarian donor to the response in
Nepal, having provided $35 million to organizations
working across affected districts, including $15 million
to the United Nations flash appeal. We urge other
donors to do more and urgently support the appeal.
Since the beginning of the crisis, we have provided
logistical support to the Government of Nepal and the
international response, including military aircraft.
According to the humanitarian community in Nepal,
additional logistical capacity is urgently required to
meet the needs of affected communities ahead of the
monsoon. The United Kingdom has offered and remains
ready to make additional helicopter assets available to
support the humanitarian response.
We strongly support efforts to support the longterm impacts of the earthquake, but our immediate
focus must be on addressing immediate and urgent
humanitarian needs. Swift action is required to address
needs before the onset of the monsoon season, when
roads will become impassable in some locations. Unless
we collectively act quickly, the humanitarian context
could deteriorate with the arrival of the monsoon. This
scenario would lead to a further disaster — a protracted
humanitarian response that could have been averted.
We believe, therefore, that the message is clear.
Significant progress has been made, but there are still
significant needs. As an international community,
we need to act urgently and collectively in support of
Nepal to address this remaining challenge and to avert
even greater humanitarian need.
Mrs. Namgyel (Bhutan): At the outset, let me thank
the President of the General Assembly for convening
this important plenary meeting to provide an update
on the situation in Nepal. We welcome the adoption of

15-142239/15

A/69/PV.90

resolution 69/280, which we were pleased to co-sponsor.
I would also like to place on record our thanks to Spain
for having taken this initiative.
I would also like to express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing on
the situation in Nepal following the earthquake.
We wish once again to convey our deepest
condolences to the people and Government of Nepal
and to commend the Government of Nepal and the
international community, in particular those on the
ground in Nepal, for their dedicated and continued
efforts in helping the people of Nepal get through this
difficult situation. Bhutan, for its part, has made its own
modest contributions to Nepal’s relief efforts, based on
the command of His Majesty the King and followed up
with a personal visit by the Prime Minister of Bhutan,
leading a team of relief personnel on 27 April.
As the Secretary-General’s briefing made clear,
Nepal has a difficult and challenging task ahead of it, not
only to provide immediate relief, but also to undertake
long-term reconstruction and rebuilding efforts. We
understand the difficult circumstances and challenges
under which Nepal would have to undertake these
efforts and therefore urge the international community
to continue to support Nepal in these difficult times. As
a close friend and neighbour, and a fellow Himalayan
country, Bhutan stands in solidarity and support with
the people and Government of Nepal and wishes them
strength as they work to overcome the challenging task
of rebuilding their country.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Secretary-General for his detailed
briefing, which truly conveys the devastating impact
of the earthquake in Nepal, which not only claimed
a great many lives and wounded many people, but
also destroyed much of the country. On behalf of the
Government of Colombia, I wish to extend my deepest
condolences to the Government and the people of Nepal
and to the families of the victims following this natural
disaster whose devastating effects call for the support
of the international community, as made clear in the
report of the Secretary-General and the resolution we
have just unanimously adopted under the leadership of
Spain (resolution 69/280). The resolution clearly lays
out how the international community must continue
channelling its support for emergency relief and for
reconstruction and development activities.
Colombia understands the difficult situation Nepal
is going through and, in solidarity with the fragile
10/15

15/05/2015

situation of its people at this difficult time, on 5 May
we responded to their call by making a contribution of
$200,000 to the fund. We hope that, with the assistance
and cooperation of the international community, we
can help Nepal return to the path towards development.
Mr. Lennartsson (Sweden): Sweden aligns itself
with the statement delivered on behalf of the European
Union and would like to make a few additional
remarks. Let me begin by reiterating Sweden’s heartfelt
condolences to the Government of Nepal and the
families of all those who lost their lives and our deepest
sympathy to the many injured as a result of this terrible
earthquake in Nepal. As many speakers before me have
pointed out, they are not alone in this hour of need.
Sweden was happy to co-sponsor resolution
69/280, adopted today, which demonstrates the
global solidarity with the Government and people of
Nepal. The Swedish Government responded swiftly
to the disaster on 25 April by immediately deploying
personnel and deciding on financial support. So far,
Sweden has contributed approximately $10 million.
A significant part of this support is in response to the
recently launched United Nations flash appeal in areas
such as water, sanitation and psychosocial support, but
also support to children’s education and protection.
Furthermore, we are providing funds to the World Food
Programme’s logistical support to reach hard-to-reach
areas. Sweden strongly encourages other donors to
urgently fund the Flash Appeal, which remains severely
underfunded at only 14 per cent. This is critical in order
to avert further humanitarian needs.
Sweden has also contributed by sending 40 Swedish
specialists to assist in the United Nations Disaster
Assessment and Coordination Team, and experts in
areas such as management, coordination, information
and communication technology, logistics, construction,
vehicles, temporary shelter and equipment. In
addition, we have sent a group of Swedish specialists
in coordination and needs assessments. As one of the
major providers of voluntary core contributions to
organization such as the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, UNICEF and the United
Nations Development Programme, we stand by the
United Nations efforts to provide a timely and efficient
response to this disaster.
In closing, we would like to commend the Nepalese
Government for its leadership in the response as well
as for its foresight demonstrated by earlier investments
in disaster preparedness. The Swedish Government
15-14223

15/05/2015

will continue to closely monitor the situation on the
ground and stands ready to commit further assistance
to operations in Nepal.
Mr. Forés Rodríguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I reaffirm our solidarity with the people and
Government of Nepal and extend our condolences to
them upon the devastating human and material damage
wrought by the earthquakes of 25 April and 12 May
and their aftershocks. Cuba wishes to share its modest
experience in dealing with natural disasters in the hope
that it may be useful to the people of Nepal.
Following in our long tradition of solidarity
with other nations facing difficulties, a team of
49 Cuban international experts specialized in disaster
response and the management of major epidemics,
including 25 doctors of various specialties, traveled
to Kathmandu. The group of health professionals is
now on the ground putting in place conditions for the
deployment of a field hospital that will provide services,
including a surgical unit, sterilization, an intensive care
unit, diagnostic tools including X-rays, sterilization
and a semi-automated ultrasonic laboratory, as well as
consultation and rehabilitation services, which will be
the most important work in the days ahead.
We reiterate our willingness to continue supporting,
selflessly and in solidarity, disaster-stricken countries
that are in need of assistance. Moreover, we call on the
United Nations system and the international community
to shoulder their responsibilities to developing countries
by helping them to improve their disaster prevention and
response capacities. In that regard, one efficient way of
helping the brotherly people of Nepal would be to cover
the financial costs of its external debt. Our delegation
fully supports the draft resolution under consideration
and is one of its sponsors.
Ms. Ponce (Philippines): At the outset, allow me to
express once again the Philippines’ deepest condolences
and sympathy to the Government and the people of
Nepal for the terrible loss of lives, extensive damage to
property and destruction of Nepal’s important cultural
sites caused by the earthquakes of 25 April and 12 May.
We also express our condolences and sympathy to
the people of its neighbouring countries, Bangladesh,
China and India, who also suffered loss of lives and
property. The Philippines affirms its support for Nepal
and thanks Spain for its initiative and coordination of
this resolution, which we are honoured to co-sponsor.
The second earthquake that struck Nepal showed
us that disasters do not wait. International assistance

A/69/PV.90

is critical from the onset, and we are heartened by
the spirit of solidarity, cooperation and willingness
that suffused the negotiation of resolution 69/280.
As the resolution equally emphasizes, relief efforts
are but a part of the scale of humanitarian assistance
needed. They must be accompanied from the onset
by reconstruction, rehabilitation and development
programmes that are anchored in the principles of
resilience and building back better. And as pointed
out by Under-Secretary-General Valerie Amos at last
week’s briefing, risk awareness and reduction must be
built into those efforts. In so doing, we particularly
need to be mindful of the special needs and challenges
of Nepal as a least developed, landlocked country
emerging from a conflict.
We also agree that there is a need to direct
assistance to prevention by further strengthening
national capacities at all levels, including effective
and efficient governance and institutions, and to also
integrating a gender perspective and the needs of the
most vulnerable groups, including children and older
people, and in all relevant aspects related to disaster
management and rehabilitation. In these, an important
guidepost is the Sendai Declaration and the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030.
Our Metropolitan Manila Development Authority has
deployed a rescue team to assist in the retrieval and
rehabilitation operations. The Philippine Red Cross
has also sent two teams, including a medical team
that has joined the Canadian Red Cross in setting up
an emergency field hospital focusing on providing
maternal and child health care. We intend to further
assist in the rehabilitation and reconstruction efforts.
As a country that experienced the magnitude
of destruction wrought by Typhoon Haiyan in 2013,
the Philippines is well aware of the vital importance
of coordinated humanitarian assistance from the
international community in such situations of natural
disasters, not just for the aid and expertise provided, but
for lifting the spirits of those affected, in the knowledge
that there is a community behind them and with them.
We are optimistic that, with the leadership of the
Government of Nepal and the coordinated assistance
of the international community, the challenges of this
tragic disaster will be adequately addressed.
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): First of
all, I would like to thank you, Sir, for convening this
meeting and the Secretary-General for his briefing. I
also commend Spain for its leadership in introducing
resolution 69/280.

15-1422311/15

A/69/PV.90

15/05/2015

On behalf of the people and Government of the
Islamic Republic of Iran, I wish to express my heartfelt
sympathy and condolences to the Government and
people of the Federal Democratic Republic of Nepal
for the losses of life, injuries and the huge damages
caused by the devastating earthquake of 25 April and
the subsequent earthquake of 12 May. As Saadi Shirazi,
the great Iranian poet of the thirteenth century, wrote,

rice, ready-to-eat meals, tents and blankets. Nepalese
medical students studying in Pakistani medical
colleges have also been assisted to return home to help
in the relief operations. The chairman of the National
Disaster Management Authority of Pakistan has visited
Nepal and met with Nepalese leaders and officials to
assess the situation and the need for further assistance
from Pakistan.

“Humans are the limbs of the same body, and
are from the same essence in their creation. When
the conditions of the time hurt one of these parts,
other parts will suffer from discomfort as well. If
you are indifferent about the misery of others, it is
not deserving to call you a human being.”

In conclusion, let me reassure the Government
and the people of Nepal that Pakistan stands ready to
provide additional assistance as per their needs.

The people and the Government of Iran, who
have suffered immensely from natural disasters,
including some big earthquakes in the past decades,
share the pain of their Nepalese brothers and sisters.
Iran has dispatched emergency humanitarian supplies
to the quake-stricken people of Nepal, and we remain
committed to further assisting the victims of this
tragedy.
Mr. Munir (Pakistan): I take this opportunity to
reiterate the profound condolences of the Government
and the people of Pakistan to the Government and
the people of Nepal at the colossal loss of life and
property resulting from the 25 April earthquake and
its continuing aftershocks. We stand in solidarity
with our Nepalese brothers and sisters at this difficult
time. I would also like to thank Nepal and Spain for
steering the important resolution 69/280, which signals
the resolve and commitment of the international
community to providing all needed assistance to
Nepal and to supporting it along the long-term road to
recovery. We were pleased to co-sponsor the resolution
and hope that its promise and commitment will be fully
translated into action.
As a fellow State member of the South Asian
Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) region,
Pakistan immediately responded to the dire situation in
Nepal by rushing emergency relief goods and critical
medical supplies. Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif issued
a special directive to provide all possible assistance
to Nepal in a timely manner. Our relief assistance,
which is still continuing, includes the establishment
of a 30-bed field hospital, a 38-member urban searchand-rescue team with sophisticated equipment, and 10
aeroplane-loads of relief goods, including medicines,

12/15

Mr. Haque (Bangladesh): I would like to express
our gratitude to Spain and Nepal for introducing
resolution 69/280. Bangladesh is pleased to have
co-sponsored the resolution.
On behalf of the people of Bangladesh, we express
our deepest condolences to the victims of the devastating
earthquake that shook Nepal on 25 April and then on
12 May. We hope that the people and Government of
Nepal will be able to overcome their losses with the help
of Nepal’s friendly neighbours. When the earthquake
shook Nepal, it also shook many areas of Bangladesh,
where thousands of people took refuge in open fields to
avoid the aftershocks. A few people died in Bangladesh
as well. The honourable President and Prime Minister
of Bangladesh expressed their deep condolences for the
losses caused by the devastating earthquake in Nepal,
one of our closest neighbours and a valued member of
the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation.
In the wake of the recent devastating earthquake
in Nepal, the Government of Bangladesh was among
the first countries to send a humanitarian assistance
team to Nepal. The Government of Bangladesh took
an immediate decision to send relief materials and
a medical team immediately. All the airports in
Bangladesh have been opened to foreign countries who
want to send relief materials to Nepal. The Government
of Bangladesh has already talked to India to ensure
that the relief materials could go to Nepal through our
Banglabandha land port using Indian territories.
Bangladesh was one of the first countries to send
a medical team, comprising 70 members of medical
donors plus technicians and nurses. The medical team
was deployed in the Lalitpur district of Kathmandu to
provide medical treatment to the earthquake victims.
As of today, the Bangladeshi medical team has provided
medical services to a few thousand Nepalese. In
addition, Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina has directed an

15-14223

15/05/2015

additional 10,000 metric tons of rice and an additional
quantity of water to earthquake-hit Nepal. Besides the
Bangladeshi Government, the headquarters of many
non-governmental organizations in Bangaladesh have
extended their support by sending relief materials to
the earthquake victims in Nepal. A concert for Nepal
will be held on 21 May in an effort to raise funds for the
victims of the earthquake of Nepal.
The people of Bangladesh feel strongly for
the friendly and courageous people of Nepal, and
Bangladesh will remain at the side of the disaster-struck
people of Nepal and provide all assistance possible.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I thank
you, Sir, for convening this meeting and SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his important briefing. I also
thank my colleagues, the Ambassadors of Spain and
Nepal, for having proposed resolution 69/280, which
we fully endorse as co-sponsors.
Today the international community comes together
to acknowledge and offer our deepest sympathies to the
people of Nepal, who are reeling from a recent series
of earthquakes that have caused thousands of deaths
and affected millions more. The United Arab Emirates
would like to thank the President of the General
Assembly for convening the important briefing on this
urgent humanitarian situation facing Nepal and the
broader region.
We have over 100,000 Nepalese living throughout
the United Arab Emirates, who work alongside people
of over 200 different nationalities represented in
our country. When a shocking tragedy such as this
happens, United Arab Emirates citizens and residents
feel the human impact right away. Our hearts go out
to those who lost friends and family as a result of the
earthquakes, and we are keen to do as much as we can
to bring people to safety and provide humanitarian aid
to provide immediate relief and mitigate the impact of
the disruption.
Upon learning of the earthquake, 87 members of
the United Arab Emirates search-and-rescue team
from the Abu Dhabi police department were deployed
to Nepal. Working closely with the United Nations
Disaster Assessment Coordinator, our team provided
logistical support, including the use of unmanned
drones to capture footage of hard-to-reach areas to
assess the integrity of damaged buildings in Nepal.
Team members also offered medical services to
patients, as well as equipment to hospitals and training

A/69/PV.90

to Nepalese doctors and nurses. Under-SecretaryGeneral Valerie Amos met with our teams on the
ground and offered valuable insights on specific needs
that we responded to. Philanthropic organizations
within the United Arab Emirates mobilized resources
quickly to provide humanitarian aid to those in remote
areas. With a generous donation from Her Highness
Sheikha Fatima bint Mubarak, Chairwoman of the
General Woman’s Union, the United Arab Emirates Red
Crescent Authority has been able to provide aid to over
30,000 families throughout Nepal. Our contributions
from across the United Arab Emirates have resulted in
the deployment of humanitiarian aid to remote areas of
Nepal and the construction of field hospitals to help in
the ongoing relief operations.
We need to do more and we will. Today our focus
is on relief, but we should not forget the role that
preparation can play in future crises like this. We
should continue to invest in countries efforts’ to invest
in disaster risk reduction so that they can become
more resilient to disasters. In this regard, we echo
the statement made by the observer of the European
Union that adequate safeguards must be put in place
to protect the most vulnerable, specifically women,
children and boys. It is our hope that those affected
by this earthquake will soon be able to return to their
homes and life as normal as soon as possible. In order
to do this the international community must not turn
its focus away from this humanitarian crisis too soon.
There is still so much more to be done.
Mr. Bhattarai (Nepal): On behalf of the
Government and people of Nepal and myself, I wish to
express our deepest gratitude to you, Sir, for convening
this meeting today at this crucial hour in support of
Nepal in the wake of a series of earthquakes that have
left the country devastated. I thank you for your opening
statement, highlighting the need on the ground, and I
also thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
briefing, with its graphic account of the dire situation
on the ground and of the needs, including those of the
remotest parts of Nepal, at this hour.
On 25 April, three weeks ago, a 7.8 magnitude
earthquake hit Nepal. Together with dozens of
powerful aftershocks of up to 6.8 in magnitude, it has
consumed over 8,000 lives, injured over 18,000 people
and rendered more than 600,000 houses uninhabitable.
The earthquake left 3 million people without shelter in
Kathmandu valley and several outlying districts to the
west, north and east. Two days ago, just as we commenced

15-1422313/15

A/69/PV.90

the transition to relief and recovery, Nepal was struck
again by a quake nearly as powerful. That earthquake,
with its own set of aftershocks, tore down the already
debilitated buildings and structures that had withstood
the first episode. Thousands of houses in the outlying
districts in the north-east and east of Kathmandu valley
have been levelled; hundreds of people have been killed
and many injured. While the earthquakes have imposed
havoc and ruin on Kathmandu, their effect on rural
Nepal, sequestered and beyond the reach of immediate
help, is on a scale scarcely imaginable.
Amid this crisis, the show of support from Member
States and from all corners of the globe — both
institutional and individual — has been tremendous.
We are grateful for the outpouring of sympathy and
solidarity we have received. The concern of SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon and the determination with
which he sought to respond to the crisis, both personally
and through the United Nations system, are highly
appreciated. The visit to Nepal by Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs Valerie Amos,
together with the visits by the leaders of the European
Union and the World Food Programme, brought moral
support to the ground, while the people already on the
ground are working tirelessly around the clock.
It has been deeply moving to witness the generosity
and spontaneity with which the first responders acted
in the aftermath of the 25 April earthquake. We are
grateful to our immediate neighbours, India and
China, and all other countries — from the South Asian
Association for Regional Cooperation member States
to our long-standing development partners and a raft
of multilateral organizations and institutions, from
the United Nations to the European Union. These
actors have directly contributed to the rescue and relief
operations. Hundreds of people were rescued alive and
treated. Many more friends have contributed since
then. Nepal cherishes deeply these friendships, which
have lent us strength and hope in the face of this great
calamity, but it is imperative to remember that it is not
only Nepali nationals who have suffered. Our hearts go
out to the families of our friendly countries’ nationals
who succumbed to the disaster. We hope for their quick
recovery.
The scale of destruction of physical and social
infrastructure is immense. In the districts hardest hit,
hardly a school or health post still stands. The roads
to these areas were shut off and access to vital public
services cut off. The rescue and relief effort under way

14/15

15/05/2015

has been hampered by landslides and heavy rainfall
time and again. The prospects for the future look grim.
Tens of thousands who had just crossed the poverty line
run the risk of falling back into absolute poverty. Past
development achievements, including the progress on
the Millennium Development Goals, stand to suffer
major setbacks and our hope to graduate from least
developed country status by 2022 may be severely
diminished.
Beyond the economic and human impact is the pain
of a lost past, our historical, cultural and archaeological
heritage, which endowed us with values and an
identity that have been damaged, perhaps decimated,
by the powerful shocks we have experienced. It is
heartbreaking to see centuries-old monuments and
temples, many of them World Heritage Sites, reduced
to rubble.
In his briefing, the Secretary-General underscored
that the immediate and most exigent challenge
is providing shelter for the millions who are now
homeless. The monsoon season is fast approaching,
and temporary shelters must be set up in the next few
weeks. We need to rehabilitate bridges and roads and
reinstate schools and health posts. We should also
do everything possible to enable us not to miss the
planting season, which is just around the corner. The
Government of Nepal is committed to yoking the relief
and recovery phase of post-disaster management to the
longer-term goals of rebuilding and reconstruction.
For that, it will mobilize already existing central and
district-level mechanisms, which will need the means
necessary to ensuring that the recovery can progress
seamlessly towards rebuilding and reconstruction,
avoiding any unnecessary duplication of effort or waste
of scarce resources.
On 27 April, the Government appealed to the
international community for assistance and set up
a national reconstruction fund, consisting initially
of $2 billion, with $200 million earmarked from
its own resources, for the immediate rebuilding of
vital infrastructure, homes and heritage sites. A full
assessment of the damage and financing needs for
reconstruction is being conducted by our national
planning commission, in collaboration with the
United Nations Development Programme and other
development partners. The eventual total needed could
amount to several billion dollars. The Government
is counting on the generous support of Nepal’s
development partners to enable it to meet these

15-14223

15/05/2015

challenges. To that end, we welcome the launch of the
United Nations pledge appeal and call on all Member
States to contribute generously in order to provide the
earthquake’s victims with lifesaving assistance in the
next three months, without which the humanitarian
situation will be dire.
I would like to assure all the friends of Nepal here
today that, just as they have hoped and prayed for and
expressed confidence in our ability to achieve, the
Nepalese people will emerge stronger from this crisis.
We are determined to do it. For that, we need greater
support and cooperation, particularly in the form of
substantial, sustained financial resources from our
international development partners.
Nepal has been trying to prepare for disasters
such as this for years. Although we have enacted
laws, established institutions and stocked supplies and
harvests for several years, in the end our capacity has
fallen far short of what is required. With a landlocked
and least-developed mountain economy that has
recently emerged from conflict, Nepal could not prepare
adequately for a disaster of this magnitude. Yet under
the circumstances, the Government has acted promptly
to mobilize its own resources and coordinate outside
support as efficiently as possible.
Nepal is in a precarious situation at this time,
wading uncertainly in waters that are too deep. But
we have full confidence in the support of our friends
and in our own strength and determination to move
past and recover from this calamity and build a better
home. In the midst of chaos and in the wake of disaster,
it is inspiring to see how selflessly the Nepali people
have come together, at home and abroad, to come to
one another’s aid. It is inspiring because it is an augury

A/69/PV.90

of change. The hope that Nepalis have for their country,
the work they are putting into rebuilding Nepal and
the confidence they have in its resilience — these
are the ingredients of progress. A country mired in a
protracted political transition for several years is now
witnessing an unprecedented unity of purpose among
political parties and leaders for facing the challenge
together, creating a political climate conducive to
rapid social and economic development. On 13 May,
the Constituent Assembly, which is also the country’s
national parliament, resolved unanimously that all its
constituents will rise to the challenge and guide our
country out of this catastrophe.
We are confident that resolution 69/280, adopted
this morning with an overwhelming number of
sponsors, will be instrumental in facilitating any and
all initiatives that will be needed to realize that dream.
We are grateful to the Spanish leadership for bringing
the United Nations membership together in global
solidarity with Nepal by way of the resolution. I would
like to sincerely thank Mr. Román Oyarzun Marchesi,
the Permanent Representative of Spain and my good
friend, for his efforts and for his moving introduction of
the resolution. I would also like to take this opportunity
to express once again the Government of Nepal’s deep
appreciation to all friendly countries for their efforts to
finally shape the resolution, and to thank all delegations
from the bottom of my heart for their steadfast support
to Nepal and for the adoption of today’s resolution,
making us truly feel that Nepal is not alone.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (c)
of agenda item 69.
The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.

15-1422315/15
