United Nations

A/RES/56/84

General Assembly

Distr.: General
18 January 2002

Fifty-sixth session
Agenda item 163

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/56/590 and Corr.1)]

56/84.

Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host
Country

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on Relations with the Host
Country, 1
Expressing deep condolences to the families of the victims of the heinous acts
of terrorism of 11 September 2001, as well as solidarity with the Government and
people of the host country,
Recalling Article 105 of the Charter of the United Nations, the Convention on
the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations, 2 the Agreement between the
United Nations and the United States of America regarding the Headquarters of the
United Nations 3 and the responsibilities of the host country,
Recalling also that, in accordance with paragraph 7 of General Assembly
resolution 2819 (XXVI) of 15 December 1971, the Committee should consider, and
advise the host country on, issues arising in connection with the implementation of
the Agreement between the United Nations and the United States of America
regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations,
Recognizing that effective measures should continue to be taken by the
competent authorities of the host country, in particular to prevent any acts violating
the security of missions and the safety of their personnel,
1.
Endorses the recommendations and conclusions of the Committee on
Relations with the Host Country contained in paragraph 37 of its report; 1
2.
Considers that the maintenance of appropriate conditions for the normal
work of the delegations and the missions accredited to the United Nations and the
observance of their privileges and immunities, which is an issue of great importance
to them, are in the interest of the United Nations and all Member States, and

_______________
1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 26 (A/56/26).
Resolution 22 A (I).
3
See resolution 169 (II).
2

01 47815

A/RES/56/84

requests the host country to continue to take all measures necessary to prevent any
interference with the functioning of missions;
3.
Expresses its appreciation for the efforts made by the host country, and
hopes that the issues raised at the meetings of the Committee will continue to be
resolved in a spirit of cooperation and in accordance with international law;
4.
Notes that during the reporting period the travel controls previously
imposed by the host country on staff of certain missions and staff members of the
Secretariat of certain nationalities remained in effect, and requests the host country
to consider removing such travel controls, and in this regard notes the positions of
affected States, of the Secretary-General and of the host country;
5.
Notes also that the Committee anticipates that the host country will
continue to ensure the issuance, in a timely manner, of entry visas to representatives
of Member States, pursuant to article IV, section 11, of the Agreement between the
United Nations and the United States of America regarding the Headquarters of the
United Nations, 3 inter alia, for the purpose of their attending official United Nations
meetings;
6.
Requests the host country to continue to take steps to resolve the problem
relating to the parking of diplomatic vehicles in a fair, balanced and nondiscriminatory way, with a view to responding to the growing needs of the
diplomatic community, and to continue to consult with the Committee on this
important issue;
7.
Requests the Secretary-General to remain actively engaged in all aspects
of the relations of the United Nations with the host country;
8.
Requests the Committee to continue its work in conformity with General
Assembly resolution 2819 (XXVI);
9.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-seventh session
the item entitled “Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country”.
85th plenary meeting
12 December 2001

2
