1;. SECURITY
OFFICIAL
THIRTY-SECOND

COUNCIL
RECORDS

th
1986

YEAR

MEETING: 7 FEBRUARY 1977

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l986)

, . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . +. . . . . . . .

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . . . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda , . . , . , . . . , . . . . . . , , . . , . . . . , . . . . , . . . , . . .

1

Complaint by Benin:
(n) Letter dated 26 January 1977 from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the
Permanent Mission of Benin to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/ 12278)
(bl Letter dated 4 February 1977 from the Chargi: d’affaires a.f. of the
Permanent Mission of Guinea to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/12281) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . ,

1

S/PV.1986

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures, Mention of such a symbol indicates’s reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates thd suppletneni in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

NINETEEN

HUNDRED

AND EIGHTY-SIXTH

Held in New York on Monday,
President: Mr. James MURRAY (United Kingdom of

Great Britain and Northern Ireland).
&sent:
The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Republic, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 986)
I. Adoption of the agenda
2. Complaint by Benin:
(a) Letter dated 26 January 1977 from the Charge
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Benin to
the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/12278)
(b) Letter dated 4 February 1977 from the Charge
d’affaires a.i of the Permanent Mission of Guinea
to the United Nations addressedto the President of
the Security Council (S/12281)
Xhe meeting was called to order at 5 p.m.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
1. The PRESIDENT: Before turning to the business before
us this afternoon, I should like to pay a tribute, on behalf
of the Council, to my predecessor, Ambassador
Troyanovsky of the Soviet Union, who was President of the
Security Council during the month of January. I cannot say
that I have had an opportunity to examine all the
precedents, but I suspect there have been few previous
occasions on which a permanent representative to the
United Nations has been called upon to take on the onerous
duties of President of the Council during his first month of
office. I should like, therefore, on behalf of my delegation,
to express to Ambassador Troyanovsky our profound
admiration for the exemplary way in which he carried out
the business of the Council during his presidency and, since
he is not present himself, I ask the representative of the
Soviet Union, Ambassador Kharlamov, to be kind enough
to convey this to him. I shall do my best in the coming days
to emulate his example.
Adoption of the agenda
; 7he agenda was adopted.

7 February

MEETING
1977, at 5 p.m.

Complaint by Benin:
(a) Letter dated 26 January 1977 from the Charge
d’affaires ai. of the Permanent Mission of Benin to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/12278)
(6) Letter dated 4 February 1977 from the Charge
d’affaires a.~+,of the PermanentMission of Guinea to
the United Nations addressedto the Presidentof the
Security Council (S/12281)

2. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of
the Council that letters have been received from the
reprqsentatives of Algeria, Guinea, Madagascar, Rwanda and
Togo, in which they request to be invited to participate,
without the right to vote, in the discussion of the question
on the Council’s agenda. Accordingly, I propose, in
accordance with the usual practice and with the consent of
the Council, to invite these representatives to participate in
the discussion, without the right to vote, under the
provisions of Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Council. There being
no objection, I invite the representatives of Algeria, Guinea,
Madagascar, Rwanda and Togo to take the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber, on the
understanding that they will be invited to take places at the
Council table whenever they wish to address the Council.
At the invitation of the President,Mr. A. Rahal(Algeria),
Mr. A. Doukoure (Guinea),Mr* I3. Rabetafika (Madagascar),
Mr. I. Karuhiie (Rwanda) and Mr. A, A. Kodjovi (Togo)
took the placesreservedfor themat the sideof the Council
chamber.

3, Mr. BOYA (Benin) (interpretation from French):
Mr. President, my delegation welcomes your assumption of
the presidency of the Security, Council for this month of
February 1977. Your country, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, has played and, indeed,
is still playing an important role in the history of the total
liberation of the peoples of the world from foreign
imperialist and colonialist domination. Your country has
important responsibilities vis-a-vis Africa in the heroic and
worthy struggle being waged by the true sons of Zimbabwe
for their liberation from the barbaric and shameful oppression of the rebel clique of Ian Smith. My country has no
doubt of your country’s immense ability to help the true
sons of Zimbabwe to free themselves at long last.
4. For these reasons, Benin is particularly pleased to see
you directing the proceedings of this Council, the urgent
convening of which my country requested so that it might
consider the aggression committed by imperialism and its
gang of barbaric mercenaries against the city of Cotonou,

-

._..._- ---.

-__----

the economic capital of my country,
January 1977.

neutralized all our men, who were unexpectedly overcome
in the airport area. The mercenaries took up a position and
advanced towards the city in columns. In their advance
they performed a drag-net operation and then concentrated
al1 their equipment and weapons on the Palace of the
Presidency of the Republic, which was obviously one of
their principal targets. At the same time, and in a
co-ordinated manner, they attacked our military camp with
mortars and rockets.

on Sunday, 16

5. My delegation ventures to hope that, thanks to your
distinguished qualifications as an enlightened diplomat, the
debate beginning today will proceed in the calm, lucid and
objective manner which should characterize the Council in
its role of maintaining international peace and security in
the interests of the freedom and independence of the
peoples of our world.

14. The aim of the aggressorswas, then, clear: they wished
to immobilize the People’s Armed Forces and place the city
of Cotonou under military occupation as a first stage. It is
easy enough to guess their objective during the next stage.

6. Before going on to the subject before us, I should like
to discharge two very pleasant duties.
7. First, I wish to express to my colleague from the Soviet
Union, Comrade Ambassador Troyanovky, the full admiration of my delegation for the very responsible manner in
which he conducted the work of the Council during the
month of January.

15. As a result of this senselesstreacherous attack severe
damage was inflicted upon our airport, the television
building, the Hall of Congress, the Hotel Croix du Sud, the
new Embassy of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, the
Conseil de l’entente buildings, the new Treasury building,
the Palace of the Presidency of the Republic, 40 housing
units and the building of the Benin Office of Social
Security.

8. Secondly, I should like to ask the United States
delegation to be kind enough to convey to our brother and
friend Ambassador Andrew Young the warmest congratulations of the People’s Republic of Benin on his appolntmerit to this important post. His nomination is a symbol, a
sign of the times. It is a sign of the significant changes
taking place in this great and beautiful country, the United
States. President Jimmy Carter said of his inauguration that
it marked a new starting-point and a new spirit. My
delegation hnpes that that desire will each day be manifested in new deeds at a time when the struggle for the
liberation of Africa from racist oppression and apartheid is
reaching a decisive stage. While we wish Ambassador Young
every success,we cannot forget his distinguished predecessor, Governor Scranton, whose honesty, frankness, forthrightness and senseof fair play we very much admired in his
work in the Council and elsewhere at the United Nations,

16. Our country, the People’s Republic of Benin, was the
victim of a carefully prepared and executed act of
aggression by well trained persons equipped with ultramodern war mat&k-l. The weapons and equipment
abandoned by the gang of mercenaries, who were beaten
back, were extremely sophisticated. I shall read the list to
the Council. It is long, but I shall read it to the end.
17. There were 1,256 9 mm cartridges with regular bullets,
PA-PM, Lot No. 23-4-SFM75, of French origin; 405
NATO-type 9 mm cartridges with regular bullets, of
Belgian origin; 33,668 NATO-type 7.62 mm cartridges with
regular bullets, of Belgian origin; 10,230 NATO-type
7.62 mm cartridges on detachable magna-metal belts
(1 tracer and 4 regular bullets) of Belgian origin; 3,000
7.62 mm cartridges on detachable magno-metal belts
(1 tracer and 9 regular bullets) with Arabic markings; 1,875
12.7 mm cartridges on detachable magno-metal belts
(1 tracer and 4 regular bullets), of Belgian origin; 6 offensive hand grenades, D-37, Lot No. SPA 38-60, of French
origin; 5 fuses for offensive explosive hand grenades, Lot
No. 42 RYN 60; 7 explosive hand grenades, D-37, Lot No.
4-EB-59, of French origin; 4 explosive hand grenades, D-37,
Lot No. 6-TYN-58, of French origin; 1 explosive hand
grenade, D-37, Lot No. 4-TNP-60, of French origin; 5 fuses
for hand grenades, D-37, Lot No. 5-EB-59, of French
origin; 4 fuses for explosive hand grenades, D-37, Lot No.
114 RYN-58, of French origin; 53 40 mm explosive rifle
grenades, APAV, Lot No. 2-MPA-77, 4 of which were
destroyed, of Belgian origin; 10 offensive-defensive hand
grenades, M2, with fuses, M-204 AI, Lot No. I MI-6-71, of
American origin; 18 explosive shells, 81 mm, FA-32 5
BT 36, Lot No. 32, of French origin; 20 propellant
cartridges for 81 mm shelb, I...& No. 44CF-51, of French
origin; 20 fuses, DP 24/31 RYG 18, for 81 mm shells, Lot
NO. 9 ATS-62, 1 of which was destroyed, of French origin;
64 relays for 81 mm shells, Lot No. 122, CF-51, of French
origin; 11 81 mm smoke shells, complete, with fuses, Lot
NO. 211-71, (fuse, Lot No. 441.76), of British or American
origin; 5 explosive 81 mm shells, complete, with fuses, Lot

9. My detegation sincerely thanks the members of the
Council for being kind enough to recognize the gravity of
the situation and accept Benin’s request for the convening,
as a matter of urgency, of a meeting of this important body
of the United Nations to consider in a clear and objective
atmosphere all the details of the complaint put forward by
the People’s Republic of Benin.
10. The question before the Council, the act of aggression
of imperialism and its mercenaries against the People’s
Republic of Benin, is nothing less than the obstinate and
continued dangerously unjust refusal of the colonialists and
neo-colonialist imperialist Powers of our world to allow
small countries like mine and peace-loving peoples of the
third world such as mine to live and prosper in peace,
security, freedom, independence and national sovereignty.
11. These are the facts.
12. On Sunday, 16 January 1977, at 7,03 a.m., a pirate
DC-7 aircraft, curiously equipped with turbo jets, landed at
the airport at Cotonou, our economic capital. It had on
board a gang of mercenaries.
13. As soon as they disembarked, those mercenaries
ruthlessly attacked the airport with automatic weapons and
2

has the necessary financial means to organize and perpetrate an infamous aggression on such a large scale.

No. 211-71 (fuse, Lot No. 441-76), of British or American
origin; 4 65 mm AC explosive rifle grenades, with Arabic
markings, 2 of which were destroyed; 32 66 mm AC
explosive rockets, M-72-A-2, Lot No. LS 220-R-8-74,26 of
which were destroyed, of American origin; 12 89 mm AC
explosive rockets, BM-66, Lot No. l-73, 1 of which was
destroyed, of Spanish origin. Other objects were found:
wine, Moroccan, French and American cigarettes and some
dates.

23. Moreover, members of the Council will agree with me
that, even in countries where arms are freely sold, it is not
possible to acquire such sophisticated weapons of war
without any restriction. The Council will agree also that,
even in those countries where air transportation is the least
developed, no aircraft, let alone a military aircraft, could
operate so easily without the competent authorities of the
country concerned knowing about it. That is to say that
this kind of operation, if it is not carried on openly, is of
necessity supported by accomplices.

18. On 1 February, the people of Benin, still in mourning,
paid a solemn and heartfelt national tribute to all its
martyrs who had fallen nobly on the field of honour, killed
by the bullets of the gang of criminal mercenaries who,
slavishly and blindly obeying their dastardly imperialist
masters, in a cowardly and treacherous manner carried out
armed aggression against our country, the People’s Republic
of Benin, against our peacefully militant people and against
our people’s democratic revolution.

24. The statements of the reactionary and imperialist
press, which is spreading lies about the events which took
place on Sunday, 16 January 1977, are ridiculous and not
based on an objective analysis of the facts. This far-reaching
campaign to distort the truth and disseminate gross and
stupid lies about Benin, a campaign of which 7?he New
York Times and Le Monde are the instruments and the
champions, is part of the strategy of which the proimperialist circles of the press are past masters, a strategy
aimed at sowing confusion and covering up the humiliations, the intolerable pressure and the acts of sabotage and
aggression of which the progressive countries of the third
world are the intended victims. It is by that adroitly
orchestrated press campaign that those who exploit us try
to cover up their crimes and set their conscience at rest.
They try to pass off an aggression from abroad, organized
and carried out by them, as an internal struggle in the
People’s Republic of Benin. In sum, the masters of
international blackmail, the professional poisoners of public
opinion and unscrupulous liars have set their propaganda
machinery noisily in motion in order to have falsehood
accepted as truth, darkness as light, foreign aggression and
the crime of mercenaries as internal clashes in the People’s
Republic of Benin.

19. Those mercenaries-downright criminals-had a decisive encounter with the first units of our People’s Armed
Forces, which immediately launched an intense and sustained counter-attack. Thus, after approximately three
hours of fierce fighting, the vile hired killers, who had
thought to surprise the vigilance of our People’s Armed
Forces and of our militant people, were halted in their
progress and, being repulsed, beat a hasty retreat which
quiclcly turned into a rout. In a helter-skelter stampede
characterized by general disorder and an attitude of “every
man for himselF’, those blood-thirsty agents abandoned in
the field a considerable quantity of war matd’iel, arms and
munitions, to which I have just referred, as well as very
important and particularly telling documents. Their pirate
aircraft had to take off very rapidly, leaving behind quite a
number of mercenaries, who were heavily drugged and out
of their minds, as well as the bodies of their accomplices
which they could not take with them.
20. This ignoble aggression caused more than material
damage; it cost our country, the People’s Republic of
Benin, the lives of many of our true sons both civilians and
soldiers, not to speak of the wounded at present being
treated in our hospitals.

25. The repulsive authors of this barbarous act of aggression, those who organized this mass killing, this airborne
expedition of war, are primarily the imperialist, colonialist
and neo-colonialist Powers and, secondarily, financial
circles, international reactionary and conservative circles
and the international capitalist bourgeoisie.

21. Here we should ask ourselves a series of questions
which the Security Council and the international community will have to help us to answerin order to shed light
on all the facts. What group of citizens of Benin could, even
by combining their resources, afford the luxury of acquiring an aircraft, such sophisticated weaponry, so much
ammunition and so many well-paid mercenaries? In what
country and in what market are such sophisticated weapons
of war publicly sold to the first buyer? What citizens of
Benin, traitors to the sacred cause of our democratic and
popular revolution, have airfields at their disposal from
which a DC-7 aircraft could take off without any prior
formalities?

26. Al1 these enemies of the progress of the peoples of the
third world are highly organized and supported by various
secret services and mass media. By resorting to all kinds of
blackmail, pressure and mass killings, they aim primarily to
prevent the countries of Africa, Latin America and Asia
from freely enjoying their sovereignty and their independence and from opting for a socio-political system of their
own choice.
27. My country comes before the Council as an accuser
and not as the accused. The people of Benin accuses those
Powers and those circles and holds them responsible for the
savagekillings perpetrated by their mercenaries, who were
first well trained, then drugged, transformed into mad
hunting dogs and hurled at a peaceful city, Cotonou, the
economic capital of the People’s Republic of Benin.

22. It is up to the Council clearly and objectively to find
adequate answersto these questions. As far as the people of
Benin, the victims of aggression, are concerned, they have
not been taken in and know perfectly well what to make of
it. The people of Benin are convinced that no man, no
group of traitors to the sacred causeof the people of Benin

28. As I said before, in their haste, the mercenaries left
behind certain important and telling documents. On the
3

_- ----.---..

basis of those documents we can say that the mercenaries,
for the most part whites, were recruited and trained by the
secret services of powerful financial circles. The sophisticated military equipment was given by those powerful
financial circles to the gang of mercenaries who carried out
the barbaric act of aggression which took place on Sunday,
16 January 1977. The war plane which transported the
gang of mercenaries belonged to those financial circles.

strength of our people. That is why they did not expect the
devastating response of the People’s Armed Forces and of
all the people of Benin, mobilized and organized by the
Party in the vanguard, the Party of the People’s Revolution
of Benin.
32. The people of Benin, on the basis of the actual
condition of our country, resolutely and in an independent
and responsible manner chose the path of scientific
socialism for its development. That option is one which was
taken by the people of Benin in the exercise of its sacred
and inalienable right to self-determination, independence
and sovereignty, which the United Nations recognizes asthe
ri&t of all nations and peoples.

29. On the basis of these overwhelming facts and on the
basis of this tangible and irrefutable proof, it is easy enough
to conclude that this is a case of foreign aggression directed
against our people and its democrntic and popular revolution, This is clearly a case of a plan hatched by the
colonialists to win back our country. It is obviously a case
of an attempt to unseat the revolutionary regime of the
People’s Republic of Benin. It is a plot against the
progressive rigimes of the third world. This is borne out by
the testimony of accredited diplomatic representatives in
our country, the People’s Republic of Benin.

33, Despite the barbaric nature of colonial aggression,the
peopleof Benin will always remember that during the two
world wars, from 1914 to 1918 and from 1939 to 1945,
when differences among the imperialist Powers had been
exacerbated to the point where they endangered world
peace and the freedom and independence of the countries
and peoples of the world, primarily those of Europe,
without any hesitation they-the people of Benin-made
great human and material sacrifices to guarantee the
territorial integrity, independence and sovereignty of those
very Powers that today stubbornly refuse to recognize the
right of our country and our hard-working and peaceful
people to freedom, dignity, independence and sovereignty-in brief, the right to development on the basis of a
socioeconomic system of their choice. We shall never
forget the immortal martyrs of Benin and of Africa who
voluntarily laid down their lives for the freedom of Europe
and who are resting in the cemeteries of France, Germany,
Italy and other countries.

30. The French Ambassador at Cotonou stated:
“There can be no doubt in the minds of any of those
who witnessed that aggression that it was an act of
aggression conducted by a group of experienced mercenaries and was clearly an attack mounted from outside
the country,”
The Ambassador of Zaire at Cotonou stated:
“As an African, and especially as a citizen of Zaire, I
say that for those of us who remember the mercenary
activity of the period 1960 to 1967, this is an abominable
action. We were invaded several times by mercenaries,
whites and blacks, we know what they are capable of, and
I can say that in this case Zaire is with Benin.”

34. Our immortal martyrs of the two world wars were
imbued with the idea that, by making the supreme sacrifice
of their lives to safeguard the independence and freedom of
Europe, they were affirming the inalienable right of all the
peoples of the world and, more particularly, the right of the
people of Benin, to independence, freedom, sovereignty
and progress.

The Ambassador of the Federal Republic of Germany at
Cotonou stated:
“We are against using force in any form in international
relations, I should like to stress that fact in the light of
the events which have just taken place here at Cotonou.”
The Ambassador of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea at Cotonou stated:

35. Why then did those bloodthirsty European mercenaries, those international outlaws, who were recruited and
armed by imperialism, who have no love or allegiance but
to money and mass crime, commit aggression against us on
16 January 19771 What crime had been committed by the
people of Benin and its democratic and popular revolution
between 26 October 1972 and 16 January 1977?

“We saw with our own eyes the mercenaries marching
from the airport towards the Presidential Palace of the
Republic. That ignominious act of aggression must be
condemned by the whole world.”
The Ambassador of the Arab Republic of Egypt stated:

36. The people of Benin had committed no crime. The
people of Benin had committed no aggression against any
nation or any State. The people of Benin had offended no
one and had been conducting its internal revolution against
no other country. The people of Benin is a peace.lovlng
people which does not have an aggressivearmy that can be
used outside its national territory, The people of Benin
does not interfere in the internal affairs of other States. The
people of Benin, ever since the historic date of 26 October
1972, has endeavoured to establish and develop friendly
relations and mutually advantageous co-operation with all
the countries of the world without distinction.

“I cannot find words to denounce that ignoble
attack . . . . Employing mercenaries is a shameful and
disgraceful act.”
My delegation is making availabIe to each member of the
Council an album containing photos which will give
members an idea of that act of aggression committed
against Benin.
31. But the imperialists, all reactionaries, conservative
elements and powerful financial circles underestimated the
4

37. In Africa, the people of Benin is committed to
fraternal co-operation as established by the Organization of
African Unity. In the West African area, bearing in mind
the interests of other States, the people of Benin has
remained in the Conseil de I’Entente, the members of which
are Benin, the Ivory Coast, Upper Volta, Niger and Togo.
Again, in the interests of subregional co-operation, the
people of Benin originated the process of reforging the
goals and objectives of OCAM [African, Malagasy and
Mauritian Common Organlzation] , the present members of
which are Senegal, the Central African Empire and the Me
countries of the Conseil de Z’Entente I have just mentioned.
The people of Benin co-operate with all French-speaking
countries in Africa that are part of the same
monetary zone, that of the franc. The people of Benin are
proud to have been among the promoters of the new
Economic Community of West African States. This is a
dynamic community without linguistic barriers which
brings together 16 countries of the West African region. In
spite of the vicissitudes of a still recent colonial past, the
people of Benin are devoted to the development and
strengthening of their relations with France.
38. At the national level, since 26 October 1972, the
people of Benin have made significant progress towards
building an independent and prosperous economy. Even the
reactionary newspapers acknowledge that fact. The entire
people of Benin is now committed to a national production
campaign.

43. The douncil is meeting this evening at short notice to
consider, at the request of Benin, yet another complaint
regarding an attempt to interfere in the domestic affairs of
a sovereign and independent State and-what is in this case
more serious-an actual act of armed aggressionagainst the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of a State Member of’
the Council.
44. I have listened very attentively to the statement of my
beloved African brother, the representative of Benin. We
are now all aware that an attack by foreign and unidentified
mercenaries of different colours took place at Cotonou on
the morning of 16 January. Nobody has yet denied the fact
that, first,. a jet-propelled DC-7, armed to the teeth with
sophisticated modern lethal weaponsand carrying between
100 and 150 international mercenarieswearing paratrooper
uniforms; landed at Cotonou, secondly, that the mercenaries fired on the Presidential palace, military installations,
strategic points, including communication centres, and so
forth,. causing extensive material damage and, thirdly, that
no less than six citizens of Benin werekilled.
45; We cannot but admire and congratulate the President
and Government of Benin and the Beninese army and
people who valiantly defended their territory against this
unwarranted and unprovoked barbaric act and who effectively repulsed the facelessenemies of peaceuntil they left,
dragging their corpseswith them.
46. This attack against the sovereignty and integrity of
Benin is an attack against the whole of Africa. It is Benin
today; it could be Mauritius tomorrow. Indeed, this is not
the first time that such an act of aggressionhas taken place
in Africa. It happened in November 1970, wtien armed
bandits, international mercenaries, with the help of the
then .Portuguese colonial army, invaded the Republic of
Guinea. Recentlyr the territorial integrity of Uganda was
violated by Israel. How long and how often are we going to
allow such tecldess acts to continue?

39. Benin is a peace-loving and hospitable country that is
anxious to achieve development through the hard work of
its people. It wishes, first and foremost, to rely on its own
strength and on the creative drives of the hard.working
massesof its countryside and towns.
40. The people of Benin demands that light be shed on the
aggression of which it was the victim on Sunday, 16
January 1977. The people of Benin wishes the Security
Council to dispatch a special mission to Cotonou in order
to ascertain the facts in a clearer and more objective
manner, to determine who was responsible for and who
carried out the armed aggression and to help the People’s
Republic of Benin assessthe damage caused. During a
second stage, appropriate action should be taken so as to
repair material damage and to prevent a recurrence of such
barbaric acts of aggression by mercenaries in the pay of
foreign domination.

47. I believe that the Council must act and act quickly and
with foresight. It will perhaps be argued by some that the
Council cannot act unlessthe enemy or enemiesof Benin in
the present circumstances is or are identified. In this
connexion, I should like to point out that the President of
Benin has already informed the international community
inch&g-through
the representative of Ber$n-the Security Council, that the enemies were international merce.
naries. I do admit, however, that no proper identificatron
has so far taken place. In fact, we cannot expect Benin to
point with precision, at those who committed aggression
against it. It is for this reason, if for no other, that I believe
that the Council should act immediately and come to the
help of Benin by assisting it to pinpoint responsibility for
this barbarous and illegal act committed by the dark faces
of evil in such a way asto unmask them, 1 suggestthat one
way that the Council can help to maintain peace and
‘security in Benin and in Africa and, indeed, international
peace and security, is to dispatch a special fact.finding
mission to Benin. After that mission has reported to the
Council, we shall be in a better position ‘to give fuller
consideration to the complaint, to assign responsibility, to
condemn the aggressors who will, 1 hope, have been
ideritifled by the mission, and to take any other necessary
action.,
_ ‘.

41. In conclusion, I should like to state in no uncertain
terms that it must be clear in everyone’s mind that our
people has chosen scientific socialism as the path of
development and Marxism-Leninism as its philosophic
guide. That is an irreversible option and the people of Benin
will fight to defend it. They will make the supreme
sacrifice. They will fight to the death of the last of their
patriotic sons. No pressure, no blackmail,’ no act of
aggression from whatever source can make us change our
minds.
42. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): Mr. President, I miss
Comrade Troyanovsky in the Chair but I am very happy to
see YOU occupying it in the absence of Mr. Ivor Richard.
You may count on my co-operation.
.,
‘5

48. I believe that we all agree that a de fncfo aggression
has taken place at Cotonou. It is now up to us to do our
best to identify the aggressors.The aeroplane that landed at
Cotonou did not come from or return to outer space. It is
for this reason that the African members of the Security
Council, namely, Benin, the Libyan Arab Republic and
Mauritius, have decided to contribute to the work of this
Council by submitting a draft resolution, which I now have
the pleasure of introducing orally so as to allow members of
the Council plenty of time in which to consider it:

revert to them. As we have heard them, those facts are
striking, and they shocked us deeply. The territorial
integrity and the sovereignty of the People’s Republic of
Benin have been violated and; what is most serious, this was
done by mercenary forces. The use of mercenaries has been
strongly condemned by international public opinion, particularly in Africa, and I should like it once again to be
vigorously condemned by the entire international community, otherwise the efforts of our Organization will be
completely negated.

[The speaker read the draft resolution which was subsequently circulated as document S/12282.]

56. What we are asking of the Council in this particular
case is that it use the powers conferred upon it by the
Charter to clarify this situation that is so dangerous, not
only for the peace and security of the State Member, Benin,
which is the victim, but also for those of the entire African
continent. The dispatch of a mission of inquiry is essential.

49. This is a most uncontroversial draft, and I believe it
represents the least that the Security Council can do at this
stage. I hope it will be adopted unanimously. It is based on
a previous draft prepared on a similar occasion, namely,
when the Republic of Guinea wasattacked.

57, It is clear that this attack was intended first and
foremost to topple the established institutions in Benin by
sowing disorder and panic among the population in the
name of a criminal, imperialist ideology. Unfortunately, it
is the resultant deaths and incalculable damage that we have
to deplore today, and Africa is deeply saddened thereby.

50. I washoping that it would be possible for members to
adopt this draft resolution this evening, but I understand
there are several representatives who are listed to speak, and
some members may wish to receive instructions from their
respective Governments. I understand the situation, and I
reserve my right, Mr. President, if you would allow me, to
speak again at a later stage.

58. Allow me here to share with you a few general
thoughts. I should like to recall that the Council has had
before it more than one case of aggression or attack against
an independent African State. This is becoming very
disturbing, because it means that Africa is still the first
target of the dark designs of imperialism. Is it because it
refuses certain ideological alliances and political allegiances? Is it because Africa is without any protection or
military capacity of its own?

51. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Rwanda, whom I invite to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
52. Mr. KARUHIJE
(Rwanda) (interpretation
from
French): Mr. President, before taking up the matter which
is before the Council at the present time, I should like to
express my gratitude to you and to all members of the
Council for having given me an opportunity to expresshere
my solidarity and that of the entire African Group with the
fraternal people of Benin.

59. Today, imperialism is taking on more subtle and
sophisticated forms, but it still has the same constant
feature: the domination of the weak by the strong, with all
the consequent humiliations for the former. The methods
have not changed: within a State, imperialism tries to sow
rivalries in the form of nationalism and conflicting ideologies. But, fortunately, States are alert to this. Benin has
just demonstrated this by its act of heroism, for which it
deserves praise, in preserving its aspirations for freedom
from servitude. It is to be regretted that small States
necessarily become the object of imperialist designs and are
easily subjected to political and economic domination. But
it is very dangerous to believe that even within a small State
those in authority have the truth. Be it an individual or a
collective institution, if it tries to impose its own truth on
others, it becomes responsible for a fatal division and
thereby shows itself to be imperialistic.

53. I hope you will also allow me to address to you my
sincerest congratulations aud best wishes for successin your
duties as President of the Council. We are aware that the
country which you represent-the United Kingdom-as well
as your own personal qualities, are the best possible
guarantee of the way in which you will conduct our work. I
am particularly pleased to addressmy good wishes to you,
since my country has not forgotten your time in Rwanda as
the first Ambassador of the United Kingdom and I must say
that your memory is still alive there.
54. I wish also to congratulate your predecessor, the
President of the Security Council for the month of January,
for the excellent work which he accomplished. During his
presidency African problems were before the Council and
today, once again, we are dealing with an African issue.

60. I have often heard it said, and I have also read this in
the press, that Benin is a small country, a poor country,
with many problems. That is perhaps true. But that is no
reason for it to have imposed upon it institutions or any
kind of domination. Its Government possesses a deeprooted and constant revolutionary spirit and has established
for itself a far-reaching goal, and a limitless task, namely, to
build a State, to construct a society, to encourage a nation,
and this in a spirit of discipline. Anyone who impedes that
progress in the guise of liberation is only manifesting
imperialist designs.

55. The complaint which the Council has before it today
from the People’s Republic of Benin is fully justified and
we endorse it on behalf of the Group of African countries.
The People’s Republic of Benin wasattacked on 16 January
last by real armed forces, albeit of unknown origin. The
facts are there; they have been described lucidly and in
detail by the representative of Benin and there is no need to
6

61. Mr. President, like the other members of the Council,
you are aware that everyone is against imperialism. But,
since this is often a matter of empty words, imperialism has
not disappeared from the face of the earth. Today it is
camouflaged by subtle language which makes not for law
but rather for the reign of hypocrisy,

“The Malagasy people, its Supreme Council of the
Revolution, its Government and I myself thus address
both to you and to the valiant people of Benin our
warmest congratulations on your brilliant victory YOU
have scored over the mercenaries who invaded your
country and we offer you the militant support of the
Malagasy revolution.”

62. The Council, which is the protector of the principles
of the Organization, must remove all disguisesbehind which
imperialism appears these days, and it must energetically
condemn its acts. Indeed the tragedies of the past and those
we are now experiencing should prompt us to look far
beyond that, for the sake of protecting the very existence
of the Organization. Such as we are, we should be fully
aware and convinced of our potential unification which will
probably be transformed into unity, although today we are
still tragically divided. At all events, the Organization offers
us the prospect of a peaceful life without slavery, without
exploitation and without domination of the weak by the
strong.

67. My delegation is gratified to note that, despite certain
tergiversations and manoeuvres, arising in part from a literal
or restrictive interpretation of custom or procedure, in its
collective wisdom the Security Council is able to meet to
consider the complaint of the People’s Republic of Benin
following the aggression to which it fell victim on 16
January last. For us this is a meeting of particular
importance because, in holding it, the Council has already
decided on two points which have in recent weeks so
concerned a part of the press whose impartiality towards
the third world is not strikingly obvious.

63. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of
Rwanda for the kind words he addressed to me. I was
particularly pleased that he should have referred to my stay
in his country. I retain the most agreeable memories of the
years I spent as the first British Ambassador to his very
beautiful country and I hope that he will convey my best
wishesto my many friends there.

68. In effect, by acceding to the request in document
S/12278, the Council has recognized the admissibility of
the complaint of Benin. Secondly, it has affirmed its own
competence as described in Article 39 of the Charter.
Furthermore, it has established the validity of the complaint, since by submitting it to the Council, Benin was
only abiding by the stipulations of the General Assembly
resolution on the definition of aggression [Ml4 (XXIX)].

64. The next speaker is the representative of Madagascar. 1
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
a statement.

69. It is not customary for us to take refuge in so many
formal and formalistic precautions, but the development of
the situation and the comments made by those who wish to
interpret it according to a viewpoint distorted by prejudice
make it necessary for us here to take up the challenge that
has been issued elsewhere.

65. Mr. RABETAFIKA (Madagascar) (interpretation from
Mr. President, about 15 yearsago it wasdiscreetly
suggested to representatives of States not members of the
Security Council that they refrain from congratulating the
President, 1 do not know whether that was in any way
related to the existence of consecutive interpretation, a
provision of the Charter or any article of the provisional
rules of procedure, However, it remains true that silence on
my part in this connexion might well be construed as
reflecting the existence of some uneasinesseither in our
personal relations or in those between our two countries. I
can assure you that that would be absolutely wrong, and I
hasten to hope that you will bring to this difficult debate
your customary sense of justice and morality to which I
should like to pay a warm tribute.

Fret&‘):

70. Some doubt has been cast on the good faith of a
Member State, as if the gravity of an act can be gauged by
the degree of sympathy its victim enjoys in certain circles.
Hypotheses have been put forward, each more slanderous
than the other, in order to submerge the actual facts under
a flood of proofs that are largely imaginary.
71. It has been stated that there could have been no
aggression because the aggressorhas not been identified, or
that it is not a matter of international law-as though we
could believe that a crime ceases to be a crime simply
because there is no known perpetrator, or because the
crime is simply not within the competence of a local court.

66. To justify our participation in the Council’s work-a
result of the permission given us by the members of the
Council and for which, through you, Mr. President, we
should like to thank them-and so that the Council may be
able to measure the degree of commitment of my CountrY
to the cause of Benin, I should like first to read out a
messagemy President, His Excellency Mr. Didier Ratsiraka,
addressed to the President of the Republic of Benin on
17 January:

72. Some have even had the effrontery to say that since
other African countries seem to be implicated-and I stress
the word “seem”-it
is up to Benin to turn to the
Organization of African Unity. I wonder what would be the
reaction of some Members of the United Nations which are
so wedded to defending the principles enunciated in the
Charter if they were asked to take their concerns to their
own regional organizations and not to bother the United
Nations with them.

“The odious aggression perpetrated by international
imperialism and its lackeys against the revolution of
Benin gives me a further opportunity to call upon
progressive and revolutionary countries in Africa and
elsewhere to be vigilant and to be united in their action.

73. Those are some of the aberrant and cynical arguments
which have been thrust upon us and which, unfortunately,
have found some echo within the Organisation. It was
therefore our bounden duty to insist from the very outset
7

on a decision being taken by the Security Council regarding
the admissibility and the validity of the complaint of Benin,
in order to avoid any misunderstanding, to refute in
advance any interpretation not based on the facts and to
cut short any pseudo-legal quibbles.

82. Thus, by way of example, it appears that the
recruiting of mercenaries is legal in a number of countries,
and, formally speaking, a Government of a country of
which these mercenaries are citizens may always officially
ignore or overlook the recruiting which is carried out on its
territory or even authorize it and promote it, since the law
does not say otherwise. This is the culmination of Pharisalsm.

74. My delegation will not repeat the facts which have
been presented soberly, strictly and with feeling by the
representative of the People’s Republic of Benin. Some
would perhaps have preferred an account as neutral as a
police report in order to get an objective view of the
situation. But the Security Council is not simply a court of
law; it is above all a political body whose main concern is to
maintain international peace and security,

83. But we are all aware that, with one or two exceptions,
the time is now past when regular mercenary armies could
be set up; we are also all aware that these mercenaries are in
the pay of international Interests and finally, we are all
aware that Governments or special government services are
identified with these interests to such an extent that it
could be said that war is no longer waged directly or
through client nations but through the intermediary of
mercenaries. Powers tend to acquiesce in this situation,
which shows the intolerable degeneration of international
morality, particularly since they can shirk their responsibilities, thus, for their own purposes, blocking the intemational machinery for intervention in the caseof aggression.

75. However, there will be neither international peace nor
international security as long as a single Member of this
Organization feels that its sovereignty, its independence and
its territorial integrity are threatened, either directly or
indirectly, and that it cannot fully rely on the guarantees of
the Charter and on their automatic nature.
76. There will be neither international peace nor international security as long as any region seeks to submit another
region to some sort of diktaf, organized for the protection
of obsolete interests and acquiescing in extravagance and
dubious justifications, in contempt of mutual respect and
non-intervention,

84. Determining the existence of an act of aggression
would be reduced to a routine formality, particularly in the
present case where there is already a commission of inquiry
made up of Benin, Guinea and Nigeria, were it not coupled
with the assignment of individual and collective responsibility, particularly in the light of the Charter. This
procedure, which does not set a precedent since it has been
frequently applied by United Nations commissions of
inquiry, will make it possible for the Council to discharge
its functions under the best possible conditions.

77. There will be neither international peace nor international security as long as we are not prepared to assume the
collective commitment to which we subscribed in the
Charter, to repulse aggression in whatever form it appears
and wherever it comes from, as well as to come to the aid
of the victim of aggression, irrespective of any ideological
consideration.

85. At this stage my delegation does not intend to
elaborate on the question of responsibility. It will have an
opportunity to do so subsequently. However, we wish to
reject out of hand the idea that there can be no
international responsibility simply because mercenaries are
the principal guilty parties in the aggression against Benin.
In the same way, we must say that the violation of the
territorial integrity of Benin, the intervention of foreign
interests in the domestic policies of that country and the
refusal to recognize its sovereign choice in socio-economic
and ideological matters prompt us to place the main
responsibility at the door of international imperialism,

78. There will be neither international peace nor intemational security as long as the principle of the sovereign
equality of States remains a dead letter and as long as
international reaction continues to deny the evident fact
that every State is entitled to choose its socio-economic
system and is free to be unmoved by certain types of
retrograde proselytism.
79. There will be neither international peace nor international security as long as some people believe that the
interdependence which today’s world calls for can be
manipulated and used in order to promote the establishment of new relations based on dependence, exploitation
and domination.

86. This position is by no means something which derives
from a mere formality. It is justified by an objective
analysis of what is happening and of the plotting that has
been going on for several years from the Congo to Somalia,
from Angola to Mozambique and Madagascar, from Guinea
and Benin to Uganda, to cite but a few African countries,
and not to mention the lamentable expedition of the Bay
of Pigs. The conspiracy is growing, gaining ramifications
and becoming more sophisticated; it is perfectly normal
that, in the face of this force growing alongside it, the
Organization should affirm its authority, if we do not want
an international society which lags behind the times and is
sometimes without faith or law.

80. Finally, there will be neither international peace nor
international security as long as it is felt that the group of
revolutionary countries is the target of a particular ideology
and that it therefore has to be saved despite itself by all
possible means, including force.
81. What I have just said is not designed to distract the
Council from the main topic under consideration: the
aggression against Benin. Indeed, my delegation feels that
that aggression might not have taken place had we been as
zealous in asking for the application of international law as
in conforming to international morality,

87, Benin, which is a peaceful country and which has no
conflict with riparian States or States of the region, has
addressed ‘itself to the Security Council to right a wrong
8

done to it and to ask that measures be taken against the
direct or indirect perpetrators of flagrant and out-and-out
aggression. It could have succeeded by itself, as has already
been shown, or with the assistanceof fraternal and friendly
countries, in overcoming the difficulties entailed in a
situation where militant readiness must prevail over submission and defeatism. But it decided, since it was sure of its
rights, to choose the sometimes perilous path of recourse to
international judgement, because its case is not an isolated
one and, essentially, consists of trying to bar the road to
reaction, that reaction which continually manages to profit
from the ambiguous interplay of law and morality, the
limits of the power of intervention of the Organization and
the compromises to which we agree in trying to save the
established order.

Guinea is well aware of your heavy responsibilities at a tirno
when Mr. lvor Richard is doing his utmost to reach a
negotiated settlement of the situation in Zimbabwe. A few
days ago your people joyfully celebrated the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the accession to the throne of Her Majes*Y
Queen Elizabeth. My delegation wishes to associate itself
with those that presented their compliments on that
occasion.
93. We are pleased that the Security Council has convened
to consider the complaint of the, Government of Benin. Wo
cannot ..deal with the. heart of the. matter without .reforrirV
to the message /see S/12281] addressed to you by His
Excellency Mr. Ahmed St!kou Tour&, President of *ho
Republic of Guinea, with the purpose of helping to ensure
that no manoeuvres would be used to obstruct our work.
The Secretary-General wasgood enough in his reply to state
that he personally would follow the implementation
of the
suggestions made by my head of State, in order that the
present meeting may help to bring about a just settlement
for the people of Benin, victims of a cowardly act of
aggression on.16 January
-.-.. ‘. .. 1977.
.,

88. The Security Council is at the service of all the
Members of the Organization, at the service of ideals which
we find in the Charter, at the service also-and we must not
forget it-of all those initiatives by which we try to bring
closer the realization of those ideals. I already brought out
the fact that my delegation could not subscribe to the
Security Council’s engaging in a routine operation in this
case. Benin could have simply transmitted to the Security
Council a thorough and documented file on the matter so
that the Council could weigh the evidence. The immediate
situation in Benin could thus formally have been solved,
although we are highly suspicious of the determination of
some Member States to carry out the recommendations of
the Council in this regard.

94. On that day at daybreak an unidentified
plane
crash-landed at the airport of Cotonou. -As the rules of
international civil aviation require, our brothers at the
airport swiftly went to the assistance of the aircraft which
they thought was truly in distress. There are no words to
describe their surprise when they were met by passengers
armed to the teeth who were none other than mercenaries
under the influence of drugs who were in Benin solely to
sow death and destruction. Their goal, which is typical in
such cases,was to occupy the strategic points in the capital,
and first and foremost the Presidential Palace of the
Republic, where there was bloody fighting for more- than
two hours.

89. It follows that steps are necessary, steps which must
take account of the actual precepts of the Charter but
which must particularly take account of the aggressiveacts
to which some of our States are systematically exposed,
steps which will put an end to the impunity apparently
enjoyed by those who, under the guise of juridical
formalism, pursue the most heinous and reprehensible
designs on the international scene, steps which, finally, will
give their real meaning to the principles of mutual respect,
non-intervention and sovereign equality.

95. In an admirable upsurge of patriotism, the people and
the armed forces of Benin, to whom we pay a heart-felt
tribute, beat back the invaders, who, after they were to put
to rout, left behind military materiel and some of their
gang, who will surely reveal the whole truth about their
heinous deeds.

90. At all costs, the Security Council must sooner or later
take political decisions on military and other forms of
aggression, on the recruitment and training of mercenaries
and on the international responsibility of States in this
respect. Otherwise, Benin and other countries like ours will
know how to draw the necessaryconclusions by strengthening international solidarity, by staging a last-ditch resistance
against all that we consider to be contrary to. the full
exercise of our sovereignty and, by reaffirming our own
responsibility, create a society which is more truly guided
by justice and morality.

96. The revolutionary people of Guinea, thanks to the
ideology of the Party, is well aware of the meaning
of
counter-revolution. It knows about its objectives and its
methods and that is why it would not be surprised to learn
from specific facts that counter-revolution does exist, In
fact there are two types of counter-revolution. The first
type represents a shrewd approach; it is always better
organized and is clandestine. The counter-revolutionaries
appeal to the people as though
they were defending their
interests, but since their words do not correspond to their
deeds, there is an imbalance and this type of counterrevolution is inevitably doomed to failure. The second type
of counter-revolution is different and contains the seeds of
its own destruction. In the Republic of Guinea we can say
that we are familiar with counter-revolution and we are
even more familiar with it today, because we are dotermined to continue the revolutionary offensive so as to bring
about radical changes in the living standards of our people,
and nothing wiil prevent us from carrying out that mission.
We want that to be clear to everyone.

91. The PRESIDENT: The next name on the list of
speakers is that of the representative of Guinea whom I
invite to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
92. Mr. DOUKOURE (Guinea) (interpretation from
fienchl: Mr, President, the delegation of the Republic of
Guinea is indeed honoured to extend to you its congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the Council.
9

.A

.i.

destruction. In the Republic of Guinea we can say that we
are familiar with counter-revolution and we are even more
familiar with it today, because we are determined to
continue the revolutionary offensive so as to bring about
radical changes in the living standards of our people, and
nothing will prevent us From carrying out that mission. We
want that to be clear to everyone.

101. The acts of aggression against Africa have been
occurring for some t-&e. They were introduced by the
explorers and the missionaries; they arrived with the trading
posts and all the trappings of the European adventurers
who came to our continent. At that time, Africa, faithful to
its traditional humanism, thought that those people were
honest men and sons of God. The results of those first
meetings showed up in the shameful trade of ebony, the
drowning of slaves who could not survive the crossing of
the Atlantic and the barbaric genocide to which Africa had
to say no. How many African bodies are at the bottom of
the seas which link the Caribbean with Africa? And how
many famous names may be found in the history of those
brave people who conducted such noble resistance against
colonialist penetration? Of those names I should like to
mention Samory Tour6 and King Behanzin of Abomey.
Those two men faced colonial aggression and fought to the
death to safeguard the values of Africa. Almamy Samory of
Guinea and King Behanzin of Benin would be proud of the
courageous resistance which the fraternal peoples of Benin
and Guinea continue to display to combat neo-colonialist
domination.

97. Our brothers in Benin, after a difficult struggle for
independence, finally, on 1 August 1972, set up their
people’s rBgime which decided once and for all to free the
country from colonialism and neo-colonialism. It discovered, as we had done in Guinea, that the number one
enemy of Africa was imperialism. Therefore it dismantled
the whole neo-colonialist structure which aimed at permitting the survival of a regime which allowed the exploitation
of man by man. That is why the act of aggression of 16
January, of which the fraternal people of Benin were the
victims, is understandable. It was a recurrence of what
happened on 22 November 1970 at Conakry, and was
aimed at overthrowing the people’s Government under the
enlightened leadership of Comrade President Mathieu
Kerekou.

102. The objectives of imperialism have not changed. It
would be a serious mistake, indeed, to believe that
yesterday’s enemies had changed their minds and been won
over to become today’s friends. The African peoples must
reconsider the problem of the security of our States,
especially since disreputable elements like Congo Muller,
Schramm, Steiner, Seibold and others continue in complete
freedom to recruit mercenaries in order to destroy the
achievements of our young nations.

98. The people of Guinea, in solidarity with the people of
Benin in these tragic circumstances, did not hesitate to
express their hatred of the mercenaries and their masters
and immediately dispatched a delegation to Cotonou. The
Government of the Republic of Guinea solemnly proclaimed that if there was a recurrence of aggression, the
army of Guinea would be at Cotonou with its brothers to
safeguard the overriding interests of Africa.

103, After hearing the list of equipment read out by the
representative of Benin, members of the Council, who are
distinguished men of education, will surely appreciate the
magnitude of the injustice committed against Africa. They
will surely agree with us that it is high time that the
aggression against our young countries was halted and that
serious action was taken to ensure that peaceful peoples,
which want only to improve their lives, are not subjected to
the constant threat of bandits in the pay of colonialism.

99. We have said and we have written that imperialism
recruits depraved Africans to commit aggression against our
countries. We have said and we have written that those men
without a country are trained, often in neighbouring
countries, where the regimes are bent on betraying our
continent and where they are provided with all the means
they need to commit murder. Only a few weeks ago the
voice of the revolution, the radio station of the Republic of
Guinea, issued a strong warning to the renegades who were
preparing to commit their foul deeds.

104. On 12 July [194&h meeting] we drew the attention
of the Council to the consequences of any form of
weakness in the face of the aggression of which Uganda was
a victim. Thereafter, we read books and we saw films which
glorified the raid on Entebbe. Those practices have encouraged the invasion of the airports of sovereign States. The
Council did not meet our request of 12 July, but it is time
that justice was done.

100. The imperialist press is bending over backwards to
cover up for the malefactors. Imperialism is a past master in
the art of lying and it is constantly trying to heap scorn on
us by minimizing the gravity of the aggression of which our
people has been the victim. In November 1970, there was a
printed report to the effect that the aggression of which
Guinea was the victim was merely the settling of accounts
between opposing factions. Another act of insanity was the
attempt that was made to have people believe that Guinea
had invented those plots and that, the economy of the
country being in a precarious state, an effort was being
made to divert the attention of the people to external
matters. We read about the alleged feats of an African
Zorro who was fighting at Conakry to liberate the people of
Guinea. To liberate it from what? One can read in the same
newspapers today about the aggression in Benin and see
that only the name of the country has changed; the lies are
the same because they are all cast in the same mold, which
can be called the imperialist press.

105. Benin, Guinea and all progressive countries of Africa
and of the world understand that they want to muzzle us in
order to cancel the victory of the liberation movements.
Imperialism will never succeed; we shall all the more arm
our brothers of Zimbabwe, Namibia and Azania and, with
all brothers on the continent, check the diversionary tactics
and the crimes constantly being plotted against us. The
stakes are high and my delegation is certain that the peoples
of Africa will not be duped by those who are trying to
plunder our gold, our diamonds, our iron ore, copper,
bauxite and manganese and leave us with leprosy, smallpox,
hunger, illiteracy and the other miseries of this world.

10

106. At this first stage of the debate, in the solidarity
which binds us to our brothers of the Popular Republic of
Benin, my delegation would like to bow respectfully before
the graves of those that fell on the battlefield, and we
propose, with your permission, Mr. President, that the
Council support the request of the Govermnent of Benin,
that we firmly condemn the use of mercenaries to sow
death and destruction in our countries and that, following
consultations between the President of the Security Council
and others who are involved, a special fact finding mission
be set up and given the responsibility of preparing a report
that would allow the Council to reach a final stand and take
appropriate action that would be to the credit of the
United Nations and to mankind as a whole.

to deal with mercenary attacks, a new method of warfare
that is so marvellously well adapted to certain policies, and
whose showy exploits have even won admiration in sOnlo
parts of the world where violence is still extolled when it is
directed against others.
113. The attraction of adventure, the taste for violerlce.
the morbid pleasure in spreading terror and death are llot
sufficient, however, to explain the acts of mercenaries
whose essential motive is greed and the desire for considerable and immediate financial reward. Behind the actions
of mercenaries is hidden the mind of a politician whose
aims, quite apart from disorder, destruction and devastation, are, first and foremost, of a political nature. Mercenary action has replaced that of the colonial armies or, in
certain cases, has strengthened it; their goals merge. That is
why we should not be put off by the superficial appearance
of mercenaries as adventurers, malefactors and killers. The
problem which they represent and which, particularly
in
Africa, has assumed alarming proportions, must be viewed
in the political context, must be evaluated in terms of its
political consequences, and must be tackled at the level of
its political origins.

107. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of
Guinea for his expression of good wishes to my country on
the occasion of the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the accession to the throne of Her Majesty the Queen, and for his
kind words to me personally.
108. The next speaker is the representative of Algeria,
whom I invite to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.

114. Today we join with the Government of Benin in
denouncing to the international community the constant
threat to our countries, which takes its most dangerous and
pernicious form in attacks by mercenaries, coming from
places unknown and sufficiently well paid not to reveal the
identity of their employers.

109. Mr. RAHAL (Algeria) (interpretation from French):
Mr. President, first of all, I should like to say how pleased
we are to see you presiding over the Security Council for
the month of February. We are all aware that in the
troubled world in which we live your responsibility, like
that of the Council, is neither wholly simple nor undemanding. Your experience and the wisdom which you have often
displayed will, I am convinced, permit you once again to
discharge your duties most satisfactorily and in the best
possible interests of international peace and security.

115. This scourge is a real threat to the entire international community, even if its most destructive effects are
felt in the countries of the third world, particularly
in
Africa. Those who today seek to use this means to achieve
their own ends may in the near future themselves fall
victims to it, because the action of mercenaries is governed
more by the desire for profit than by political or racial
affinities. The problem that we are bringing before the
Security Council is not confined to limited or isolated
events which perhaps would not be deserving of tie
attention of the international community as a whole. This
is a much more complex and universal phenomenon and
that is why it should arouse the concern of all. It requires
energetic, concerted action, which is the only appropriate
way to eliminate this danger and prevent its recurrence.

1 10. I am grateful that the Council has allowed me to
participate in this debate, which is of concern to my
Government for more than one reason. Since this is a
typical act of aggression against the independent State of
Benin, my delegation would first like to reiterate here its
total abhorrence of an act that runs so grossly counter to
the fundamental principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and which endangers peaceful coexistence among
the various members of the international community. That
aggression, which is the subject of the complaint of Benin
to the Council, has been unanimously acknowledged in the
international press, bcth by journalists and by diplomats
who were able to verify the effects and evidence of that act
irz situ. That fact alone justifies this meeting of the Council,
whose responsibility is never so much involved as when
peace is threatened in a particular region of the world.

116. The aggression perpetrated against the People’s
Republic of Benin has all the features of mercenary action.
Unforeseen, swift and destructive, leaving traces of its
destruction but camouflaging its political origins, givirlg
proof of its determination, but disguising its real significance, the attack committed on 16 January presents too
much concrete evidence for its reality to be called into
question, but its origins and its purposes are still sufficiently unexplained for its real nature to give rise to all
kinds of conjecture.

111. My delegation’s participation in this debate can also
be explained by the danger for all African countries
inherent in the attack of which the Republic of Benin has
just been a victim. The solidarity that we would here like to
convey to the people of Benin and its leaders is strengthened by an awareness of our common vulnerability in the
face of the boldness and unscrupulousness of those deliberate acts directed against our sovereignty and our security.

117. In publicly denouncing the aggression against Benin
and by publishing the details and describing the weapons
seized, the Cotonou Government has shown its legitimate
desire to uncover the real culprits and to determine the
actual scope of this action. We would emphasize particularly, as a sign of restraint, moderation and responsibility,

112. In this case-as in many others, unfortunately, in the
still very recent past-the act of aggression was the work of
mercenaries. Numerous African countries have already had
I1

that the Benin Government has not levelled any precise
accusations or sought to draw hasty conclusions from an
inquiry which, we are convinced, was not a purely
superficial one, The Government of Benin has not yielded
to the understandable emotion which such an aggression
might naturally arouse in order to assign responsibility or
apportion blame. On the contrary, it addressed itself to the
Security Council, requesting that it denounce this serious
act which violated the integrity, sovereignty, and security
of its country, and also that it di$itch a mission of inquiry
in order to determine, on the spot, the evidence of
aggression and to uncover its origin or origins.
118. The Government of Benin is fully entitled, as a
Member of the Organization, to appeal to the Security
Council so that light may be shed on all these incidents, the
seriousness of which cannot be overstressed. The people of
Benin by their vigilance and courage have succeeded in
repulsing the aggression; it is up to the international
community now to determine who is responsible, who were
its instigators and how the aggression wascarried out,
119. In giving our full support to the request of the
People’s Republic of Benin we, shou!d ,.ourselves also
,, like to

avoid any speculation as to the precise meaning of the
events of 16 January at Cotonou. The situation throughout
the African continent is extremely threatening for the
future of our countries. We are aware of that, and that is
why more than ever we wish to associate the international
community with our preoccupations and, if possible, with
our hopes. Africa is no longer the preferred site for colonial
adventures. It is no longer a continent divided up among
different forms of foreign domination and subject to either
concerted or competing exploitation. The African peoples
have set out on the road to their rehabilitation in the
community of free peoples. That must be the price of peace
in Africa and, of course, of peace throughout the world.
120. We are certain that the Security Council will accede
to the appeal that has been made to it by the Government
of Benin. Discovering the truth about the aggression of 16
January is not up to Benin alone. It concerns all members
of the international community and it is first and foremost
the responsibility of the Council.

.

The meeting rose at 6.55 p.m.

.

.

HOW

TD OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

Natione publicatione
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the world. Conrult your bookstore
or write to: United Nations,
Sales
Section, New York or Geneva.
United

COMMENT

SE PBOCURBB

LBS PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Lee public&me
den Nations Wee eont en vent8 dens lee libreiries
et lee sgences
ddpoeitairee
du monde entier. Informer.-vous
auprhs de votre libraire ou adressex-vous
B : Nations Unier. Section dee ventee, New York ou GenBve.

H3nasHfl
Hau~il,

Opraweauw
Odaenwrewrhrx
HasHR YOIHO ~ynmb
B HHH)HHI.IX Saran arerwcmax
BO mex paRonax *upa. Hasof.fnre cnpanwr
06 ~oflairwrx
B
wwwow
uara3we
nnn nnnnwe no anpecy: O~LSHH~~L(HR 06zenHHeHHbrx
Chuwn no npo~ance
HJnan~tt,
HbIO-mOpx
HIGH XeHeaa.

COMO

CONSCCUIR

3max

aawen

PUBLICACIONBS

DE LAS NACIONJZS

UNYDAS

Lee publicecionee
de Ins Naciones Unides eatan en venta en librerlas y ceeee diatribuidoree en todae pertee de1 mundo. Consulte a eu librero o dirljaee e: Naciones
Unidaa, See&n de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United

Nmtionr,

New York

P&e:

W.S.

1 .OO (or equivalent

in other currencies)

70001-May

19774,200
