THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

MEETING:

NEW

2 AUGUST

1983

YORK
CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2461)

1

..,*.....,,*.......,.,....,,...*....

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , *. . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . .

1

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 5 November 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Morocco
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15481);
Letter dated 9 November 1982 from the Permanent Representative of the Niger to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15483);
Letter dated 8 February 1983 from the Chargt d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Jordan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/15599);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Qatar to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15764);
Letter dated 27 July 1983 from the Permanent RepresentativC of Democratic
Yemen to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15890) . . . . . . , . . . . . . , . . . ,.,,*...,,,...,....,,.....,......,,....

1

S/W.246 1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol’ indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given,
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been apphed retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2461st MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday,
Mr. Luc de La BARRE
(France).

President:

de NANTEUIL

Pw.wI~:
The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua,
Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2461)
1.

Adoption

2.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 5 November 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Morocco to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15481);
Letter dated 9 November 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of the Niger to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15483);
Letter dated 8 February 1983 from the ChargC
d’affaires a. i. of the Permanent Mission of Jordan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15599);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Qatar to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15764);
Letter dated 27 July 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Democratic Yemen to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/15890).

2 August 1983, at 3.30 p.m.
Letter dated 8 February 1983 from the Chargd d’affaires a. i. of the Permanent Mission of Jordan to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15599);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Qatar to the United Nations
addressed to the. President of the Security Council
(S/15764);
Letter dated 27 July 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Democratic Yemen to the United
Nations addressed to *the President of the Security
Council (S/15890)

of the agenda

The meeting was called to order at 4.25 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 5 November 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Morocco to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15481);
Letter dated 9 November 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of the Niger to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15483);

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with decisions taken at previous meetings on
this item [2401st, 2412th to 2414th, 243&h, 2457th, 2459th
and246Oth meetings], I invite the representative of Israel to
take a place at the Council table; I invite the representatives
of Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Cuba, Djibouti, Democratic Yemen, Egypt, the German Democratic Republic, Greece, India, Iraq, the IsIamic Republic
of Iran, Kuwait, Lebanon, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, the Niger, Oman,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Somalia, the Sudan, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey, the United Arab
Emirates, Yemen and Yugoslavia to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber. I
invite the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) to take a place at the Council table.
Af the invitation of the President, Mr. Blum (Israe2) took a
place at the Council table; Mr. Zarif (Afghanistan), Mr.
Sahnoun (Algeria), Mr, Al-Sabbagh (Bahrain), Mr. Wasiuddin (Bangladesh), Mr. Caballero Rodriguez (Cuba), Mr.
Houfane (Djibouti), Mr. Al-Ashtal (Democratic Yemen), Mr.
KhaliE (Egypnt), Mr. Hucke (German Democratic Republic),
Mr. Dountas (Greece), Mr. Krishnan (India), Mr. Mohammad (Iraq), Mr. Rajaie-Khorassani (Islamic Republic of
Iran), Mr: Abufhassan (Kuwait), Mr. Fakhoury (Lebanon),
Mr. Burwin (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Zainal Abidin
(Malaysia), Mr. Traore (Mali), Mr. Ould Hamody (Mauritania), Mr. Lahlou (Morocco), Mr. Oumarou (Niger), Mr. Ali
(Oman), Mr. Al-Boainin (Qatar), Mr. Zowawi (Saudi Arabia), Mr. Sarre’ (Senegao, Mr. Madar (Somalia), Mr. Elfaki
(Sudan), Mr. El-Fattal (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. Lessir
(Tunisia), Mr. GGkge (Turkey), Mr. Al-Qasimi (United Arab
Emirates), Mr. Sallam (Yemen) and Mr. Golob (Yugoslavia)
look the places reserved for Ihem at the side of the Council
chamber; Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation Organization) took
a place at the Council fable.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French): The
first speaker is the representative of Mauritania. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

a proudly and openly proclaimed objective of Israel:
creeping colonization of the West Bank and Gaza in the
name of a legitimacy going back thousands of years,
8. The usurpation of Palestinian lands in 1948 is no
longer enough, no more than the unilateral and illegal
annexation of Jerusalem or that of the Syrian Golan
Heights. The whole land of Palestine must be delivered to
the unrestrained and chauvinistic imagination of Zionist
settlers before being annexed for all time. In order to
facilitate this dream, the theocratic State of Israel must
expel all Palestinians-in
short, purify the land to make
room for others.

3. Mr, OULD HAMODY
(Mauritania) (interpretation
from French): Sir, it is certainly a personal pleasure for me
to congratulate you on behalf of the delegation of the
Islamic Republic of Mauritania on your assumption of
the presidency for the month of August. This is a welldeserved recognition for an ambassador of your great
intellectual and moral stature. Another source of satisfaction for me and for my delegation is that this confidence
has been placed in the representative of a country, France,
with which my country has maintained constant and
multi-faceted relations for more than three quarters of a
century.

9. It goes without saying that I am not telling the Council anything new. These broadly expanded and proclaimed theories are known to all its members. As
Chairman Yasser Arafat said immediately after the crimes
perpetrated in Sabra and Shatila-these
barbarous acts
that are yet another wrong inflicted on Palestine and on
the Arab nation-these crimes are contrary to the humanism of Judaism and an insult to the sufferings and discrimination imposed on the Jewish people for more than
2,000 years. It goes without saying that such acts do
ensure peace and security for the peoples of the region
and, first and foremost, not for the Jewish populations in
Palestine. Prospects for the Middle East and with it for
the rest of the world are truly threatened if such practices
continue with impunity. The fleeting military superiority
accorded to the usurper by its allies-first and foremost
the United States of America-offers
no real guarantee
for peace and a secure life in the Middle East far the
populations brought from five continents to dispossess a
people of its land and deny it its inalienable rights.

4. I should like also to congratulate most sincerely the
representative of the People’s Republic of China, Mr.
Ling Qing, for the wise, competent and devoted work he
did as President of the Council last month. The People’s
Republic of China, whose supbort for the Arab and African peoples in their liberation struggle has always been
constant and consistent, has earned the trust and respect
of Africa and of the Arab nation, of which my country is
a perfect synthesis.
5. Truly, the Arab peoples of the Middle East have been
spared nothing since the brutal introduction into their
region of Zionism and the gradual usurpation of their land
since the creation of Israel in 1948 in conditions which are
well known. Thus, the peopIes of the Middle East will
have suffered the full panoply of the terrors of Fascist
rCgimes: unprovoked aggression, genocide, mass deportations, indiscriminate bombardment, terrorism, and all the
other types of individual and collective punishment of evil
memory.

10. Just and lasting security can be achieved only by
restoring the basic rights of the Arab peoples, and especially through thq total and unconditional
withdrawal
from all our lands, including the Holy City of Al-Quds,
the creation of a sovereign Palestinian State under the
guidance of the PLO, the sole authentic representative of
the Arab people of Palestine, and its participation in any
comprehensive, definitive and just settlement of this issue.

6. Once again the Security Council has before it as a
matter of urgency the problem of the Middle East and
Israeli practices in violation of human rights and the
’ rights of peoples. The overall picture always remains the
same, even if the scene of the crime always changes,
Today, it is a matter of new sufferings inflicted on the
courageous martyred people of Palestine. The Council is
also to pass judgement on criminal acts committed in the
name of religious fanaticism and racial contempt by the
usurper whom nothing seems to stop anymore, Finally,
the Council is faced with an arrogant challenge to the
Organization, the United Nations, and to its principal
instrument for peace and security: the Council itself.

11. For the immediate present, the Council must face up
to the explosive situation in the occupied Arab territories
in view of the events in Al-Khalil, and hence a repetition
of similar acts must be prevented. First of all, there must
be a thorough examination of the terrorism of which
Palestinians are today victims; then the latest crimes committed in cold blood must be vigorously condemnedcrimes for which the direct and active responsibility of the
occupying authorities can be neither denied nor even
limited.

7. The premeditated and cold-blooded attack against
the Islamic University of Al-Khalil and the savage repression at Bir Zeit, Jerusalem, Nablus and elsewhere is shocking in its gratuitous brutality, the dire consequences of
which are ground for concern. But unfortunately these
deeds are neither isolated nor surprising. This terrorism
elevated to State philosophy-which
we all condemn
today-is part and parcel of the neo-Nazi logic of zionism. Worse still, this attack, whose goal is to terrorize the
Palestinian Arab populations, is designed to help achieve

12. The Council bears a heavy responsibility for the
maintenance of peace and security in an atmosphere of
justice and legality in such an explosive and a sensitive
region- which is so necessary for the stability of the
world. Indeed, if international legality is not restored in
Arab Palestine, it is the law of “an eye for an eye, a tooth
for a tooth” that will prevail. There can be no question
that in that case the Arab nation will obtain justice-in
2

CI~X year, 10 years or 100 years the balance of forces will
shift in its favour.

21. The Israeli presence in the occupied territories,
including the Palestinian territories and Jerusalem, is the
result of military invasion. Following that invasion, Israel
has repeatedly, arbitrarily and defiantly violated the provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection
of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949.l It
also trampled upon The Hague Convention respecting the
laws and customs of war on land, of 18 October 1907? AII
Israel’s actions prove that its sole aim is to tighten its grip
over all the Arab territories it has ravaged.

13. Also, we have no doubt that the Security Council is
aware of this awesome responsibility and that it will discharge it. That is one of the motivations and the genuine
hope of the sponsors of the draft resolution S/15895
before the Council for its consideration.
14.

The PRESIDENT

(interpretation from French): The

next speaker is the representative of Morocco. I invite him

22. Provocations and all forms of invidious oppression
that took place during the last few days in Bir Zeit, Nablus and Jerusalem, as well as the firing of automatic weapons and the hurling of grenades at the students of the
Islamic University in the city of Al-Khalil, killing some
and injuring many, are viewed within the clear-cut framework of persecution and harassment of the inhabitants so
as to force those remaining in the occupied territories to
leave their homes and take the path of displacement.

to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
15.

Mr.

LAHLOU

(Morocco)

(inrerpretntion

from

French): Sir, at the outset I should like most sincerely and

warmly to congratulate you, on behalf of my delegation,
on your assumption of the presidency for the month of
August. This is a pleasure for us for many reasons: first of
all, because you have many qualities of which we are all
well aware-tact, courage, heart and clear thinking-and
because you come from France, a country with which my
own country, Morocco, has for centuries, and particularly
since our independence, enjoyed very close ties of cooperation to the mutual benefit of both the Morrocan and
the French peoples.

23. Our attention is drawn to the organic relationship
between the oppression of Arabs and the establishment of
illegal Israeli settlements, since the events in Al-Khalil
have coincided with the Israeli decision to build settlements in the heart of that city.
24. The reality of the Israeli policy aimed at depopulating the Palestinian cities represents a new dimension in
the Israeli practices where the inhabited cities have
become fresh targets for illegal Israeli settlements. The
tragedy will be repeated, because the inhabitants of these
cities will be persecuted until they leave their homes and
neighbourhoods and become refugees.

I should like also to tell the representative of China
how grateful we are for the wisdom and competence with
which he guided the work of the Council in July and to
recall the obvious relations of friendship and co-operation
existing between our two countries.
16.

17, Also, I wish to thank the Council for allowing me to
speak in this debate.

25. This premeditated and wilful violence can be seen as
part of the design represented by Israel’s continuing OCCUpation of Palestinian and other Arab territories in preparation for their assimilation and annexation and the
replacement of their Arab populations by Israelis.

[The speaker continued in Arabic.]

18, The Council is once more seized of the question of
the deteriorating situation in the occupied Arab territories. Its constant interest in this serious problem stems
from grave events there and the ensuing deteriorating
situation that is worsening day by day.

26. We all know that the Palestinian question is the crux
of the conflict prevailing in the Middle East. It is a question of an uprooted people that has been displaced by
intimidation and oppression. Year after year has gone by
and this people is still waiting for the United Nations,
especially the Security Council, to fulfil the obligations
and pledges made to it. It yearns for its own country and
homeland in which to find security and a State of its own,
thus ending its Diaspora. It did not become a refugee
people by choice; it did not struggle because it hated
peace; it did not prefer banishment to its own homeland.
It is high time now for Israel to realizc that bloodshed and
harassment of the Palestinian inhabitants in the lands it
occupies will never, achieve the peace to which it aspires.

19. Israel’s aggressive practices in the occupied Arab territories and its insistence on expanding, by force and terrorism, are ample evidence of its reliance on the logic of
subjugation and domination, The painful events reported
to the Council and to the international community, Whose
details provide irrefutable proof that the escalation of the
Israeli aggression against the Arab inhabitants and, in
particular against the Palestinians, in the occupied Arab
territories indeed reflect an established policy that has
clear-cut aims exceeding in ruthlessness and scope those
of the dark ages of colonialism.

27. The fundamental principles and the natural framework for the establishment of peace in the area can be
found in the numerous relevant General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions-those
resolutions that are
flouted by Israel because they are not in keeping with its
expansionist greed.

20. What is even worse and more painful is the fact that
the Israeli leaders do not deny what is ascribed to them
regarding their expansionist ambitions, Instead, they state
them publicly and admit that they resort to repressive and
oppressive acts as necessary collective reprisals against the
Arabs.
3

But viewed in the socio-political context of the region,
these fresh events emerge as a link in a series of acts all
aimed towards the same goal, namely, to render permanent the occupation of invaded territories. These events
involve the responsibility of Israel, the occupying Power,
which should ensure the protection and security of the
populations of the occupied areas. It follows from the
lack of protection and security these events have shown
that Israel’s behaviour is in contravention of Article 47 of
the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August I949.’

The Arab States, as well as the PLO, as they look
anew to the Council, reaffirm their adherence to their
rights enshrined in international instruments and display
their faith in the United Nations and its Principles an,d
noble aims. They have provided ample evidence of the1r
desire to achieve permanent and just peace in the area.
When the international community responded unanimously here in the Council, as well as in the General
Assembly, to the Fez plan [see S/15510, annex], it endorsed
this plan in its resolutions to resolve the Palestinian qnestion and settle the MiddIe East conflict, committingitselft”
make every effort to ensure that the plan would bear fruit.
28.

34, We should once again recall here that by imposing
its laws on the population of those occupied territories
and establishing new settlements there Israel is also trampling underfoot that convention which forbids the occupying Power from modifying the legal status of populations
of occupied territories. Furthermore, this behaviour is in
contradiction with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and Council resolutions on the subject,

29. This plan was conveyed to the United Nations by
His Majesty King Hassan II of Morocco. In the General
Assembly he was the spokesman of all the Arabs when he
addressed the Members of the United Nations, indicating
they shared responsibility for putting an end to the tragic
state of affairs in the area. He spoke as follows:
“We wished to come to the Assembly, in this building
dedicated to brotherhood, peace and security, to assure
you that we depend on each one of you to be faithful
apostles of our will and determination for peace and
our desire to contribute to the building of a world
community based on equality and the safeguarding of
the rights of all . . .

35. These violations stem from the long occupation that
followed the events of 1967, and the Palestinian people
will not be able to exercise its basic rights as long as it is
denied the right to self-determination. It is therefore quite
correct that the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli
Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Population
of the Occupied Territories says, in paragraph 287 of its
report in document A/37/485, “that the violation of
human rights in the occupied territories will cease only
when the Palestinian people are allowed to enjoy their
right to self-determination”. That necessarily implies the
withdrawal of Israel from the occupied territories.

“There is no doubt that you, the representatives
members of the Assembly, will again provide us, as in
the past, with strong support. I am confident that, on
being informed of our decisions and our plans, you will
be even more determined in your support of our
cause.“3

36. The Israeli attitude in the occupied territories only
increases tension in a region where the situation is already
one of the greatest concern. It compromises in a dangerous manner the efforts undertaken by certain countries,
groups of countries or organizations with a view to finding a negotiated settlement to the Middle East conflict,

30. Mr. ADJOYI (Togo) (interpretation from French):
Sir, my delegation wishes to express its great satisfaction
at seeing you presiding over the work of the Council during this month of August. You represent a country with
which my own country is linked by deep ties of friendship
and co-operation and a country for which freedom and
fraternity are not empty words. Your skill at the helm,
your human sensibilities, your great qualities as a diplomat and your outstanding knowledge of international
issues guarantee the success of our work.

3’7. The situation in Lebanon and the occupied territories,
as well as the other problems in the region, all revolve
around one basic problem, namely, the Palestinian problem
which finds’its origins and roots in the refusal of two peoples
which were once brothers to live in peace.

31. I should also like to pay a well-deserved tribute to
your predecessor, Mr. Ling Qing, for the moderation and
wisdom with which he guided our work last month,

38. Why cannot those two peoples no longer live
tdgether? Are the interests of those Ijeoples so divergent?
One finds it difficult to believe that that region which gave
rise to two major revealed religions and to a large number
of philosophical or spiritual movements the final objective of which is the fulfilment of man in peace might be
turned into a powder keg and a battlefied. One finds it
difficult to believe that the word “tolerance” has disap
peared from the life of those peoples to the point where
they are bent on destroying each other.

32. In speaking, my delegation would like once again to
express the Togolese Government’s deepest concern over
the distressing problem of the Middle East in general and
the Palestinian problem in particular.
33. The facts are in; they speak for themselves and each
One is more edifying than the next; and there is no need
for my delegation to recall them, especially since previous
speakers have already provided sufficient information,
However, it is fitting to emphasize that the latest events
that have occurred at the Islamic University
of Al-Khalil
would have taken on the character of every-day
events
had they happened elsewhere and in other circumstances,

39. For its part, the Togolese Government has aIways
supported Israel’s claim of the right to a homeland. But
the Togolese Government supports that same right for
others, especially for Palestinians, led by their sole legitimate representative, the PLO. Any attempt to seitle the
4

Middle East conflict and any negotiation that might lead
to a positive peaceful result must necessarily involve the
participation
of the PLO. The PLO, the sole representative of the Palestinian people, is a party to the conflict
and, as such, it must participate on an equal footing with
all the other parties in all efforts to arrive at a comprehensive peace.

47. The Council has on many occasions condemned
Israeli policies and practices aimed at establishing settler
colonies in the occupied Arab territories and Israel’s constant attempts to change the natural, political, cultural,
religious and demographic character of those territories.
The Council has in many resolutions affirmed that those
policies constitute a major obstacle to the establishment
of lasting peace in the region.

40. AS has been stated by General Gnassingbe
Eyadtima, the Founding President of the Rassemblement
du peuple togolais and President of the Togolese
Republic:

48. The whole world is aware of the impossibility of
achieving just and lasting peace in the Middle East without full and complete recognition of the Palestinian
people and achievement of its inalienable rights, including
its right to return to its homeland and to the establishment of an independent State there. All attempts to find
solutions of the crisis in the Middle East must include
consideration and full acceptance of the participation of
the PLO, the sole representative of the Palestinian people.

‘&We remain absolutely convinced that there will be
no lasting peace in the Middle East as long as the true
parties to the conflict are not all involved in negotiations with a view to reaching mutual recognition and
guarantee for peaceful coexistence as neighbouring
peoples destined to live together.”

49. The arrogance of the State of Israel reveals its true
face, which is that of an expansionist and a colonialist.
Regrettably Israel has led us to relive the spectacle that
history attempted to bury at Nuremburg, which we had
thought would be erased forever from our memory. In the
face of this situation, which is a threat to international
peace and security, in the face of this genocide, in the face
of this holocaust whose victims are the peoples of Palestine and of the occupied Arab territories, we reaffirm our
staunch support for their just cause, which we embrace as
our own.

41, It is with those words that the Togolese delegation
would like to conclude and express the firm hope that the
recent events will be an opportunity for new awareness on
the part of all the parties concerned and that they will no
longer delay in coming to the negotiation table finally to
put
an end to more than a quarter century of wars that
have caused upheaval for the populations of that area
which aspire only to live in peace.
42. The PRESIDENT
(intnprelrltion@om
FIWW’I):
The
next speaker is the representative of Djibouti. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
43,

50. The Palestinian people cannot relinquish its right to
self-determination and independence. The Council, which
is the guardian of peace and security, is the body that
must take the necessary and relevant measures with
respect to Israel so that it will cease these inhuman and
barbaric practices against the Palestinian Arab peoples in
the occupied territories.

Mr.

HOUFANE
(Djibouti) (inrerpre&on
.from
May I be permitted to express our profound gratitude to a friendly country-France. My delegation is very
happy to see you, Sir, presiding over the Council during
the month of August, given your diplomatic experience
and skills.

l%~~h):

51. The legitimate struggle of the Palestinian people in
the occupied Arab territories against the Zionist occupier
is clearly a just struggle. That people is entitled to freedom
and the well-being enshrined in the Charter. Hence it is all
the more up to the Council to take all necessary measures
to restore those rights.

44. I should also like to congratulate your predecessor,
Mr. Ling Qing, the representative of the People’s Republic of China, with which my country has very close cordial
relations, for the competent and wise manner in which he
conducted the proceedings of the Council last month.

52. We hope that the Council will adopt the draft resolution [S/15895] of which my country is a sponsor.

45, I wish also to thank the members of the Council for
allowing my delegation to take part in the debate.

53. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of the German Democratic Republic. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

46. Once again the Council is meeting to discuss the
grave and distressing question of the occupied Arab territories. Male and female students of the Islamic University
of Al-Khalil
have died and more than 30 have been
wounded. Those are premeditated criminal acts designed
to intimidate the Arab population of the occupied territories. These are also the usual political practices of occupation of Israel, the occupying Power, whose goal is the
building of a greater Israel in disregard of the relevant
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and international law.

54. Mr. HUCKE (German Democratic Republic): Let
me first of all congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency for the month of August and to wish
you success in the discharge of the functions of that
responsible office.
55. At the same time I should like on behalf of the delegation of the German Democratic Republic to express
appreciation to the representative of the People’s Repub5

lit of China, Mr. Ling Qing, for the work he accomplished in his capacity as President of the Council in July.

Nations decisions; it arouses the legitimate
the Palestinian people.

56. The delegation of the German Democratic Republic
thanks the members of the Council for giving us this
opportunity to explain the views of my country on the
important issues on the agenda.

64. Nobody can ignore the fact that the present escalation of Israel’s policy of aggression and occupation is possible only with the unqualified support of the United
States. The “strategic alliance” enables the ruling circles
in Israel to disregard with impunity the decisions taken by
the United Nations and to continue with their policy of
aggression against the Arab peoples. The fateful collaboration between the rulling circles of the United States and
Israel becomes ever more obvious in their striving to force
the Arab peoples into a course of confrontation
and
super-armament and thereby to put a stop to the struggle
of peoples for national independence.

57. The delegation of the German Democratic RepubIic
fully understands that an immediate meeting of the Council was requested by the representative of the People’s
Democratic Republic of Yemen in his capacity as Chairman of the Group of Arab States at the United Nations
for the month of July [S/25890] in view of the serious
situation in the occupied Arab territories.

65. It is with great sympathy and concern that the world
is following the heroic struggle of the Arab people of
Palestine. The German Democratic Republic would like
to reaffirm in the Council its support for the just and
courageous struggle of the Palestinian people under the
leadership of its sole, legitimate representative, the PLO,
It strongly condemns the criminal acts of terror and violence perpetrated by Israel in the occupied Arab territories and demands an immediate stop to such acts.

58. Indeed, the situation has further deteriorated in the
illegal occupied Arab territories over the last few days and
weeks. Day by day news is reaching us about acts of
oppression and violence in the Israeli occupied West
Bank, the Gaza Strip, the Syrian Golan Heights and
southern Lebanon. It very clearly shows that the Israeli
policy of aggression and occupation towards the Arab
peoples contradicts international law.
59, The esteemed representative of the PLO, Terzi, has
impressively pointed out here before the Council the
extent of and the background to the most recent Israeli
measures of terror against the Palestinian population
[2457th

resistance of

66. The German Democratic Republic holds the view
that it is high time the Council rose to its responsibility for
the preservation of peace and security according to the
Charter of the United Nations and took resolute measures
for the immediate cessation of the Israeli aggression and
occupation.

meeting].

Those brutal acts of vioIence against Palestinian students in Hebron demonstrate anew that the aggressive
policy pursued by Israel and its accomplices is aimed at
preventing the Palestinian people from exercising its inalienable rights, in particular its right to an independent
State.
60.

67. The shocking events that occurred recently in the
Israeli-occupied West Bank underscore the urgent need
for the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of the
Israeli occupation forces from all Arab territories occupied since 1967, in compliance with the relevant United
Nations decisions, and for a just, comprehensive and lasting solution to the Middle East conflict, at the core of
which is the issue of Palestine.

61. It is quite obvious that the ruling circles of Israel
have to bear responsibility for the most recent excessesin
Hebron. Characteristic of the escalation of the Israeli policy of occupation are new attacks against communal institutions, against the local economy, the national culture
and the educational system of the Arab people of Palestine. By means of martial law, incarceration ancl brutal
force, the ruling circles of Israel attempt to break the
Palestinian people’s legitimate will to resist.

68. The German Democratic Republic therefore continues resolutely to advocate the exercise of the inalienablc rights of the Palestinian people, including its right to
return to its homeland, achieve sell-determination
and
establish an independent State of its own.

62. The current acts of terror of the Israeli occupants are
a continuation of the policy of aggression against the
Palestinian people; the brutal character of such acts has
shocked world public opinion, particularly during the
aggression against Lebanon in the summer of 1982 and at
the time of the massacres at Sabra and Shatila.

69. Proceeding from this principled position, the German Democratic Republic fully supports the proposals
for a just, comprehensive and durable solution in the Middle East as put forward by the Soviet Union on 15 Scg
tember 1982 [see S/I54033 and by the States Parties to the
Warsaw Treaty in the political declaration adopted at
Prague on 5 January 1983 [see S/155515, annex].

63. The dangers created by the stepped-up implementation of the settlement policy of the Israeli rulers have
rightfully been pointed out by speakers in the Council.
The nature of that policy is to drive the Palestinians out of
their homeland by force and ultimately to bring about the
annexation of Palestinian territories by Israel. This policy
is in flagrant contradiction to the generally recognized
norms of international law and to numerous United

70. The PRESIDENT
(interpret&ion from French): The
next speaker is the representative of Israel, upon whom1
now call.
71. Mr. BLUM (Israel): At the outset, permit me to tell
you, Sir, how pleased we are to see a diplomat of your
experience and wisdom guide the business of the Council
6

in the month of August. In addition to your outstanding
qualities we also salute in you a son of France, a country
that has indelibly imprinted its name in the annals of
mankind as a champion of the struggle for liberty and
human dignity.

Lebanon that my Soviet colteaguc has chosen to give us”.
The sad truth is that one of the permanent members of the
Council has been systematically engaging in this kind of
foul and abusive language with reference to my country.
In his intervention last Friday [2458fh meeting], Mr. Ovinnikov repeatedly referred to the ruling clique of Israel,
meaning, of course, the Government of my country. The
Prime Minister of Israel did not deserve any reference to
his official title; he was repeatedly referred to as “Begin”.
It was not even “Mr. Begin”. The normal rules of courtesy do not apply to Israel and to its democratically
elected Government. When the Soviet representative
speaks, apparently certain atavistic impulses and instincts
come to the fore and prevent him from using the normal
procedures in referring to a head of Government of
another country, of another Member State.

72. May I take this opportunity also to express our
appreciation to the representative of China for the exemplary manner in which he conducted the Council’s business last month.
73, At the 2427th meeting of the Council, held on 29
March 1983, the then President of the Council, the representative of the United Kingdom, stated:
“Speaking as President of the Council, I must confess that I have had moments of considerable discomfort during the debate on this agenda item.”

77. Nor was the Soviet representative alone, Other
speakers followed him in this reference to the ruling cirdes or ruling clique. It would appear that they find it
difficult to familiarize themselves with the workings of a
parliamentary
democracy and that they do not realize
that it is not circles that rule a democratic country but the
elected representatives of the majority unlike the situation
in those countries which they are probably more familiar
with.

The Council was on that occasion dealing with a different
matter.
“It would have been embarrassing for me to have ruled
speakers out of order, but equally I was embarrassed
not to rule them out of order. As President I have been
put in a difficult position by the way in which some
speakers have taken advantage of the laxness which
has crept into our procedures. Some have spoken on
matters well outside the agenda item under discussion.
Some have also used unhelpfully strong language
which went beyond the bounds of civility. All this is
bad for the Council’s standing, whereas the SecretaryGeneral in his report on the work of the Organizatior?
has stressed the urgency of enhancing its standing. This
prospect is one which should give Council members
pause and should set limits to their own conduct in the
Council as well as the standards they would expect of
others.” [2427th meeting, para. 75.1

78. So much for the tone and the form. I must, with all
due respect, disagree with the representative of the United
Kingdom that it is just the tone and the form that should
be faulted. The tone and the form reflect the substance.
These are wrappings that cover the merchandise, and we
have known all these years what that merchandise is. This
foul, abusive and offensive language reflects the inability
or unwillingness, or both, of Israel’s enemies to come to
terms with the very existence of my country and its right
to exist. This has been the root cause of the Arab-Israel
conflict all along, ever since 1948, since the establishment
of Israel as an independent State, and before. Everything
else, including the various pretexts for convening the
Council on one or another aspect of the Arab-Israel conflict, is a pretext or subterfuge.

74. The representative of the United Kingdom has been
mercifully spared this debate. I wonder what his comments would have been had he attended the deliberations
of the Council in recent days and, in particular, yesterday.
Two representatives in the Council have also remarked
today on the tone and form of this debate. We appreciate
their remarks for, as far as I can remember, they were the
first to have objected in recent years to the kind of foul,
abusive and offensive language which has become customary in reference to my country.

79. Sometimes Arab speakers are candid enough to
admit this to the Council. Some of them have been brazen
enough to tell the Council that the very existence of Israel
is illegitimate, irrespective of the passage of time, and that
even if it took 150 or 200 years to destroy Israel they could
wait. Our Syrian colleague told the Council last year, on
2 April 1982 [234&h meeting]:

75. I will have something to say about the substance of
this language a little bit later. But let me say right away
that this kind of language is not being employed only by
our Arab colleagues. Some of their supporters have in fact
encouraged them over the years to use this kind of language rather than deterred them From it.

“Our people, the Palestinians, Syrians and others,
have lost tens of thousands of martyrs. But the population of the Arab nation is 120 or 130 million, and we
can afford to lose 10, 20, 30 or 40 million to fight
American imperialism
and the United States and
Israeli racist, Zionist, imported, synthetic occupation.”

76. The representative of the United Kingdom, in his
intervention on 18 July [2456th meefing], when the question of the extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon was discussed, rightly
saw fit to remark on what he termed “the extraordinarily
unbalanced and unhelpful account of recent history in

This is the philosophy, the substance, behind the foul language, even if some of the Arab speakers will not go so far
as to spell it out in the way that the Syrian representative
and some other representatives have done from time to
time.
7

an attempt to fish in the troubled waters of the Middle
East and, in the process, also to divert attention away
from inconvenient trouble-spots around the world. The
leader of this second category is the Soviet Union.
Obviously, it is much more convenient for Mr. Ovinnikov
to discuss the situation in the Middle East than for him to
discuss the situation in Afghanistan. The Council has not
had even one meeting on Afghanistan since January
1980-for three and a half years. Eyewitnesses who have
come out of that countiy since have told us about the
large-scale killings that have been going on in that country. Tens of thousands of people have lost their lives;
hundreds of villages have been razed to the ground; there
have been allegations of the use of bacteriological weapons by the Soviet invaders against the people of Afghanistan. The Council is not interested, and obviously the
situation is extremely convenient for Mr, Ovinnikov.

80. It has been suggested that Israel welcomes, as it
were, this kind of language, because it makes it easier for
us to ignore the proceedings of the Council. Nothing
could be further from the truth. The sad fact is that the
Council over the years has systematically disqualified
itself on matters relating to the Arab-Israel conflict. Any
impartial observer of the United Nations scene would
have to admit that Israel simply cannot get a fair deal in
the Council. I do not have to go into the reasons for that.
But it is an obvious fact, and no objective and impartial
observer of the United Nations scene would deny it.
81. Let us look at the record. Mr, Ovinnikov told us last
Friday that these debates had become a permanent feature of the Council’s agenda, and he also figured that
about one fifth of the Council’s time was devoted to
debates on what is called here in Council parlance “The
situation in the occupied Arab territories”. Let me update
these statistics. It is not one fifth of the Council’s time that
is being devoted to Arab obsession with Israel and to the
exploitation of that obsession by some cynical supporters
of the Arabs from outside the region, The figures speak
for themselves. In 1979, the Security Council held 76 meetings. Of those, 29 to 38 per cent were devoted to Israel
and the remainder to the rest of the world. In the year
1980, the Council again held 76 meetings. Of those, 37 to
49 per cent were devoted to Israel, and the remaining 51
per cent to the rest of the world. In the year 1981, the
Council held 60 meetings. Of those, 21 to 35 per cent were
devoted to Israel, and the remaining 65 per cent to the rest
of the world. In the year 1982, last year, the Council held
88 meetings. Forty-five of them-that
is, 51 per centwere devoted to Israel, and the remaining 49 per cent to
the rest of the world.

$6. The last time the Council discussed Kampuchea was
in January 1979-four and a half years ago. The Council
does have occasional meetings devoted to the Iraq-Iran
war; I believe the last one was held a year ago.
87. But that, of course, does not prevent such speakers
as the representatives of Afghanistan and Libya and
Poland from leaping into this debate. What could have
been more grotesque than the participation of the representative of Afghanistan this morning in this debate
[246&h meetifig], denouncing the evils of occupationnot, heaven forbid, of the occupation of his country: he
went to look for greener pastures.
88, And this brings me to the third reason: a group of
States which fully understands what is happening in the
Council, the travesty that is being played out here, but
which at the same time, for a variety of reasons, primarily
expediency, is not willing to stand up and object to this
despicable performance. Instead, it is more expedient to
rationalize their silence of inactivity or passivity.

82. Is this a true reflection of what is happening around
us? Should we forget that during those years we had, for
instance, a Soviet invasion of Afghanistan? We had a
large-scale massacre of the people of Kampuchea by the
Vietnamese forces. We have had a war between Iraq and
Iran for the last three years, which rarely attracts the
attention of the Council. We have had repeated petty and
not so petty aggressions by Libya committed against various neighbours-immediate
neighbours and more distant neighbours. We have had a rather critical situation in
Poland, which we were told was an internal matter and
had nothing to do with the international scene-so the
Council was not aware of that situation.

89. The cumulative effect of all this is that every minor
matter that affects my country is being inflated here, and
becomes the subject of urgent meetings, emergency meetings and so on, whereas serious crises confronting the
international community go unnoticed. Who in this building and in this chamber seriously cares about the massive
violations of human rights in most of the States Members
of the United Nations, including the mass expulsions of
hundreds of thousands of people that occurred in recent
months, which never reached the Council?

83. So let US ask ourselves, how does one explain this
situation? I hope I will be forgiven for devoting a few
minutes to these questions; they touch directly on some of
the remarks made by the various representatives in the
course of this debate. There are, I believe, three main
reasons for this lopsided approach.

90. Racial violence: we all know it as newspaper-readers
and as tele-viewers, but we have no official knowledge of
those atrocities being perpetrated on a much larger scale
than the crime in Hebron-and
a crime it was; I shall
come to it in a moment-perpetrated
last week.

84. The first is the well-known Arab obsession with
Israel, and I have two or three examples to offer this
Council to prove my point. I do not believe I have to
belabour this point.

91, This brings me to the ostensible cause for these meetings: the crime committed in Hebron last week. I want
this to be crystal-clear: the Government and people of
Israel unreservedly condemn the murders perpetrated last
week in the city of Hebron. We did so on the very day of

85. The second is the existence of a bloc of States which
is always willing to exploit the Arab fixation with Israel in
8

the perpetration of those crimes. The President of the
State of Israel on 26 July stated:

96. But this is not the first time. On 4 May 1980
[S/13923], I informed the Secretary-General of the
murder of six Jews, including women and children, who
were murdered on 2 May 1980 when returning from their
Friday eve devotions at the Tomb of the Hebrew Patriarchs, the Cave of Machpela in Hebron. No emergency
meeting of the Council was convened on that occasion
either, just as the Council was not interested when on 5
February 1980 [S/13781], in my letter to the SecretaryGeneral, I informed him-and through him the Security
Council-of
the cold-blooded murder of a 23-year-old
resident of Kiryat Arba, a rabbinical student, on 31 January 1980, which murder also occurred in the city of
Hebron.

“A crime was committed in Hebron today. The
murder of members of the Islamic Academy is no less
vicious than was that of Yeshiva student Aharon
Gross. In both cases innocent blood was spilled for
which there can be no atonement. The law of Israel
does not make distinction between blood and blood.
NO man’s blood runs redder than another’s. I utterly
condemn this repugnant crime and I am confident that
the Security Forces will spare no effort to apprehend
those responsible and bring them to justice.
“I must caution against hasty judgement or any
accusatory allegations before the criminals are apprehended and identified. Let no man claim to know the
identity of the dastardly killers before it has been
authoritatively
verified.”

97. When may I ask-and I ask this question with all
due respect-has the Council ever evinced any serious
concern over the murder of Jews? Was it when the school
children of Avivim were murdered in I970? I cannot recall
any emergency meeting or special meeting of the Council
or any condemnation, Was it when Israeli athletes were
murdered in Munich? Was it when school children were
murdered in Ma’alot in 1974, or when PLO terrorists murdered a two-year-old girl on the Nahariya beach in front
of her father in 1979? Or when they seized the nursery of
Kibbutz Misgav-Am in 1980? I challenge you: please
showme. When did the Council ever express any concern
over the murder of Jews? Why, may I ask the representative of the United Kingdom, are we supposed to believe in
the impartiality
of this body when it comes to Israel?

92. “Prime Minister Menachem Begin on the same day
termed the murders a loathesome crime and pledged the
Government
of Israel to do everything possible to
apprehend the culprits so that they can answer for their
crimes.
93. The Minister of Justice spoke in the same vein in the
Knesset, Israel’s parliament, last week. So did the Chief of
Staff of the Israel Defence Forces and other officials of
my Government.
94. But we, in contradistinction to many if not most
seated around this table, are not selective in our condemnation of terrorism, We condemn terrorism irrespective of
the identity of those who are involved in it. This unfortunately has not been the position of the Council. What
galvanized the Council into action? The crime committed
in Hebron last week. It was not the first one. Only two
weeks before, I had informed the Secretary-General of the
murder on 7 July of this year of Aharon Gross, a student
at the Religious Seminary in Hebron who was brutally
stabbed to death by a number of assailants in the town’s
market place [S/1586.5]. In the same letter I also made
reference to the death on 12 February of this year of
Esther Ochana, a 22-year-old woman who had been mortally wounded on 29 January when the car in which she
was travelling was stoned south of Hebron. The Council
was not interested. What is more, in the draft resolution
before us [S/1.5895] the Council seeks to condemn “the
recent attacks perpetrated against Arab civilian population in the occupied Arab territories, especially the killing
and wounding of students at the Islamic university of the
Arab city of Al-Khalil”. Hebron is taboo. Even in English
one has to make reference these days to Al-Khalil. The
name Hebron, which has been the traditional name of this
city for thousands of years is being systematically erased
from United Nations documentation. But that is beside
the point.

98.

I would make one admission. The representative of
Kingdom finds himself in a more comfortable
position than I because, under the rules of the Charter of
the United Nations, he can prevent the passage of Council
resolutions which he deems inimical to his country. I do
not quarrel with the provision itself. It is constitutional.
But I would expect a higher degree of empathy from him
when it comes to those Member States which find themselves in a less Fortunate position.

the United

99. Ad, as the representative of the United Kingdom
very well knows, his country from time to time does resort
to this constitutional device which is available to it-for
instance,,last year on 4 June 1982, when it prevented the
adoption of a draft resolution on the Falkland Islands
(Malvinas) dispute.
100. But let me come to another example which, I think,
fully illustrates the point I wish to make and which brings
together the various elements of the malaise-and
a
malaise it is-which has gripped the Council in its dealings with any matter affecting Israel.
Last Thursday, the representative of Jordan in his
made reference to the cases of mass poisoning
which mysteriously occurred among schoolgirls in the
West Bank last February [2457tk meeting, para. 231. The
representative of Democratic Yemen in his statement at
the same meeting also claimed that “Students in cities of
the West Bank have been poisoned” [ibid, para. 431.
101.

statement

95. The point I wish to make is that the Council does
not condemn the murder of Jews. Jewish bIood apparently is cheaper in the eyes of the Council than is nonJewish blood.
9

102. I believe all of us must view statements of this kind
with the utmost gravity-- not because the representative
of Jordan was wrong with regard to the date, which he
spoke of as last February whereas the episodes he was
referring to occurred in March and early April. This is a
minor inaccuracy and, as the ancient Romans have taught
us, de minimis non curatpraetor. I am not concerned with
that. I am concerned with the fact that months after it has
been established that there have been no poisonings a
member of the Security Council should find it so difficult
to face up to reality.

Bank . , . What is the use of murdering and poisoning
our schoolchildren? ”
108, Before I come to my own letter, I should add that
the Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People also fell in.
He also reported to the Council that:
“Local residents believe the illness to have been
induced by some kind of poison, perhaps even gas poisoning, in the girls’ classrooms” [see S/15667j.
109. So, against this background, I sent my letter to the
President of the Council on 3 April [UI.5674, in which I
informed her of the real state of facts and of the medical
inquiries that had been started, adding that, since the
Israel medical authorities could not determine the origins
of this disease-if it was a disease-the Israel Ministry of
Health decided to request also international
health
authorities to independently assessthe causes of the phenomenon. I informed the President of the Council, and
through her the members of the Council, that the representatives of the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC) had already investigated that phenomenon
and could not determine the existence of any organic
cause and that, in addition to him, the Government of
Israel also approached the United States Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta, Georgia, as well as the World
Health Organization (WHO) and requested that both
send experts to Israel to investigate the case.

103. We all remember what preceded his statement.
Last March-since
the Council was involved in all this
and, I think, since it has not finished its business, I shall,
with your permission, Mr. President, detain it for several
minutes-schoolgirls
in a number of localities in Juclea
and Samaria complained of dizziness, headaches and so
on. Thereupon the Israeli medical authorities immediately
instituted inquiries. Those inquiries did not yield any
organic cause, in the clinical sense, for those complaints.
104. Now, this was known at the time, but despite the
information made available by the Israeli medical authorities, the representative of Iraq on 29 March 1983, in a
letter to the President of the Council, stated:
“Israeli terrorism has reached the point of the impIementation of schemes for the collective poisoning of
students and inhabitants” [see S/15660].

110. Even before those experts had a chance to arrive in
Israel, the Council convened in informal meeting and
authorized its President to issue on 4 April a presidential
statement, which I should like to read out to the
Council-although
I believe many of the members of the
Council may Still remember it:

105. On the very same day the representative of Jordan,
in a letter to the President of the Council, claimed that
there had occurred
“incidents of collective poisoning to which more than
1,000 Palestinian schoolgirls were exposed in the West
Bank” [see S/1.5659].

“The members of the Security Council have met in
informal consultations with great concern on 4 April
1983 to discuss cases of mass poisoning in the occupied
Arab territory of the West Bank as referred to in document S/15673.

106. The representative of Iraq, apparently thinking
that he was having a field day, two days later came back
with another letter. I had the feeling at the time that, since
he was representing Baghdad, he thought that he had to
add to the one thousand and one nights the one thousand
and second night. In that letter he said:

“The members of the Security Council request the
Secretary-General to conduct independent inquiries
concerning the causes and effects of the serious problem of the reported cases of poisoning and urgently to
report on the findings” [S/I5680].

“These poisoning cases”-he knew already that
these were poisonings-“ were not coincidental. They
were caused by a yellow substance containing sulphur
concentrates which emitted poisonous gases with dangerous physical and psychological consequences as
well as other possible consequences” [see W1567Jl.

Ill.
Some three weeks later the experts of the Centcrs
for Disease Control concluded:
“that this epidemic of acute illness was induced by anxiety, may have been triigered initially either by psychological factors or by sub-toxic exposure to hydrogen
sulfide. Its subsequent spread was mediated by phychogenie factors. Newspaper and radio reports may have
contributed to this spread. We observed no evidence of
reproductive impairment in affected patients.”

107. Of course, the representative of Syria could not lag
behind. For some reason he did not send a letter, but he
used the Council debate [2426th meet@] on another
matter-Nicaragua-in
order to tell the Council that
Israel
“kills the Arabs, displaces them, desecrates their Holy
Places and even poisons their schoolchildren . , . PoiSOIIOUS
gases are used on Arab schools in the West

112. Then two weeks later, WHO also reported and the
Secretary-General submitted its report to the Security
10

Council.

The salient passage is to be found in paragraph

Monday. Of the girls taken to hospitals all but 34 recovered sufficiently in the course of the. afternoon to be
sent home. Six required readmission over the week-end
and three new cases were taken in during this period,
but there were no cases among the girls’ families or
from the community at large.

26:

“the WHO inquiry has not been able to indicate any
specific cause or causes of this ill-defined health emergency” [S/15756].
113. What has the Council done since to redress the
wrong that has been done to my country, in maligning it?
We have been waiting in vain for three months for the
Council to meet again in informal consultations and to
say it is very happy that no pojoning has taken place.
Heaven forbid. I would not expect a statement by the
Council to say: “We are sorry if the State of Israel found
itself offended by what we did last April”-that
would go
too far-but at least to express happiness that no poisoning had taken place. Were you all not concerned about
the reported cases of poisoning last April?
114. This is, incidentally,

“On Monday the school reassembled, and in the
course of the morning another epidemic broke out,
almost identical to the first in character and consequence. Fifty-four girls were taken to hospitals; school
was dismissed for the remainder of the week.”
There was no report that Israeli authorities had closed the
school.
“Many of the Monday cases had been affected on the
lirst day and, as previously, the symptoms subsided
quickly enough to allow the majority to be sent home
by the evening.”

what one of the newspapers

saw fit to do. The New York Timeson 18 June apologized

to its readers for the disparity in its reporting in that it
gave much greater space to Arab accusations-which
have been disproved-than
to American and Israeli explanations. There was, the paper said, no journalistic justification for the disparity.

And so it goes on. And what are the conclusions? The
following is found on page 1299:
“What became epidemic was a piece of behaviour
consequent on an emotional state: excitement or, in the
latter stages, frank fear led to overbreathing, with its
characteristic sequelae-faintness, dizziness, paraesthesiae, and tetany. Once learned, this self-reinforcing
piece of behaviour restarted spontaneously whenever
the school was assembled. By day IT’-because
the
episode lasted for 12 days--“however, the hysterical
nature of the epidemic was generally accepted, and a
firm line prevented the behaviour propagating as extensively as it had on the previous occasions.

115. The Council did not take note of that. Instead,
three months later two representatives-one
of them a
member of the Council-come
back with this discredited
story and refer again to “poisonings”. How should one
characterize such behaviour? I ask you, Mr. President, and
members of the Council, in all candour and humility:
please help me define it.
116. I should have thought that the least that could be
expected, as far as moral and intellectual integrity is concerned, is to keep silent. Those letters of last March and
April are on the record; they cannot be erased. If they
could, I would suggest to the representative of Jordan and
his other colleagues to withdraw those documents. But at
least keep silent; do not come back with these inflammatory charges which have been disproved.

“Clinically the symptoms are entirely explicable in
terms of overbreathing due to emotionai tension.”
118. On 17 March 1983 another article was published, in
The New England Journal of AIedicine, entitled “Outbreak

of illness in a school chorus”. The following description is
given on page 632:
“On the morning of May 20, 1981, 102 elementaryschool students from East Templeton, Massachusetts,
rode buses to their regional high school. They joined
another 300 students from other schools to rehearse
the chorus for their annual spring concert. After half
an hour, illness suddenly interrupted the rehearsal.
Several chorus members fell to the stage floor, grabbed
their abdomens and throats and complained of nausea,
abdominal pain and shortness of breath. Teachers
escorted the stricken children outside, but every few
minutes another chorus member began to have similar
symptoms , . .“.

117, The World Health Organization and the Centers for
Disease Control have been extremely cautious. The phenomenon apparently is known in the medical world. In an
article published in the British Medical Journal of 26
November 1966 by Peter D. Moss and Colin P. McEvedy,
on page 1295, the following case is reported:
“At mid-day on Thursday, 7 October 1965, the
Blackburn Medical Officer of Health received a phone
call from the Headmistress of a girls’ secondary school.
In the earlier part of the morning a few of the girls in
the school had complained of feeling dizzy and peculiar and some had fainted; later in the morning the
affection had become epidemic and the girls were going
down like ninepins. A medical officer immediately
went to the school, the girls looked not only frightened
but shocked, Ambulances took 85 of the most severely
affected girls to hospitals; the rest of the pupils were
dismissed and told not to return until the following

And so it goes.
119. The conclusion?
“Mass hysteria is defined as the occurrence in- a
group of people of the constellation of physical symp11

toms suggesting an organic illness but resulting from a
psychological cause, with each member of the group
experiencing one or more of the symptoms. Severa’
characteristic features of mass hysteria help differentiate such epidemics from those due t* physical causes:
the absence of laboratory results and physica] findings
confirming the specific organic cause; a preponderance
of illness in girls or women, the apparent transmission
of illness by sight or sound, or both; the Presence Of
hyperventilation or syncope; a preponderance *filIness
in adolescents or preadolescents; benign morbidity,
often with rapid spread followed by rapid remission of
symptoms”,
and so on.

kinds of excuses.The issue of Israeli settlements in Judea
and Samaria is one of those excuses. It was rightly stated
by Professor Fred Gottheil of the University of Illinois
before the United States House of Representatives Committee on International Relations, on 12 September 1977,
that:
“Jewish settlements on the West Bank is an issue
today only because the existence of Israel is an issue,
The issue of Jewish settlements in the West Bank today
is simply one thin layer that emanates from and partiaI]y conceals the core of the conflict, namely the nonrecognition by the Arab States of Israel’s right to
exist.”

127. And, since the matter has been raised, I do wish to
address myself also to the issue which ostensibly is the
causeof these deliberations: the Jewish presence, the pres.
ence of Jewish civilians in Judea and Samaria.

120. The representative of Jordan was cautious enough
in his statement last week [2457th meet%?1 t* say that:
“the mass anxiety that ensued among the Civilian POPUlations [as we]1 as the poisoning] are considered a
moral and political condemnation of Israel’s *PPressive policies and inhuman practices.”

128. Israel’s position on the matter of the right of Jews
to Iive in any part of the Land of Israel has been stated
many times, both in this body and in other United
Nations forums. I can be very brief. We do not regard
ourselves as strangers in any part of the Land of Israel, as
foreigners in Judea or Samaria or any other part of the
Land of Israel. The Israeli villages are there as of right,
We cannot accept that Jews should be prohibited from
settling and living in areas which are the very heart of our
homeland. Hebron specifically happens to be the cradle of
the Jewish people. Hebron has had an uninterrupted Jewish presence over the millenia, until the massacre of 1929
occurred and in its wake the Jewish community of
Hebron was liquidated. We shall not accept any attempt
to perpetuate that massacre by barring Jews from
Hebron. Jews as of right may live in Hebron, Nebraska;
or in Bethel, Connecticut; or in Bethlehem, Pennsylvania;
or in Jericho, New York. We shall not accept that Jews
quaJewsshall be barred from living in Hebron, Judea; or
in Bethlehem, Judea; or Bethel, Samaria; or Jericho,
Samaria.

No poisoning, really, perhaps, but the fear of poisoning is
a result of anxiety, and the anxiety of course stems from
the presence of Israeli occupation.
121. I wonder whether Blackburn, in England, has also
been occupied by the Israel Defence Forces, and if not
what were the causes of anxiety there. Similarly I am not
aware of the fact that the Israel Defence Forces have
reached East Templeton, Massachusetts.
122. And I have more examples. The Courier Post of
New Jersey reported on 23 June of this year that musical
students from New Jersey and North Carolina had been
taken ill at an award ceremony, complaining of nausea
and stomach cramps. Two hundred high school musicians
went to Riverside Hospital in Newport News, Virginia,
123. The Council did not issue a presidential statement
about those cases,nor did WHO examine the latrines and
toilets of those schools, as was the case in Judea and
Samaria.

129. At the same time it has never been the aim of Israel
to e.,.ercisecontrol over the lives and activities of the Arab
inhabitants there. We have repeatedly stated, and I wish
to state it here again, that we seek to live as equals with
them, not to replace them. Furthermore, it has been the
policy of the Government of Israel that no single Palestinian Arab resident of these areas legally holding claim to
land should be made homeless by the establishment of
these villages. Incidentally, many of the present-day Jewish villages in Judea, Samaria and the Gaza district have
been established on Jewish-owned land expropriated in
1948 by the Jordanian or Egyptian Government. Most of
them have been set up on government and public land
which had been barren for centuries.

124. Let me ask you in all sincerity: given this dismal
rec*rd, and dismal it is, why do you expect US to look for
pretexts SO as not to have to put our confidence in the
COUnCd? Who of' YOU in similar circumstances would have
any confidence in the impartiality and objectivity of the
Council?
12.5. Let us kaVe it at that. Let us place it on record that
the Council owcs an apology to my country for having maligned it last April and for having refrained from
redressing that wrong ever since.

130. The right of Jews to live in Judea and Samaria has
also been challenged here by some on legal grounds. I
should therefore like to dwell on this matter at some
length. As is well known, with the termination of the
British Mandate over Palestine on 14 May 1948 the
armies of seven Arab States-Egypt,
Iraq, Lebanon,

126. As I said before, the real reason for these systematic rehearsals and rehashes of anti-Israel exercisesin
the Council is t* be found elsewhere, primarily though
not exclusiVe]Y in Arab obsession with the very existence
of the State of Israel. Our Arab friends are looking for a~I
12

Saudi Arabia, Syria, Transjordan and Yemen-illegally
crossed the international boundaries in clear violation of
general international law and in breach of the Charter of
the United Nations, which prohibits the use or even threat
of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State. The avowed purpose of that armed
aggression by the seven Arab States which I mentioned
was to crush the fledgling State of Israel, and the Governments which dispatched them had the effrontery to make
formal announcements of their illegal action to the Council, Referring specifically to the communication
sent by
Transjordan to the Council, the representative of the
United States stated to the Council on 22 May 1948 that
the position of the King of Transjordan was characterized
by

The speaker who uttered those words was the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Mr.
Andrei Gromyko. I do not believe I need add that the
national liberation movement to which he was referring
was Zionism the national liberation movement of the Jewish people,
133. Times change. History is being rewritten by some;
even encyclopedias are being rewritten and pages are torn
out. But as far as we are concerned we shall not permit
this rewriting of history here.
134. The violation of the international boundaries of
Palestine by the Arab armies having constituted an act of
armed aggression, the consequent illegal occupation by
them of any territory previously forming part of the Mandated Territory of Palestine could not give rise to any
legitimate claim of sovereignty. Thus the purported
“annexation” of Judea and Samaria by Jordan in 1950
was in violation both of general international law and of
the General Armistice Agreement between the Hashemite
Jordan Kingdom and Israel, signed in 1949.5 It is not
without interest to note in this connection that this purported annexation was not recognized at the time by the
international community, except for one country, the
United Kingdom, which had a very special relationship
with Transjordan in those days and that even the League
of Arab States, in 1950, threatened Jordan with expulsion
from its ranks because of that purported annexation,

“a certain contumacy towards the United Nations and
the Security Council.
“ . . .
“The contumacy of that reply to the Security Council is the very best evidence of the illegal purpose of this
Government in invading Palestine with armed forces
and conducting the war which it is waging there. It is
against the peace; it is . . . with a definite purpose.
“ . . .
“Therefore, here we have the highest type of evidence of the international violation of the law: the
admission by those who are committing this violation.” [302nd meeting, pp. 41, 42 and 43.1

135. On 5 June 1967, King Hussein of Jordan spurned
an official message from Israel delivered through the intermediary of the United Nations, inviting him to stay out of
the Six Day War, which began that day. Instead, the Jordanian army of occupation of Judea and Samaria opened
fire on Jerusalem and all along the armistice lines with
Israel, and as a result of its renewed aggression Jordan
lost control of Judea and Samaria. Thus, when the Israel
Defence Forces entered Judea and Samaria in June 1967,
in the course of repelling that renewed Jordanian aggression, they ousted from those territories an illegal invader
who enjoyed at the most the rights of a belligerent occupant. However, the rights of such a belligerent occupant
under the internatiorial law of belligerent occupation are
self-terminating upon the conclusion of the occupation,
and no rights survive for him thereafter.

131. The representative of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic said the following in the Council on 20 May of
the same year:
“We are concerned with the plain fact that a number
of Palestine’s neighbour States have sent their troops
into Palestine. Our knowledge of that fact is based not
on rumours, or on newspaper reports, but on official
documents signed by the Governments of those States
informing the Security Council that their troops have
entered Palestine . . .
“Nor can there be any doubt of the purpose for
which those forces have entered Palestine. We may be
sure ‘they have not gone there for a summer camp
vacation or for exercises. Those forces have a definite
military and political purpose.” [297th meeting, pp. 4

136, Eminent authorities on international law throughout the world have repeatedly stated in recent years that
in the light of the facts and the applicable law Israel has
better title to any territory of the former Palestine Mandate than any other State. These distinguished authorities
include Eugene Rostow of Yale Law School, Elihu Lauterpacht of the University of Cambridge, England, Julius
Stone of the University of Sydney, Australia, and Stephen
Schwebel, formerly of Johns Hopkins University and currently a Judge of the International Court of Justice. The
latter, in an article published in 1970 in the American
Journal of International Law, rightly stated that:

and 5.1

132. There was another speaker who, on behalf of his
delegation, stated the following to the Council on 21 May:
“[We] cannot but express surprise at the position
adopted by the Arab States in the Palestine question,
and particularly at the fact that those States-or some
of them, at least-have resorted to such action as sending their troops into Palestine and carrying out military
operations aimed at the suppression of the national
liberation movement in Palestine.” [299th meeting, P.
7.1

“Where the prior holder of territory had seized that
territory unlawfully, the State which subsequently
13

vention says nothing about trade abroad by the territories
in question. Israel facilitates such trade, including trade
with Arab countries. The Convention accepts the jurisdiction of military tribunals of the administering Power.
Israel goes further than that, and requires that the presidents of those tribunals should have been lawyers for at
least six years and that they should be members of the Bar
and fully qualified. Similarly, the civil and religious tribunals made up of local judges continue to function in those
regions, applying civil and religious laws that were
already iti force.

takes that territory in the lawful exercise of self-defence
has, against that prior holder, better title.”
Stephen Schwebel concluded:
“Israel has better title in the territory of what was Palestine , . . than do Jordan or Egypt.“6
137. If there has been an unwillingness to hear our arguments, still more has there been a reluctance to consider
them. When, for example, Israel is on the record with a
well-defined legal position with regard to the inapplicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,’ to
Judea, Samaria and the Gaza district, it is not enough for
members to reject it out of hand, as has been done in most
caseshere. Differences of opinion are legitimate, and they
deserve serious consideration. Suffice it for me to say here
that the terms “occupying Power” and “occupied territory” have a well-defined meaning in international law
and refer to the seizure by one Power of territory under
the sovereignty of another Power. Since, for the reasons I
have just mentioned, Jordan in no way constituted a legitimate sovereign in Judea and Samaria, the fourth Geneva
Convention cannot be said to apply to Israel’s present
administration of Judea and Samaria.

141. The argument has also been raised that the presence of Israeli villagers and farmers in Judea and Samaria
constitutes an obstacle to peace. Israel utterly rejects this
assertion. Let me point out right away that due to Jordan’s Judenrein policies-the expulsion of all Jews from
the territories captured by Jordan in 1948 and the destruction of their property and villages-there
was not one
Israeli farmer Iiving in Judea and Samaria between 1948
and 1967 and yet there was no willingness on Jordan’s
part at that time either to conclude peace with Israel.
These villages are certainly, it is true, an obstacle. They
are an obstacle to the enemies of peace, to those rejectionist elements in the Arab world who continue to seek the
destruction of my country, to whom any peace or coexistence with Israel is anathema. These villages evidently
frustrate the designs of those who would see in Judea and
Satnaria the first stage in a process of politicidc-a
weakening and eventual dismemberment of Israel, and its
replacement by a terrorist entity and fresh source of instability in the region.

138. Furthermore, even if the laws of belligerent occupation were for some reason applicable here, it would have
to be pointed out that article 49, which has been mentioned in the course of this debate, bans forcible transfers,
not voluntary acts of individuals taking up residence in
the areas under consideration. Moreover, it must also be
remembered that article 49 was written in the wake of the
mass expulsion from their lands of population groups by
the Nazis in order to make room for the settlement of
Germans in those areas in place of the original inhabitants. However, no Arab inhabitants have been displaced
by the establishment of the villages in question. Thus, for
this reason, too, article 49 of the Convention does not
apply here.

142. The constant recourse to futile and meaningless
debate in the United Nations is but one more weapon in
an obsolete arsenal. Reason, common sense and sheer
humanity demand its abandonment once and for all in
favour of the successfully proved way of direct and substantive negotiation between the States concerned.
143. Far from constituting an obstacle to peace, the
Israeli Villages are in fact a vital deterrent to war, Even a
cursory glance at the map of the region shows clearly that
along Israel’s narrow central coastline, where 80 per cent
of Israel’s population lives, the distance between the pre1967 armistice lines and the Mediterranean Sea averages
between 9 and 15 miles, or about the distance from the
northern tip of Manhattan island to the World Trade
Center. Until 1967 all of Israel’s major towns and cities
were within range of medium Arab artillery, and our capital, Jerusalem, was within light mortar range of Arab
forces. Villages of the kind we are discussing have proved
to be an effective form of early warning system.

139. In addition, in this particular instance consideration should be given to the fact that Israel not only applies
the principles of the fourth Geneva Convention with
regard to the residents of the territories in question but
goes significantly beyond them. The Convention, for
example, allows for the application of capital punishment.
Israel has never applied the death penalty in the territories
in question, despite some atrocious crimes committed
there. The Convention does not provide for access by
local populations to courts of the administering Power.
Israel allows the people in those territories to have access
to Israeli courts, whether the cases are against individuals,
against the Government of Israel, or against any of its
officials, including military officers in those regions.,

144. It is clearly the objective of Israel’s enemies to try
to have the territories leading to the outskirts of Jerusalem and Tel Aviv cleared of any Israeli presence which
may stand in the way of their bellicose designs. But anyone prepared to consider seriously the security problems
facing Israel would recognize that Israel being, as it is, still
threatened on its northern and eastern frontiers by implacably hostile Arab neighbours, the presence of those villages is vital also for Israel’s security. Judea, Samaria and

140. There is no provision in the Convention requiring
that movement of the local population outside the territories be facilitated. Israel facilitates such movement in both
directions, including movement to the Arab countries
which regard themselves as being in a state of war with us.
In particular, it facilitates pilgrimages to Mecca. The Con14

the Gaza district were used repeatedly in the period from
1948 to 1967 as staging grounds for ceaselessand unremitting aggression against Israel. Israel’s major towns and
CiiieS were within easy range of Arab artillery and faced
constant threats of attack. The Israeli villages in Judea
and Samaria today are thus an effective form of early
warning system, as well as a vital deterrent to war.

151. My expressed its views on Israeli policies in the
illegally occupied territories on 14 February last [2413th
meeting]; we shall therefore only confirm those views
today without any unnecessary repetition.
152. It is to the future that we must look, after briefly
reviewing the past, and without going into minute details.
153. The events brought to our attention on this occasion are, of course, tragic in themselves, but they are only
symptoms of a wider malady. The Council, ih a way, has
become an inadvertent and reluctant party to a wider
tragedy, in that its attention is frequently diverted from
the real focus meriting its undivided attention to issues
which are in themselves of a nature which demands immediate action but which, as I have already indicated, are
only part of a much wider malaise. The Council, therefore, only reacts to grave situations or, even worse, to&its
accomplis; it has not been able so far to initiate an objectively independent and comprehensive course of action.

145. Yesterday in this debate [2459th meeting], Mr.
Maksoud posed some rhetorical questions. He asked the
Council what he and the group of countries for which he
speaks is supposed to do, Should they resort to force?
Should they come again before the Council when on so
many occasions in the past, to quote him, the Council’s
deliberations
have proved fruitless? Mr. Maksoud did not
answer those questions. Let me answer them for him.
146. The most obvious answer, the most obvious choice
and option, did not even occur to him. Rather than speculate about the use of force or about engaging the Council
in these interminable debates-which, I agree with him,
are exercises in futility-why
not sit down and discuss all
our outstanding problems as is customary in the rest of
the world? Is it not absurd that this possibility does not
even occur to him? He wishes to involve everyone, except
for the party to the dispute-which brings me back to my
introductory
remarks, The root cause of the Arab-Israel
conflict has been all along this unwillingness to recognize
Israel’s existence and its right to exist. The expression of
this unwillingness has been a refusal to sit down with US
and to negotiate without any prior conditions.

154. This was not the case with the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, which took on the assignment given to it by tile
United Nations seven weary years ago, Throughout 1976,
free from the pressure of immediate events, the Committee, by international consensus among its members, diligently drew up a prescription for a peaceful resolution of
the Palestine issue within the Middle East complex.
155. The Committee then treated the question of Palestine as the central issue, which it is, while respecting previous decisions of the United Nations directly relevant to
the Middle East. There was abundant material to use as
the source and the inspiration for the Committee’s recommendations, The number of meetings and the number of
decisions taken on this question is, unfortunately, only a
reaction to what has actually taken place on the spot.

147. Now, where has all this led you, Mr. Maksoud, and
the States which you represent? Are you any better off
after 35 years of unrelenting hostility towards Israel than
you were 35 years ago? Have not you and the rest of the
Arab leadership led your peoples from one disaster to
another? Has not the time come for you and for the leaders of the Arab States to reconsider your position?

156. The hopes generated by those recommendations,
which were endorsed in each successive year by the General Assembly by an even more resounding majority, at
least preserved for a few years a relative calm in the
region, and violence, though not completely eliminated,
was contained. The Palestinian people and its recognized
leadership were encouraged to pursue their diplomatic
initiative. However, the high hopes of the Assembly were
not taken up by the Council, which continued to neglect
the question of Palestine, or else, when frequently called
upon to do so by the nature of events, was only able to
react in a voice muted by dissent.

148. If the Council wishes to make a constructive contribution to the Arab-Israel conflict, it would certainly
encourage our Arab friends to reconsider their position. It
would encourage the Arab States to sit down at long last
to negotiate with Isral without any prior conditions on all
the outstanding issues between us.
149. Mr. GAUCI (Malta) (interpretation from French):
Sir, permit me first of all to express to you my friendly
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency for
the month of August. The very fact that you presided over
a meeting on the very first day of such a hot month augurs
well for the effectiveness of your presidency and is a sign
of your country’s determination
to bring about a resolution of the question before us.

157. The end result was predictable. The attention of the
Council was, in fact, drawn time and time again to several
signals of a major storm gathering on the horizon. Israel
was clearly taking advantage of the Council’s hesitation,
and it acted forcefully on the spot, allegedly in reprisal,
but out of all proportion to any acts which it may have
considered as a pretext. As usual, it chose to strike at the
most vulnerable target. As a result, Lebanon-a
small
and friendly country valiantly striving to heal its internal
problems-was
singled out last year for a devastating
blow. Today, Lebanon, a founding Member of the Organ-

150, I should like also to congratulate most warmly Mr.
Ling Qing of the People’s Republic of China, your predecessor, whose guidance of the Council’s work through an
equally busy July was impeccable.
[The speaker continued in English.1
15

time and energy in advocating the benefits of dialogue,
understanding, reconciliation and recognition, as We-11 as
constantly urging the start of a reverse momentum away
from war and in the direction of peace in the Middle East.

i&ion, is, to say the least, in an unprecedentedly dangerous situation, to our regret, even to our shame.
158. The accumulated evidence is clear and receives confirmation practically every day, The approaches of the
past cannot yield positive results, Israel itself, far from
gaining the respect and security it seeks, is only sowing the
seeds of’ further future conflict by its present militaristic
policy, from whatever perspective one looks at it.
159. There can no longer be any doubt that Israel is now
embarked on an insidious effort to take over the West
Bank and the Gaza Strip. This has been confirmed. It is
sufficient to mention that in just three years both the
number of settlements and the number of settlers have
more than doubled. Soon there will come a point of no
return. We cannot remain helpless witnesses. The truth
can no longer be obscured. It is difficult against cumulative and widely reported evidence to escape the conclusion
that Israel is not only flouting international law but also
that many of its civilians seem to take the law into their
own hands. The genuine fear of West Bank Palestinians
engendered by these illegal Israeli practices was intelligently described in the article by Mr. Jonathan Kuttab
published in Tie New York Times yesterday. It is encouraging that the Israeli authorities have deplored this latest
incident, but the fears remain and evidently they are not
unfounded. We must act if we wish to prevent even worse
disasters.
160. So even its best-intentioned friends, with all the
good will in the world, must act together to persuade
Israel not to continue with its present policies. Similarly
the partial approaches that have deflected and by-passed
the efforts of the United Nations clearly also are not
enough. They too divert attention from the real problem
and on account of their limited scope bring scant
consolation-if,
indeed, they bring any consolation at
all-to the dispossessed Palestinians subjected daily to
ever more repressive Israeli measures.
161. Let us now admit it once and for all: many elements are, of course, involved in the complex Middle East
equation, but the Palestinian question deserves concentrated and priority attention.
162. Over the past seven years the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People has laboured to bring out objectively all the elements of this question. These elements have already been
the subject of concentrated attention in all the regions of
the world, in particular during the past two years, in preparation for the climax during the International Conference on the Question of Palestine to be held in Geneva
later this month. The preparatory work, therefore, has all
been done. The stage is thus set for a determined effort,
open to the contribution of all.
163. Innumerable Governments, including my own,
have not contributed a single bullet to feed the violence of
the Israel-Arab conflict. We have not once encouraged
the escalation of animosity, verbal or otherwise, On the
contrary, we have racked our brains and devoted much

164. A unique opportunity, which will not easily be
repeated, therefore lies ahead in the proposed International Conference on the Question of Palestine. I wish to
point out and to stress that it has already been agreed in
advance to propose that the Conference make its best
effort to ensure that its recommendations are adopted by
general agreement. Here lies an opportunity for a breakthrough in overcoming the obstacles and the stalemate
that have plagued the Middle East for more than a generation. We trust that the leaders of all the nations in the
world will seize this opportunity to set down the fundamental guidelines that will truly recognize the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people and respond positively to
their yearnings for a place among the family of nations,
not by lip service but by resolute, concerted international
agreement. Let all national leaders without exception
devote one benevolent week this month to devising
together a new approach to Palestine and the Middle East
instead of recklessly fanning the fires of discontent by
authorizing enormous sums for the dispatch of lethal
arms to what is probably the most volatile region in the
world-a
region that unfortunately is already oversaturated with the weapons of war and whose soil is
strewn with thousands of hapless victims. The former
course would truly be a UniversaLinvestment for peace in
the years ahead, sorely needed and long overdue.
165. Eventually the Council will have to assume its
proper role in world affairs. It is the only place in the
world where all parties can meet around the same table
and where other flexible arrangements can also be envisaged to facilitate contact, negotiation and reconciliation,
The countries of the region and the major Powers, which
wield such tremendous influence on the protagonists,
should play their predominant part in a positive way in
moulding a truly universal consensus on the imperatives
of the Palestinian dimension to the Middle East conflict.
It is the only way to change direction from antagonism
and confrontation
to tolerance and rapprochement,
backed if necessary by strong international guarantees to
satisfy the legitimate preoccupations of those who may
wish to seek them.
166. Once more the Secretary-General set the right tone
in his latest report on the work of the Organization:
“It is absolutely essential that serious negotiations on
the various aspects of that problem”-that
is, the Middle East problem-“ involve all the parties concerned
at the earliest possible time. Far too much time has
atready elapsed, far too many lives and far too many
opportunities
have been lost, and too many fairs
accompfis have been created.“4
It would be an even graver tragedy if, through uncertainty, division or indifference, the prospects offered by
this beneficial opportunity were to be once again jeopardized or squandered in acrimony and thereby lost.
16

167. In these circumstances, I honestly feel that all
nations should rise to the occasion, not to re-write history, but to right wrong. Malta for its part will do so, both
at the Conference itself and in the Council during the
remainder of our tenure. We desperately need something
constructive for a region which lies in prolonged torment
and which has tormented the international conscience for
far too long. Surely it is not too much to ask that after a
decade and a half of dithering with symptoms and partial
remedies the international community, acting in concert,
will finally direct efforts towards a road to peace based
not on the sinews of war but on the sound principles of
justice, human rights and national dignity.

cern and even. revulsion as regards Israeli practices and
hypocrisy.
174. The Israeli representative stated that a bone of contention is the lack of desire on the part of the enemies of
Israel to recognize its existence and that of its people. He
speaks about what he calls the desire and intention of
others to destroy Israel. He refers to statements that were
prompted by a feeling of danger and by the life threat
posed by Israel’s practices. There is before the Council a
long record of Israel’s daily practices designed to dismember the Arab nation, especially the Palestinian
people. The Israeli representative was oblivious to the fact
that until recent times his rulers did not even recognize the
existence of the Palestinian people. He wonders why the
Security Council showed disregard for and did not meet
to consider what he called the murder of Jews.

168, Today we will vote in favour of the draft resolution
presented [S/15895), but our expectations lie in the
future, on the more difficult but constructive road that we
should all choose.

175. He forgot that Israel has turned its people into an
expansionist aggressor, and that the Zionist philosophy
has turned the Israeli Jews into a people which occupies
other States and achieves its ambitions at the expense of
others, especially at the expense of the Palestinian people.
What took place recently at the Islamic University of AlKhalil is just one example of Israel’s feverish quest to
expel the indigenous Arab inhabitants from their homes
and replace them with “imported” Jewish settlers. This is
what has been said even by some Jews who oppose the
racist Zionist philosophy.

169. Mr. SALAH (Jordan) (interpretation from Arabic):
As is his custom, the Israeli representative has tried to
distract the attention of the Council and to turn the focus
of attention away from the item on the agenda, the situation in the occupied Arab territories.
170. He has tried to prompt representatives on the way
to formulate their statements concerning the aggression of
Israel against the Palestinian people and the Arab nation,
He has tried also to set himself up as judge of the Council
and of the representatives of States-as an arbiter of the
accuracy of their statements and of their condemnation of
aggression, expansion and occupation.

176.

In 1948 Jordan and a number of Arab States went
people, which asked for
help to prevent its elimination and expulsion at the hands
of armed Jewish bands that resorted to terrorism to eject
civilian Arab populations from their territories. Today,
settlers use the same method in Nablus, Al-Khalil and the
West Bank towns, as well as in the daza Strip and the
Golan.
to the rescue of the Palestinian

171. The anger displayed by the Israeli representative
and his grudge against the Council and the Organization
is not unusual, because here in the Council Israel is
unmasked and here we see the process of unveiling its
expansionist aggressive policy.
172. What has been stated by the Israeli representative
about the Council and the United Nations devoting most
of their time to Israel actually reflects the reality. He himself mentioned that the Council spends more than half its
time on Israeli practices, However, he did not indicate the
reason. It takes moral courage to state the reason since it
involves self-condemnation. The Israeli representative forgot to mention, or was oblivious of the fact that the
record of Israel’s occupation of the Arab territories and
its oppressive, arbitrary policies against the civilian inhabitants are the reasons for the Council’s preoccupation
with Israel. It behoves me to say that there is an
unwillingness-and
oftentimes a desire not to overburden
the Council with the implications of Israeli practices and
oppressive policy. I believe with all objectivity that the
Council should meet constantly to grapple with the results
of Israel’s extremism, rash behaviour and expansionism.

177. When Jordan and its Army heroically rose up in
1948 to prevent the genocide of the Palestinian people at
the hands of the Irgun and Stern gangs, that was legal and
legitimate under the rules of international law and the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations. Jordan is
proud of its historical link with the Palestinian people and
with Palestinian-Jordanian
unity. It is the country which
hosted the Palestinians after they were expelled by Israel
from their territories in Palestine. It is the country which
has shared with the Palestinians their pains, hopes and
livelihood and has done its utmost to ease the pains
caused by Israel.
178. We are well aware of the fact that it is impossible
for the representative of Israel to understand those historical and equal bonds that exist between two peoples and
two regions outside the framework of his State, which is
based on the usurpation of the rights of others and replacing one people with another. The legitimate rights of the
Palestinian people cannot be replaced with temporary
shelters and humane action to ameliorate the suffering
caused by the Israeli occupation and the displacement
that has taken place at Israel’s hands. The rights of the
Palestinians are political, legal and historical in the IanJ

173. The conceit and arrogance of the Israeli representative have gone so far that he arrogates the right to assess
the content and formulation of statements of representatives concerning Israel’s brutal and aggressive practices. I
believe that what has been mentioned in the Council condemns Israel. It stems from the feelings of anxiety, Con17

184, Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
Mr, President, since this is the first opportunity we have
had to address you since you assumed the presidency, let
me express our sincere recognition of the efforts of your
Government to help contribute to an organic solution of
this situation.

of their fathers and forefathers, in Palestine. As regards
the claim of the Israeli representative to the effect that his
country desires peace, I wish to state that peace consists in
deeds, not in words only. The representatives in the Council are meeting today to consider Israel’s actions that contravene the most rudimentary requirements of peace. But
if we really want to consider Israel’s aggressive record,
our debate will be lengthy, and I do not believe that there
is anyone in the Council who is not aware of that record.
Just to refresh representatives’ recollections, I shall recall
that Israel is the only State which the international community has unanimously agreed is not a peace-loving
nation, in accordance with the relevant resolution of the
General Assembly. I wish also to recall to representatives
that since the 1967 war Israel has been obstructing peace
efforts with a view to keeping the West Bank and Gaza.
Israel has refused to implement resolution 242 (1967) and
has thwarted all attempts aimed at its implementation. Its
most recent rejection of peace initiatives was its prompt
rejection of President Reagan’s initiative of 1 September
last.’

185. In June I was in your country, Sir; I visited Quay
d’Orsay and, with your colleagues there, I sensed concern
regarding where the Israeli settlement policy is leading us.
I wish here only to record that your efforts in July 1982 in
the Council and as manifested in the France-Egyptian
draft resolution [S/153171 speak extremely highly of your
endeavours to obtain a peaceful solution to the miseries of
our people and to bring them to an end.
186. We have heard a very lengthy lecture dealing with
legalisms, morals and so on. We have heard some accusations being launched against the Council. We could have
been spared all those accusations of misinformation or misreporting if only the Commission that was established by
the Security Council under its resolution 446 (1979) had
been permitted to go into the occupied territories and to
investigate for itself to find out exactly what was true and
what was not true. By preventing such a visit by a Commission established by the Council, the criminals tried to
hide some of their crimes. If they were so sure of themselves, why did they not permit the Council to carry out
its duties?

179. The unlawful acts of Israel in the occupied Arab
territories such as the building of settlements, the confiscation of territory and the expulsion of inhabitants
condemn in the strongest way possible the claims of
Israel and its falsifications and statements to the effect
that it desires peace. The international community has
unanimously adopted the principles of a just and lasting
peace, most important of which are the withdrawal of
Israel from all the Arab territories occupied since 1967
and recognition of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian
people. The onIy State that departs from that international unanimity is Israel.

187. I am glad to hear from the Council that there are of
course differences of opinion on what is legitimate and
what is not legitimate. But such differences of opinion
should in no way be construed as an interpretation
or
misinterpretation of the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations. The Charter tells us very clearly that all
Members shall refrain from the threat or use of force
against the territorial integrity or political independence
of States. This morning the representative of the United
Kingdom told us:

180. I will be revealing no secret when I say that the
motive behind the actions of Israel is its desire to keep the
occupied territories since it prefers that to peace. Here lies
the disease.
181. We were expecting that at this meeting the Israeli
representative would give an indication of good faith, and
move from mere words to deeds. There is no doubt that
until Israel states its intention to follow the path of peace
the international community will continue to judge it on
the basis of its acts and practices and not on the basis of
its claims.

“we consider these settlements to be contrary to international law and to the principle of the inadmissibility
of the acquisition of territory by force” [246&h meeting, para. 76-J.

According to the Charter, according to the unanimous
decision of this Council-and
many decisions have been
adopted unanimously to this effect-the presence of the
Israeli forces in the occupied Palestinian and other Arab
territories, including Jerusalem, is illegal. I do not think
we can convert this place into a class for the interpretation
of legalisms.

182. In conclusion I wish to refer to what was stated by
the Israeli representative when he spoke of precision, He
said that in my statement of last Thursday [2457fh meeting, para. 231 I mentioned that the incidents of the mass
poisoning of schoolgirls had taken place in February. I
want to correct him. In my statement I said that these
cases took place last March. I call upon him to make sure
by consulting the verbatim record of that meeting if he
wishes to do so. If correctness is a measure of credibility, I
hope that that criterion will be used as far as concerns
what has been said by the representative of Israel this
evening.

188. According to the sixth paragraph of article 49 of
the Geneva Convention relative to the Protectiop of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949:’
“The Occupying Power shall not deport or transfer
parts of its own civilian population into the territory it
occupies.”

183. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from l+mch): The
representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization
wishes to make a statement. I call upon him.

We have concrete evidence that the Deputy Prime Minister, and the Minister for Housing, I think, Mr, Levi, says
18

that in Hebron he will settle 500 Jewish families in the
coming three years-this in an area already settled by
Aribs. The result will be that those Arabs will have to be
evicted or, let us say, thrown out of their homes.
189. The Commission
that the Security Council
entrusted with the task of investigating Israeli practices
presented a report on 25 November 1980 [S/14268]. That
report was never brought to the attention of the Council; I
really cannot explain why. I only know that the report
exists and the Security Council never considered it. What
is relevant in that report is contained in its conclusions.
The Commission found as follows:
“the Commission would like to reaffirm the entirety of
the conclusions contained in its two previous reports,
and more specifically the following:
“ . . .
(b) A correlation exists between the establishment of
Israeli settlements and the displacement of the Arab
.population;

nomic plans change, the executive changes, but there is a
continuity and full credibility in that country’s legal system and in its judiciary. If, with a change in the executive,
there is a change in the concept of law and legalism, of
legalities and legitimacies, I wonder what will happen
when we have the next President in this country.
191. Frankly, all this is academic. In the Council we do,
of course, need some academic background for being
here, but the fact remains that the Council has met to deal
with a crime perpetrated against students, a crime that
was continued by the Israeli army proper that fired on
students in Bir Zeit, that fired on students in Nablus, that
imposed further restrictions even on the burial of those
victims of crimes against students in Hebron.
192. And there is nothing incidental about this. We
recall that on 25 December 1975 the ex-commander of the
Zionist paratroops, Mr. David Aaron, lecturing at the
Ben Eleazar National College in Tel Aviv, told his
audience:

(c) In the implementation
of its policy of settlements, Israel is resorting to methods-often
coercive
and sometimes more subtle-which include the control
of water resources, the seizure of private property, the
destruction of houses and the banishment of persons in
complete disregard for basic human rights;

“If we really want to spare Jewish and Arab blood,
then the final solution”-1
repeat-“the final solution
that we must strive for is that of transfer-that is, the
removal of all Arabs from here to the Arab countries,
which should, of course, be achieved by reasonable
ways and means.”

(4 The settlement policy has brought drastic and
adverse changes to the economic and social pattern of
the daily life of the remaining Arab population and is
causing profound changes of a geographical and
demographic” -and
I would underline the word
“demographic”-”
nature in the occupied territories,
including Jerusalem” [ibid., puru, 234.

Mr. Aaron did not come out with anything new to us,
because the founder of political Zionism, Theodor Her&
had said:

That report was presented by the Security Council Commission established under resolution 446 (1979) to examine the situation relating to settlements in the Arab
territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem, that
consisted of the representatives of Portugal, Bolivia and
Zambia. I do not think anybody could question the integrity of the members of the Commission.
190. It was alleged-or
rather, stated-here
that the
crime committed in Hebror;l-or
perpetrated against
those students in Hebron-was condemned by the President of Israel and by Mr. Menachem Begin, the Prime
Minister. It was also condemned by the mayor of Hebron.
What happened? He was fired because he condemned the
crime. Here we have a discriminatory criterion for condemning or not condemning crimes. Concerning illegality, I should like to recall what President Carter said on 28
July 1977. He stated:

“We shall try to spirit the penniless population across
the border. The process must be carried out discreetly
and circumspectly.”
It boils down exactly to: “Kill

them without pain”.

193. But we the Palestinian people are not willing to
participate in a final solution. Of course, the Irgun Zeva’i
Laumi, which is the root of the present Likud and Herut
Parties in Israel, was fishing for a final solution for the
Jewish question. This appears in a document entitled
‘LBasic outlines of the proposal of the National Military
Organization in Palestine (B-gun Zeva’i Leumi) concerning the solution of the Jewish question of Europe and the
active participation of the National Military Organization
in the war at the side of Germany”. This came out in the
late 193Os, and I should like to read out exactly how the
Irgun Zeva’i Leumi thought it would contribute to the
solution of the Jewish question:
“On numerous occasions prominent statesmen of
National Socialist Germany”-in
other words, Nazi
Germany- “underlined in their remarks that the new
order of Europe required a radical solution to the Jewish question through evacuation.

“This matter of settlements in the occupied territories
has always been characterized by our Government, by
me and my predecessors, as an ikgal action.**

“The evacuation of the Jewish masses from Europe
is a precondition for the solution of the Jewish question, which, however, solely and finally becomes possible through resettling those masses in the homeland of

Those are the words of a President of the Government of
the United States, an elected President. I do know that in
the United States the legislative branch changes, the eco19

the Jewish people in Palestine and through establishing
a Jewish State in its historic frontiers.
“To solve the Jewish question that way and thereby to
free the Jewish people once and for ail times is the aim of
the political activity and long-standing struggle of the
Israeli liberation movement, of’ the National Military
Organization in Palestine, the Irgun Zeva’i Leumi.
194. The PLO has no intention whatsoever of COoperating with the neo-Nazis in Tel Aviv in order to find a
solution to the Palestine question, either by evacuating
the Palestinians from their home or by eliminating them,
as was the result of this co-operation in Dachau and
Auschwitz and other places. In that connection, we know
how the Irgun Zeva’i Leumi, which is the root of ,the
present Likud alignment in Israel, contributed to the ehmination of those victims.

202.

I now resume my function as PRESIDENT.

203. The representative of the United States has asked
to speak in exercise of the right of reply, and I now call
upon him.
204, Mr, LICHENSTEIN
(United States of America): I
shall be very brief on this occasion, Mr. President. I
intend to speak again after we have voted on the draft
resolution.
205. Apparently, the representative of Jordan has decided to exclude the representative republican democracy
whose entity and ruling clique operate out of Washington, D.C. these days from the international community.
He referred to the unanimous opinion of the international community in support of the infamous General
Assembly resolution of last year identifying Israel as a
‘,‘non-peace-loving State”. I remind the representative of
Jordan that on that occasion the representative of the
United States, which, to the best of my knowledge,
remains a member in good standing of the United
Nations, if not of the international community, voted
“No”. I reiterate today that that representative voted
“No”. To the best of my recollection, it was this very
forefinger which proudly pushed the appropriate button,

195. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): 1
shall now make a statement in my capacity as representative of FRANCE.
19G. The Council is meeting to consider the complaint
submitted by the Group of Arab States following an
attack in the Islamic University of Hebron. [S/l5890].
197. The French Government cannot remain indifferent
to this new tragedy affecting an already sorely tried city. It
firmly condemns this act of terrorism, which has caused
many victims.

206. It is my further recollection that between 15 and
20 modest republics throughout the world, some of them
Western European, some of them Latin American, some
of them Asian, abstained from voting on that resolution.

19X. The Israeli authorities must take all the steps necessary to prevent such tragedies. On this occasion, France
recalls that, in accordance with the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, of 12 August 1949,’ the Israeli authorities, as the
occupying Power in the West Bank and Gaza, are responsible for the protection of Palestinian civilian populations.
Consequently, we urge Israel to comply strictly with its
obligations in this regard. More generally, in line with a
basic principle of its policy, France cannot but disapprove
of any unilateral measure imposed on any State or people
whatesoever. It calls for’ respect for democratic freedoms
and for cessation of the escalation of violence and
repression.

207. So much for the unanimous opinion of the international community. The representative of Jordan conjoined in his remarks credibility and confidence. So much
for credibility; so much for confidence.
208. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): 1
take it that the Council is prepared to vote on the draft
resolution before it [ibid]. If there is no objection, I shall
now put the draft resolution to the vote.
209, Mr. SALAH (Jordan) (interpretationfrom
Arabic):
The delegation of Jordan is pleased on behalf of the
member States of the League of Arab States to introduce
the draft resolution contained in document S/15895 of 1
August 1983. In this connection, I wish to state the
following.

199. In this regard, we are bound to note that the policy
offlit accompli pursued by Israel in the territories occupied by it since 1967 is harmful to any peace efforts. The
Israeli settlements are without legal basis and create an
atmosphere of tension. That is the reason for the violent
incidents that have been deplored for years.

210. First, the conflict dealt with by the draft resolution
is well known to representatives. It has been on the
Council’s agenda for a long time. Despite the attempts of
the Council to deal with the matter, Israel’s arbitrary
practices and measures against the civilian Arab populations, languishing under the Israeli occupation for 16
years, have been on the increase. Moreover, the pace aT
Israel’s settlement activities has increased, jeop:krdizing
peace and security in the arca.

200. It is through dialogue and negotiation, and not
through violence and repression, that we can arrive at a
peace that will ensure the security of all States in the
region and justice for all peoples desirous of exercising
their legitimate rights in their own homelands.
201. For that reason, my delegation will vote in favour
of the draft resolution submitted by almost all of the Arab
States [5/158951.

211. Secondly, the elements of the draft resolution are
basic, fundamental principles for any international posi20

tion, especially on the part of the Council, with a view to
dealing with the deteriorating situation in the occupied
Arab territories. No attempt to deal with the situation will
be meaningful and effective unless it contains these principles in their entirety. To reject them or to show lack of
enthusiasm for supporting them would undermine the
credibifity of any action aimed at achieving a comprehenshe, just and lasting peace.
212.

which the Council is suffering from, as well as for its
inability to deal with international crises that pose a grave
threat to international peace and security. It has become
clear that putting self-interest and narrow chauvinism, in
the absence of a genuine threat, above considerations of
collective security is the main reason for the paralysis. The
draft resolution gives the Council a chance to affirm its
validity and effectiveness in grappling with a matter of
paramount
importance that jeopardizes international
peace and security.

The draft contains the following principles.

213. First, the Israeli settlement po!icy is illegal and i!!egitimate and constitutes a major obstruction to achieving
a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the Middle
East problem.

220, The Group of Arab States and, through that
Group, Jordan have tried to set out this problem rationally and objectively, and in such a way as to secure for
everyone every opportunity to uphold the principles of
justice, equity and equality so that the legitimate principled national or regional interests of no party will be
compromised.

214. Secondly, the Israeli policies in the occupied Arab
territories are in contravention of the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, of I2 August 1949.’ The Council calls upon Israel to
abide scrupulously by the Convention and to desist from
taking any action which would result in changing the lega!
status and geographical nature and in materially affecting
the demographic composition of the occupied Arab
territories.

221. After painstaking effort, Jordan has pledged not to
place any party in a position where upholding the principles of right and justice would clash with its legitimate
national interests. On that basis, we hope that the Council
will be able to adopt this draft resolution unanimously.
222. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
shall now call on members of the Council wishing to
make statements before the vote.

215. Thirdly, the Council affirms all its previous relevant resolutions.

223. Mr. KABEYA MILAMBU
(Zaire) (interpretation
from French): Mr. President, we shall take the opportunity

216. Fourthly, in operative paragraph 5, the Council
rejects all Israeli arbitrary and illegal actions, for which it
_uses its settlers. These measures aim at forcing the Arab
inhabitants of the West Bank and Gaza to leave their
homes and their lands in preparation for their replacement by Israeli settlers, Israel’s intentions have been clear.
They are to create an economic, psychological, social and
security state that makes it difficult for the Arab inhabitants to live on their land and in their homes, thus impelling them to leave for the neighbouring States. In my
statement to the Council last Thursday [2457rh meetingI, 1
indicated the grave implications of this policy for Jordan
and other Arab countries.

in due course to offer you and your predecessor the customary words of congratulation.
224. There is no need to remind the Council that in the
many debates devoted to this item, most recently in May
1983, it has been stated that Israel’s practice of establishing settlements in occupied Arab lands is contrary to international law they have thus been condemned by the
international community.
225. Today again-just as it was yesterday and as it will
be again in the future-the Council is called upon to pronounce i&elf on the situation in the occupied Arab territories, The draft reso!ution to be put to the vote [S/15895],
if endorsed by the Council, like others in the past will not
lead to actions. We might wonder why the Council is
being called upon to repeat itself. This state of affairs
undermines the credibility of the Council both for its own
members and for the international community, and it
casts serious doubt on the applicability of its decisions.

217. Fifthly, the Council reaffirms its determination to
take follow-up action in dealing with the situation and to
examine ways and means to secure Israel’s full implementation of the provisions of the resolution.
218. In short, the draft resolution reflects the. past positions of the Security Council, adopted in many resolutions. It also reflects the situation in the occupied Arab
territories and the grave implications of the continuation
of the Israeli occupation, of the escalation of Israel’s
oppressive practices and of the settlement and immigration policies pursued by Israel.

226, Furthermore, looking at operative paragraph 6 of
the draft resolution, we must see that it is not balanced. In
the view of my delegation, murder-whether
perpetrated
by Israel or by our Arab brothers-cannot
be tolerated,
and must be condemned.

219. The Secretary-General has pointed his finger at the
root-cause of the malaise that the international Organization suffers from--the absolute adherence of States to
their national interests, the arbitrary placing of the service
of those interests over the interests of the international
system. Representatives also have applied themselves for
a long time to the analysis of the reasons for the paralysis

227. For all those reasons, my delegation will abstain in
the vote.
228. Mr. KARRAN (Guyana): I should like first of all
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presi21

dency for the month of August. With your demonstrated
skill and competence as a diplomat, my delegation is confident that you will guide the work of the Council successfully through this month.

pied since 1967, including Jerusalem, are of no legal
validity and constitute a major and serious obstruction of
the achievement of a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in the Middle East.

229. I should like also to pay a special tribute, and to
express my delegation’s appreciation, to your predecessor, Mr, Ling Qing of the People’s Republic of China, and
to his delegation for the efficient conduct of the business
of the Council during the month of July.

237. Guyana strongly abhors the use of force or the
threat of force in the acquisition of territory and believes
in the settlement of disputes by peaceful means. The
Council must act, and act now, before it is too late. My
delegation will vote in favour of the draft resolution
before us.

230. The Council is again called upon to consider the
situation in the occupied Arab territories, and more particularly the grave situation and the recent tragic events in
that region. My delegation, to say the least, was shocked
to learn of the incidents in the city of Al-Khalil (Hebron)
and particularly those at the Islamic University, where as
a result of the criminal acts of armed elements 3 students
were killed and about 40 others injured.

238, The PRESIDENT
(interpretation fi’om French): I
shall now put to the vote the draft resolution.

231. These incidents have taken- place in Is’raelioccupied Palestinian territory, and Israel, as the occupying Power, must be held responsible for the atrocltles
visited on the innocent students. This is another instance
of the systematic Israeli policy of aggression and
annexation.
232. It is cIearly a policy of creeping colonization combined with violent suppression of the rights of the Arab
population, designed to weaken and demoralize the Arab
people, in particular the Palestinians, and thereby to suffocate all nationalist sentiments within them and force them
into submission.
233. As Guyana has said on several occasions before,
any attempt to liquidate the Palestinian people or to erasi:
the Palestinian national identity will never bring peace in
that region. Peace and any lasting solution of the Middle
East question can be found only in the recognition of the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including their
right to self-determination and to the establishment of
their own independent sovereign State in their homeland,
Palestine. Israel must come to terms with the Palestinian
people. I should like to reiterate my country’s position:
Guyana recognizes the right of all States in the region’to
live in peace and security, and we believe that all negotiations must involve the PLO, as the sole authentic representative of the Palestinian people.
234. The recent incidents in. Al-Khalil (Hebron) can
only lead to greater tension and act as an obstacle to the
achievement of a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in
the Middle East. It is high time for the Council to take
appropriate action to ensure Israel’s compliance with the
relevant resolutions of the Council,

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour: China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta,
Netherlands, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Zimbabwe.
Against: United States of’ America.
Abstaining: Zaire.
The result of the vote was 13 in favour, I against, and 1
abstention.
The draft resolution was not adopted, the negative vote
being that of a permanent member of the Council.

239. The PkESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
shall now ‘call on those members of the Council wishing to
make statements after the vote.
240. Mr: LICHENSTEIN
(United States of America): I
wish, first of all, to join in the universality of tribute to
you, Sir, and to the great Republic that you represent as
we welcome you to the presidency this month. You personally and your nation are widely and properly known
for adherence to the rule of reason, to clarity and precision, to the rule of law and to an abiding concern for the
rights of all human beings to live in freedom. We look to
you for guidance and effective leadership with great confidence in this month.
241. I wish also to join in the many tributes expressed
here to your predecessor, the representative of the People’s Republic of China. He exercised leadership last
month with calm, cool judiciousness and we are all in his
debt.

235. The draft resolution set out in document S/15895,
which has just been introduced by the representative of
Jordan, is balanced and is, in my delegation’s opinion, a
genuine attempt to deal with a deteriorating situation,

242. One final preliminary remark: my memory has
been further refreshed as to the present standing of the
universality of the opinion of the international community regarding the resolution of the General Assembly.
The vote on that resolution was something like 86 in
favour, 20 opposed-including
the United States-and
some 45 abstentions. As I said before, some universality.

236. Israel’s policies and practices in establishing settlements in the Palestinian and other Arab territories occu-

243. The issue before the Council today is a grave one
and it is far-reaching. It stems from the continuing vio22

lence in the West Bank which disrupts the hopes of peaceloving people everywhere for an early settlement of the
Middle
East conflict. The United States shares the
anguish expressed by many speakers in these meetings
about the loss of life and destruction of property that the
West Bank has witnessed in recent weeks, and indeed
months and years. We are eternally opposed to violence
and terrorism from whatever quarter such acts may come,
not only because of the human tragedies involved but also
because of the resulting damage to the spirit of reconciliation, which is so necessary to peace.

tories, more perhaps than any other single action, would
foster the kind of atmosphere needed for negotiations
leading to peace.
248, We do not believe, however, that it is at all practical
or even appropriate to call for the dismantling of the existing settlements. The future of the settlements is precisely
one of the key issues which will need to be addressed in
negotiations. Nor can we accept continuing the sterile
argument as to whether the settlements are “legal”or “illegal”, an argument which unfortunately has dominated discussions in the United Nations on this question to the
detriment of the basic issue, namely, how to bring about a
just and peaceful resolution of the conflict-precisely the
conflict-over
the occupied territories, of which the recent
events in Hebron are a tragic manifestation,

244. The draft resolution before us today reflects this
feeling of anguish, but regrettably does so only in one
operative paragraph condemning the Hebron events. It
does not adequately address the recent series of criminal
attacks in the West Bank. We, of course, join the other
members of the Council in condemning these attacks
against civilians. We condemn all such acts, including the
murder on 7 July of an Israeli settler in Hebron and the
wanton destruction of part of the Hebron market that
occurred immediately
thereafter. The brutal terrorist
attack at Hebron University on 26 July was but the latest,
the most horrifying of these criminal acts.

249. The problems of the West Bank are real; they are
agonizing. The United States remains committed to the
resolution of all aspects of the Arab-Israel conflict and its
underlying causes. A debate in the Council, as I have just
suggested, over whether the Israeli settlements are “legal”
or “illegal” fails to address the real problem and encourages the kind of rhetorical, legalistic arguments that tend
to polarize differences which can be bridged only by
unconditional
negotiations. We make these differences
appear much wider and deeper than they are. Indeed, this
polarization exacerbates the relations of the protagonists
on the ground, the very parties who must be induced to
come to the bargaining. table in a spirit of mutual accommodation which is essential if there is ever to be peace in
the Middle East.

245. We also share the view expressed in the draft resolution that The Hague Convention of 19O72and the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time War, of 12 August 1949,’ are applicable
to the territories occupied by Israel. The United States
Government has stated this position on numerous occasions, and I affirm it again today. Israel, as the occupying
Power in the West Bank, is in our judgement bound by
the terms of the fourth Geneva Convention.

I
I
I
8
II
I
1
1
j
t

250. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): Since this is the
first time that I have spoken in the Council this month,
may I congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
lofty post of President of the Council and wish you success in your responsible work.

246. The draft resolution contain elements which are
wholly unacceptable to the United States. Therefore we
were obliged to vote against it. Let me make clear, however, that we did not vote against the draft resolution
because we approved of Israel’s settlement policy. On the
contratry, President Reagan said on 1 September 1982and I reaffirm it today: “further settlement activity is in
no way necessary for the security of Israel and only diminishes the confidence of the Arabs that a final outcome can
be freely and fairly negotiated”, The most obvious flaw in
the text of the draft resolution is its clear implication that
Israel has carried out forcible transfers of Arab population from the occupied territories. The allegation made
here is not one of individual deportations-which
have,
observers recognize, reprettably taken place-but rather
that a policy of large-scale transfers of the Arab population has been deliberately pursued. There is no body of
evidence to support this allegation.

251. I should like to avail myself of this opportunity to
express my gratitude to your predecessor as President last
month, the representative of the People’s Republic of
China, Mr, Ling Qing, for his skilful organization of the
Council’s work during the month of July.
252, Today’s statements by the representative of the
United States have shown quite clearly the enormous gap
existing between words and deeds of the United States. I
shall speak of the deeds of the United States.
253. In voting today in full isolation against the draft
resolution submitted [ibid.), the current United States
Administration
for the seventh time-1 repeat: for the
seventh time-has blocked the path to a just peace in the
Middle East. This is some kind of record for the United
States Administration.
But in today’s United States vote
there is not only a numerical aspect; there is also a qualitative aspect. It might be boiled down to the three following
ideas.

247. Moreover, turning to the provisions relating specifitally to Israeli settlemeds, let me reiterate that we believe
that settlement settlement activity in the occupied territories constitutes an obstacle to a fair and lasting settlement
in accordance with Council resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973), and in particular that further settlement activity in urbanized areas such as Hebron can only exacerbate
tension, As President Reagan emphasized on 1 September, a freeze on settlements throughout the occupied terri-

254. First, the current draft resolution was submitted by
20 Arab States. In other words, this is the united voice,
23

j

cally affirmed by the Council in its resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973)-unconditional
negotiation without prejudgement, without precondition, precluding no issue, on
the basis of the principles stated in resolution 242 (1967)
and reiterated and reaffirmed in resolution 338 (1973).
That has always been the policy of my Government; that
is today the policy of my Government. And I sometimes
suspect that the representative of the Soviet Union really
knows that, although he never lets on.

the united view, of all Arab nations. Consequently, in
blocking the adoption of this draft resolution the United
States has flagrantly disregarded the just demands of
Arab countries and peoples.
255. Secondly, in its contents, the Arab draft resolution
was a minimum. Its purpose was to prevent the swallowing up by Israel of Arab lands. Accordingly, the United
States veto is a direct sanctioning by Washington of such
a swallowing up and, first and foremost, a sanctioning of
annexation by Israel of the West Bank.

262. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (imrerpretatkvt from Russian): I am not disputillg the words and statements of the United States, just as
I do not iutend to dispute what was just said by the representative of the United States. That would be pointless, I
am talking about the deeds of the United States. The
representative of the United States was not able to refute
the obvious fact that the major flaw in United States policy in the Middle East is that the United States says one
thing and does something else.

256. Thirdly, after today’s United States vote no one
should have any illusions as to the essence of the policy of
Washington itself in the Middle East. This is an anti-Arab
policy. This is a pro-Israeli policy. This is an imperialistic
policy. That is what today’s United States vote tells us.
257. Just a few words in connection with the lengthy
statement made by the representative of Israel, Mr. Blum.
He spoke a great deal about others’ restraint, but he was
once again very surprising and in fact in a very sick way
showed no restraint. The fact is that for the umpteenth
time at a meeting of the Security Council Mr. Blum is
expressing fears-in an almost maniacal way-that someone is supposedly fishing in troubled waters in the Middle
East. But it is clear that for such an operation of fishing in
troubled waters to be carried out one would need the
necessary technical conditions. Some else would have to
be stirring up the waters a great deal-and, in fact, that is
what is being done in the Middle East, as is well known,
by Israel, the aggressor State, the occupying Slate, the
annexationist State. So for Mr. Blum finally to be cured of
this illness there is one very simple prescription. It would
be enough for Israel to withdraw its troops from all the
Arab territories occupied in and after 1967. And, in light
of Mr. Blum’s statement, I think it should be very clear to
all that such a step by Israel would, in addition to everything else, have a favourable effect on the health of Mr.
Blum himself.

263. The PRESIDENT
(intcrprelationfi.am
representative of the Palestine Liberation
wishes to speak. I call upon him.

Prench): The
Organizatioll

264. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
Let me express our gratitude and deep appreciation for
the result of the voting. It is not the numbers that count
but the substance. That one permanent member has opted
to take a different course and to be the Lone Ranger in an
adverse sense does not in any way surprise me. What
really does confuse me is the statement that has been
made to justify that course of action. It is really very
confusing.
265. At a time when we are told by the representative of
the Government of the United States that the United
States shares the view expressed in the draft resolutionthat the annex to The Hague Convention of 19072 and tile
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949, are applicable
to the territories occupied by Israel, and that the United
States Government has stated that position on numerous
occasions-he has again affirmed that Israel, as the occupying Power, is bound by the terms of the fourth Geneva
Convention. I take it that that is exactly in conformity with
article 49 of the “Civilians” Convention, which says that the
occupying Power shall not deport, and so on.

258. Mr. LICHENSTEIN
(United States of America): I
do keep on having difficulties with the representative of
the Soviet Union, whose professional association I do also
cherish. Probably it is a consequence of his lack of practice in dealing with democratic nations and with free
peoples.
259. The United States, for its part, rarely tries to
enforce decisions which do not arise out of the genuine
self-initiated will of the parties to a conflict or to any form
of dispute. Our vote today is characterized by none of the
three qualities that the representative of the Soviet Union
has attributed to it.

266. He then leads us into the following paragraphs,
and he says that the settlements are the key issue that will
need to be addressed in negotiations. Here my confusion
is this. Since he admits that this is territory seized by force
and Israel is the occupying Power, how can he permit
these territories to become chips in the negotiations? Is he
opening up the road to anybody to seize the territory of
others, despite their admitting that they are illegally militarily occupying that territory? Can they still utilize such
occupation as a chip in bargaining or in negotiations? i
think that the paper he read should have been revised a
little more before it was given as a statement. But naturally that is entirely up to him.

260. The policy of my Government and of my President, Ronald Reagan, has been clearly, explicitly and
repeatedly stated over the two years and eight months of
this Administration
and in the course of the seven vetoes
to which Mr. Ovinnikov refers.
261. The path to peace, in the view of my Government,
is the path that has always existed and that was specifi24

267, From his statement I would say that he also is
rather confused. He says that the most obvious flaw in the
text of the draft resolution is its clear implication that
Israel has carried out forcible transfers of Arab populations from the occupied territories.

adding to the ever-growing number of refugees, with
all the attendant consequences.
“Available evidence”-that
is, evidence available to
the Council Commission-“shows
that Israeli occupying authorities continue to deplete the natural resources, particularly water resources, in the occupied
territories for their advantage and to the detriment of
the Palestinian people.” fW14268, paras, 237 and 238.1

268. The commentary of the ICRC on the Geneva Convention confirmed that each article was to be treated
separately and distinctly, so the draft resolution refers to
the sixth paragraph of article 49, which states that the
occupying Power shall not deport or transfer parts of its
own civilian population into the territory it occupies.
What he may be referring to-and I admit he must have
been confused-is the first paragraph of article 49, not the
sixth paragraph, and there is no reference to the first paragraph in the draft resolution the CounciI has before it.

272. It is clear, therefore, that the argument presented
by the representative of the United States is based either
on misinformation or on a misinterpretation and misconception of what the draft resolution contained, as well as
of the provisions of the fourth Geneva Convention.
273. The PRESIDENT (interpretationfranz French): Mr.
Clovis Maksoud, permanent observer of the League of
Arab States, whom the Council invited to the 2412th
meeting, has asked to make a statement. With the consent
of the Council, I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

269. Going further, Israel is creating facts by this settlement policy-that
is the purpose of those settlementsjust like the Nazi facts that were created to facilitate the
acquisition of territory. Here it is meant to facilitate the
acquisition of territory so that it may become a bargaining chip in the so-called negotiations.

274. Mr. MAKSOUD:
I wish to thank you once again,
Sir, for allowing me the privilege of addressing this Council, because the Group of Arab States has worked very
hard to focus on the primary concerns that preoccupy the
world community, Needless to say, the draft resolution
that has been vetoed by the United States represented our
unanimous
Arab eagerness to secure international
unanimity. We have not diagnosed the entirety of the
crisis in the Middle East, nor have we evolved what we
deem to be a just and comprehensive solution. What we
have realized is that in order to achieve justice, we unfortunately have to be gradualists, and in order to be gradualists we have to be pragmatists, We were therefore more
eager to be relevant than we were to be principled and
consistent.

270. Of course I fully agree with him-he
may not like
that-that
the question is not the legalisms, not the confusion, not the misinformation
or misinterpretation,
but
how to bring about a just and peaceful resolution of the
conflict. There I fully agree with him. And I fully agree
with him that the parties must be induced to come to the
bargaining table. The bargaining table is the Security
Council table, As a matter of fact, that is why the Council
was created, And if memory serves, in January 1976
occurred the first attempt to utilize this bargaining
table-although
I do not like to call it a bargaining table:
it is a forum, a vehicle for peace, and that is what we
should use it for. Since January 1976 the PLO has repeatedly said that within the Council, on the basis of the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations. Let the Council become the vehicle for peace. After all, people say they
do not want any conditions. No, we do not want any
conditions. Our only conditions are the principles of the
Charter, and one of those speaks clearly of friendly relations among nations based on respect for the principle of
equal rights and the self-determination of peoples. This is
precisely what the Palestinian people is asking for: to go
to the negotiating
table with the right to selfdetermination
affirmed and confirmed as per the provisions and principles of the Charter.

275. We have undertaken a historic compromise, and
we have submitted our collective assessment of what is
achievable and of what, in the present circumstances and
international equations, can be relatively equitable. We
have deliberately sought to accommodate many States
members of the Council whose strategic relationships
with the United States might constrain them from fullfledged acceptance of what we deem to be full justice for
the Palestinian people.
276. What this draft resolution has sought to do is not
to achieve justice for the Palestinians but to mitigate the
flagrant injustices to the Palestinians. We have acted as
we have in a conscious act of compromise and what has
been called moderation. We have sought the imput of
many among the non-aligned, socialist and Western European countries. We wanted to bring about a unanimous
decision in the Council. We worked hard. Many in the
Arab States had reservations. Many thought that no matter how eager we are to accommodate there will always be
a stumbling-block-and
why should we be accommodating and pragmatic when the principal philosopher of international pragmatism would not budge even if his closest
allies in Western Europe were convinced of the conclu-

271. I am really somewhat confused, for the representative of the United States said that there is no body of
evidence to support the allegation that mass deportation
or forcible transfer of population exists, Again, if he had
done his homework and had read the report submitted on
25 November 1980-that may have been before his time,
so I do not blame him-of the Security Council Commission established under resolution 446 (1979) he would
have found the following specific statement:
“The Israeli policy of settlements has led to major
displacements
and dispossession of Palestinians,
25

sions that have been factored into the draft resolution
submitted to the Council?

the questioning process that has been interrupted by
today’s debate- can, hopefully, resume their activities.

277. Yet we swallowed a great deal of our pridedespite the fact that we realized that those Palestinians
who are suffering the oppressive nature of occupation,
who are languishing in various refugee camps, would not
look with great favour on our collective disposition to be
pragmatic, to accommodate, to toe the line with international realism and the balance of power-in order, in our
eagerness, to avoid a deadlock. For we thought that our
Western friends would broker another condition within
the Council, and yet the collective reason of the allies of
the United States in Western Europe has failed to persuade that country, if not to vote in favour of the draft
resolution, then at least to abstain in the voting-not
out
of deference to Palestinian rights or to the many friends of
the United States among the Arab States, but out of deference to the many strategic allies members of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization. We found that what a
super-Power can get away with is really sometimes
beyond our moral comprehension.

281. Many of us, in the Arab group and outside it, have
always said that the United States is, of course, a superPower, but that what is challenging is that it is not important for a super-Power to be a super-Power: it is equally
important that a super-Power be a great Power. Greatness is not measured exclusively by the strategic framework and global impact that a super-Power’s policies !
have. It is equally important that vitality and resilience
and principled commitment to human rights, to selfdetermination and to legal rights become predominant
determining
factors in policy-making
and decisionmaking processes.

278. It has been stated firmly that it is a legal privilege
for a permanent member of the Council to exercise the
right of veto. Therefore, under no circumstances would
any Arab challenge that right or the legality of exercising
it. But we have reservations about certain ethical aspects
of the exercise of that right, because we have worked very
hard to accommodate,
to moderate, to compromise.
Those many millions of Arabs who have reservations will
perhaps be justified, while the credibility of those Arabs
who have always said “Let us give the United States
another chance” may be eroded a little.
279. People have asked many times “What do the Arabs
want? If some Arabs want something, others don’t.” We
have come to the Council, through the representative of
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, with ti unanimous
document that was accommodating. We deeply appreciate the international consensus that has been achieved,
although the Council has failed to achieve international
unanimity. Unfortunately,
the discrepancy between the
consensus and unanimity can develop into a further contribution to the destablization of a region already excessively volatile. We are hopeful that the damage done by
the exercise of the veto can be controlled, although many
of US are beginning to entertain doubts. We do not want
this veto to be a rupture in Arab-American communications. We do not want it to lead to the logical conclusions.
On the contrary, in many ways it might restimulate a
dialogue, although we are not sure of the results. We are
eager to show that flexibility does not mean willingness to
reach a breaking point.

282. Is the veto a rupture or a scar? We do not know,
But the judgement of the United States is predicated upon
the reports of many in its. diplomatic service, in its embassies, in its intelligence services and among the correspondents who have achieved notoriety and who have reported
objectively on what has taken place in the West Bank and
in the occupied territories. These have had a modifying
impact on many aspects of the bias that has characterized
American policy in the Middle East. Unfortunately,
they
have not yet had the necessary impact.
283. What is it, therefore, that makes the United States
unable to crystallize its judgements into policies as they
pertain to the Arab-Israeli conflict? The United States is
an open society which allows the interplay of forces. Opinion reaches certain conclusions about the situation in the
Middle East, when the aggression and violations by Israel
are so visible, clear, categorical and conclusive in the opinion of many people in the White House, the State Department, the *Pentagon and the legislative branch. Those
judgements are then arrested and paralysed. By what? By
a flaw, a basic strategic. flaw, in the dealings of the United
States with the Middle East. It is a belief, unfortunately
sometimes pervasive-yet in many instances challenged,
fortunately-that
Israel is the only strategic instrument of
United States policies in the Middle East, that in order to
persuade Israel to comply, not with international law, not
with the United Nations resolutions, but with declared
policies of the United States itself, the United States has to
placate Israel, to please it, to satisfy it, to allow it a free
hand.
284. Apparently the United States believes that under
no circumstances should Israel-even
at times or
intermittently-be
penalized. It is as if President Eisenbower’s legacy is not a part of contemporary American
history,
285. And then we have the projection of Israel to the
liberal constituency-especially
within Congress-as the
legatee of Jewish history and destiny and as the “only
democracy” in the Middle East. And we have a certain
colour-blindness, for their position on Viet Nam has
never been matched by a similar condemnation of Israel’s
aggression on Arab territories.

280. With our knowledge of the American system, our
appreciation of the interplay of forces within the American body politic, we realize that what is at this particular
moment is not necessarily permanent, that the collective
moral, intellectual and political forces within the United
States-that constituency of conscience that has evolved
and exhibited itself during Israel’s invasion of Lebanon,
26

286. Israel’s projection to the so-called conservative constituency as the latest colonizer in West Asia brings feelings
of vengeance to that constituency, vengeance against the
decolonizing process that has characterized the third world.

ments” should not arise. And villages will go the way of
settlements, because later the Israeli representative will be
talking about Israeli towns. These settlements are illegal
whether or not they are called villages. They are illegal,

287. It is thus that Arab communication with both those
constituencies becomes sort of parasitical to the comfort
that Israel seeks to establish and consolidate within the
American body politic. Therefore, we have a situation
where politics blocks policies in the United States and in
many instances the finger is proudly raised in veto-as the
representative of the United States stated earlier--taking
into consideration elements that are outside the framework of the United States judgements on issues that characterized the conflict in the Middle East.

293. The Israeli representative has exposed himselfi he
was talking about Jewish blood and about how the Council does not discuss Jewish blood, in a way infering that if
we do not accept his assumptions we are collectively harbouring lingering anti-Semitism. This is a form of intellectual and diplomatic
terrorism that has characterized
many of the pronouncements of Israeli propagandists and
diplomats.
294, We are not concerned about Jewish blood? I
should like to state emphatically that the present Israeli
rigime itself is undertaking a policy of settlements that is
making Jews cannon fodder for the expansionist, revisionist Zionist objectives of the Begin-Likud Government,
That is why many people who are in the constituency of
conscience within Israel have protested the various massacres that the Israeli Government has undertaken, and continue to show that what is taking place within Israel is the
rebellion of Jewish humanism against Zionist revisionism.
We are not exclusivists. Judaism is part of our heritage
and Judaism can be part of our destiny. It is Zionism that
assumes a total alienation of the Jew and seeks to interrupt his sense of belonging. It is high time that the Israeli
position did not get away with the proliferation of false
actions and assumptions which, if not challenged on the
spot, become novel jurisprudence, new politics. If the
Israeli representative wants to open the whole question of
Palestine, we are ready. Yet the United States representative wants us not to paraphrase the past, and he is right;
but we want to spell out a future. If we are to negotiate we
want to negotiate a feasible, mutually acceptable outcome. The United States representative, as well as the
Israeli representative, says that negotiations should be
unconditional. All right. Whoever it is that is attempting
to broker the negotiations, I want to know: Is East Jerusalem negotiable? Are the Golan Heights negotiable?
Should those territories not be outside the framework of
negotiations since they have been annexed illegally?

288. Today is a sad day: while it is night here, it may
already be daylight in many Arab countries: in Egypt, in
Saudi Arabia, in the Sudan, in Kuwait, in Lebanon, in
Morocco, in Qatar, in Tunisia. When these countrieswith which the United States has such good bilateral
relations-read
that the raising of that finger was a matter
of pride, I hope that they will not feel terrible shame at
that friendship, a friendship that we intend to continue.
289. We have witnessed tonight a sad episode which I
hope is only an interruption, however traumatic it might
be. For we realize that within the United States body
politic the resilient vitality of the constituency of conscience will not lie low. There are, however, pragmatic
considerations, and they comments, inasmuch as those
considerations tally with some of the remarks made earlier by the Israeli representative.
290. We are repeatedly told that negotiation is the only
way to achieve genuine peace. We agree. But is the Council not a mechanism for negotiation, as the representative
of the PLO has asked that it should be? Then, even if we
grant the point of negotiations, we have a new problem:
are the settlements-the
subject of these Council
deliberations-settlements?
The representative of Israel
does not even recognize that there is something called
settlements. In the new lexicon of Zionism, they are now
called “villages”. And they are not called Jewish villages;
they are called Israeli villages. What does that mean?
What does the United States think of this new terminology which the Israeli representative wants to slip in? Or is
this only another expression of semantic acrobatics?

295. Ex ~athedr~ declarations were made by the Israeli
representative that Jews have every right to be in Judea
and Samaria, the right to be in Israel. The question is
directed not to the. Israeli representative but to the American United States: which Israel does the United States
recognize? President Reagan rightly said that these are
occupied territories. If the are occupied territories Israel
should be treated as an occupier and therefore Israel cannot establish settlements, The United States should be
consistent with what its President has declared: that the
West Bank and the Gaza Strip are part of an Arab political patrimony. Although he denied the right of the Palestinians to self-determination, at least in President Reagan’s
plan, which was quoted extensively by the United States
representative this evening, the territorial parameters of
the West Bank and the Gaza Strip are part. of a political
patrimony, and the so-called villages, otherwise known as
settlements, are an attempt ast a demographic and geogra-

291. If they are villages, they can develop into towns,
and a town can become a city, and a city can become an
Israeli city. Are we expected to negotiate the future of
villages? Is it correct to dismantle villages? It is easier to
accept the dismantling of settlements. Even the United
States at one stage called for the dismantling of settlements: Secretary of State Cyrus Vance called them illegal.
292. Now, the representative of the United States does
not want us to get rhetorical, to get legalistic. But I want
to know, on behalf of the entire Arab nation. Villages
cannot be dismantled. The Israeli representative slipped
that word in so in the next debate in the Council “settle27

phic dislocation, distortion and mutilation of the West
Bank. They are deliberate attempts to pre-empt the emergence of any form of a Palestinian identity-any
form of
Palestinian self-determination.

NOTES

I United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973.
2 Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, The Hague Cunvenrions and Declarations
of 1899 and 1907 (New York, Oxford University Press, 1915).
J Official
Records of rhe General Assembly. Thirty-seventh
Session,
Plenary Meetings, 44th meeting, paras. 90 and 91.

296. It is no use to dilate on the counter-legitimacy to
international legitimacy that Israel is seeking to provoke.
However, when the United States asks us to moderate our
positions we ask it: how much have you been able to
moderate Israel’s intransigence and aggression?

4 Official
Supplement
5 Official
Supplement

Records of rhe General Assembly, Thirly-seven/h
Session,
No. 1 (A/37/1).
Records of the Security
Council, Fourth
Year, Special
No. 1.
h Stephen M. Schwebel, “What Weight to Conquest?‘, American
Journal
of lirrernarional
Law, 1970, vol. 64, pp. 344-347.
7 See Weekly Compilalion
of Presidential
Documents,
(Washington,

297. The PRESIDENT
(in2erprefution from French):
Council has thus concluded the current stage of its consideration of this agenda item.
The meeting rose at 9 p.m.

D.C., United States Government Printing Office, 1982), vol. 18, No.
35, p. 1081.

-

28

HOW

TO

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

OBTAIN

UNITED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
from bookstores
and distrthutors
or write to: United
Nations.
Sales Section.
Neu

SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
sent en vente
du rnondc
enticr.
Informez-vous
aupres
de votrc
Section
des verttes,
New York
ou Geneve.
KAK

llOJIS’~MTb

M311AHMR

in United

Nations,

New

NATIONS

L’NIES

darts Its lthrairiea
ct It’s ugenccs dt’po~mttrc\
librairc
nu adressez-vous
h : Natton\
l’ntc\.

OPTAHM3AUMM

OfibEAMHEHHblX

HAUMti

M3naHtrs
Oprattt43autttr
OEiaenttttettHbtx
w arettrcraax
80 ncex panottax
Mupa.
MafalWHe
tinti rtwuui?‘e
not anpecy:

HaurtR
hfox~o
Kynmb
D KH~IIH~IS
\fara31111;1\
Hanonorecnpasktt
oEi t~~nattttrt~
a earnext KHILXHOV
OpraHwsantia
06%enHtteHliblx
Haulril.
C~EUIIR
no

nponaxce

K3natiL4fi,

)KetiCBa.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

HbM-MOpK

York

wnrl

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Nnciones
todas pattes del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

DES

throughout
the
York or Gcnr\a.

DE

LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Unidas
esran en venta en librerias
y cases distributdoras
rn
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones
Unidas.
Section
de Vcntas.

00400

90-h0205-July

1991~-2,050
