United Nations

S/PV.6660

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6660th meeting
Tuesday, 15 November 2011, 3.35 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Moraes Cabral . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Portugal)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ms. Čolaković
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Berger
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Sangqu
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan (S/2011/678)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-59366 (E)

*1159366*

S/PV.6660

Even with the best of intentions from its
leadership to ensure that priorities and spending
decisions are aligned with the needs of its citizens, the
Government of South Sudan will need all the support it
can get. Here, the international community and
UNMISS must quickly mobilize the political will,
resources and capacities to capitalize on the
momentum from independence to enable this transition
to take place.

The meeting was called to order at 3.35 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on South
Sudan (S/2011/678)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of South Sudan and the Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Hilde
Johnson, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan, to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Special
Representative Johnson, who is joining today’s
meeting via video teleconference from Juba, South
Sudan.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/678, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on South Sudan.
I now give the floor to Ms. Hilde Johnson.
Ms. Johnson: Mr. President, I wish to thank you
for the opportunity to present to the Council the first
quarterly report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
(S/2011/678). I will highlight key observations of the
report and update the Council on key developments in
South Sudan since its publication early this month.
In the first four months of the Mission’s
deployment and South Sudan’s independence, it is
clear that there are huge expectations from both within
and outside of South Sudan for its transition into a
stable democracy. The challenges are even greater.

2

As highlighted in the report of the SecretaryGeneral before the Council today, the Government of
South Sudan and UNMISS have both been in start-up
mode in these first four months. There have been some
notable achievements during this challenging period.
The first such achievement was the rapid
response of UNMISS to the unfolding crisis in Jonglei
state, which was possible, in part, thanks to the transfer
of assets from the former United Nations Mission in
the Sudan. We are encouraged by the assessment made
by the affected communities indicating that the rapid
response to the crisis helped prevent significant
retaliation attacks and a further escalation of violence.
Also encouraging have been the first steps taken
by the Government of South Sudan to develop broader
and more representative Government institutions and a
legislature, and to achieve tangible progress towards
objectives set for its first 100 days. Still, concerns
remain as to how the Government will address the key
challenges of the transitional period in the areas of
governance, corruption and political inclusiveness.
President Salva Kiir Mayardit’s commitment to
enacting five bills related to public financial
management and accountability has been well received.
The next couple of months will gauge whether the
1 December deadline is met and meaningful delivery
can begin to take place. The Government’s consultation
with political parties in the drafting of key legislation
has instilled increased confidence in the Government’s
express commitment to principles of political
pluralism. However, the upcoming constitutional
review process will be the critical test in this regard.
The most significant threat to civilians during the
reporting period was faced in Jonglei state. Here,
UNMISS mobilized its assets quickly to respond with a
multifaceted approach of monitoring and early warning
civilian assessments, daily air patrols and long-range
ground patrols for deterrence, local reconciliation
initiatives
and
political
good
offices.
The

11-59366

S/PV.6660

Government’s support for conflict mitigation initiatives
involving civil society and traditional leaders in
Jonglei is noteworthy.
The Government has also made significant strides
to neutralize internal security threats through the
integration of rebel militia groups. Yet, a few remain
outside of these processes, with an impact on security
in Unity and Upper Nile states, as we have also seen
with recent events. The prevalence of small arms from
these groups is believed to have increased the scale of
intercommunal violence, as witnessed in Jonglei state.
UNMISS has a key supporting role to play in the
protection of civilians, but the Government retains
ultimate responsibility. The efforts of UNMISS to
strengthen the capacity of national security organs to
deliver security and the rule of law will bolster the
Government’s ability to protect its own citizens. There
is an urgent need to transform and professionalize
these institutions in order to meet minimal
international standards. This will be by far the most
important factor in strengthening respect for human
rights in South Sudan.
We are working closely with the Republic of
South Sudan to ensure full coordination and
unhindered ability to implement resolution 1996
(2011). On 30 September, I presented the mandate to
the newly-formed Government. Subsequently, the
Cabinet and National Security Committee met and
agreed to endorse the mandate. A joint UNMISSGovernment mechanism was established, co-chaired by
Vice-President Riek Machar and myself, comprised of
10 ministers, the representatives of four commissioners
and representatives from the Mission. The group was
formed to strengthen cooperation on mandate
implementation, achieve peace and security objectives,
and raise awareness about the UNMISS mandate. This
is an important step in assisting UNMISS in achieving
the objectives of the resolution.
On 10 November, we convened our first meeting.
We discussed the road map for UNMISS-Government
collaboration on important mandate areas: the
protection of civilians, including the military concept
of operations and threat analysis; disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration; peacebuilding;
political milestones, especially the constitutional
review; and human rights. Meetings are scheduled to
take place regularly, during which we will focus on

11-59366

each one of these issues, as well as other elements of
the mandate.
The group will oversee nationwide awarenessraising about the mandate of the Mission and the
status-of-forces agreement. In that respect, I was
invited to brief all 10 state Governors, in the presence
of the National Legislature, at the opening session of
the Governors’ forum on Monday. Following my
presentation, the Vice-President welcomed the role
played by UMISS and urged all officials to study and
comply with the mandate. He also said that
Government actors at every level are responsible for
ensuring that no violations of the status-of-forces
agreement occur.
In my meeting with the Ministers last week, I
discussed the distressing number and scale of
violations of the status-of-forces agreement, and agreed
that this UNMISS-Government mechanism would be
used as a way to ensure that violations are investigated,
perpetrators held accountable, and all authorities fully
briefed on the status-of-forces agreement to prevent
future incidents.
In addition to the incidents already reported, I am
disappointed to report that, on 11 November, the Sudan
People’s Liberation Army detained an UNMISS
helicopter in Eastern Equatoria state for six hours,
under threat of force. Such actions are unacceptable
and greatly undermine our operations to support peace
and security in the nation.
Mindful of the challenges that lie ahead for South
Sudan, as outlined earlier and in the report of the
Secretary-General, one should not minimize its key
assets in meeting the challenges posed by the political
will of its leadership, the hopes and aspirations of its
people, and the resolute commitment of the
international community, including the Council, to
supporting South Sudan’s peaceful and democratic
transition.
UNMISS stands ready to support the Government
of South Sudan in meeting these challenges and is
moving forward to fill critical capacity gaps, especially
in the areas of human rights and the rule of law, where
the Mission has a robust mandate and where there is
limited institutional capacity. In the coming months, as
the Mission builds capacity and transitions out of startup mode, I and my team will work closely with the
new Republic towards accomplishing these objectives.

3

S/PV.6660

I plan to continue my visits to all 10 states of
South Sudan, as well as to travel to all of its
neighbouring capitals, in line with my mandate to
support South Sudan’s regional relations. If sustainable
peace and stability are to prevail in South Sudan, good
relations with its neighbours are essential.
As Council members know, the mandate of
UNMISS covers the Republic of South Sudan. It does
not cover border monitoring or, more broadly, the
relationship between the Republic of the Sudan and the
Republic of South Sudan. From the perspective of
peace and stability in South Sudan, we know that the
country is dependent on good relations with its
neighbours, and first and foremost its neighbour to the
north, the Republic of the Sudan.
For this reason, we are very concerned about the
heightened rhetoric on both sides, with accusations and
counter-accusations leading to the further escalation of
tensions between the two countries. As Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in South
Sudan, I met yesterday with President Salva Kiir
Mayardit and conveyed the need for the Government to
tone down its rhetoric. For more detail on recent events
and relations with Sudan, such as verification of the
bombings in Yida and the Guffa area, I now refer to
Under-Secretary-General Ladsous for his briefing to
the Security Council.
The President: I thank Ms. Johnson for her
briefing.
I now call on Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous: I thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to further brief the Security Council on
recent tensions on the border between the Sudan and
South Sudan, and recent reports of bombings in the
border areas. I will also say a few words on the report
of the creation of a new military coalition between the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North and
Darfur rebel groups.
UNMISS dispatched a verification mission to
Yida, Unity state, on Sunday, 13 November. A joint
team of civilian and military personnel, including
mine-action staff, confirmed that four bombs had been
dropped on 10 November. Three of these bombs
exploded and one did not. The fourth bomb landed on a
schoolyard but, fortunately, did not explode. According
to different eyewitness accounts of the incident, the

4

bombs were dropped by a white Antonov aircraft
coming from the Sudan.
The Government of the Sudan has denied that
these bombings took place on South Sudanese territory.
Luckily, no casualties or injuries were suffered during
this incident. The Nuba populations that had fled the
Yida refugee camp following the bombing are now
slowly returning. I am also in a position to confirm that
bombing took place in Guffa, in Maban county, Upper
Nile state, on 8 November. At least four bombs were
dropped.
Regarding reports of fighting in Kwek, in Manyo
county, Upper Nile state, on 11 November, UNMISS
could not verify the allegations of cross-border
incursions. It confirmed that fighting took place in the
northern part of Manyo county, however, and supported
the medical evacuation of nine seriously injured Sudan
People’s Liberation Army soldiers from Renk to Juba.
(spoke in French)
As stated by the Secretary-General yesterday, the
escalation of rhetoric between the Government of the
Sudan and the Government of South Sudan,
particularly in regard to cross-border support to their
respective rebel groups and incursions into one
another’s territory, is extremely worrying. The African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel chaired by
President Mbeki has called for a meeting of the Joint
Political and Security Mechanism between the
Government of Sudan and the Government of South
Sudan on 18 November. As the Council is probably
aware, the Joint Political and Security Mechanism is a
Cabinet-level bilateral body agreed upon by the two
Heads of States to resolve disputes and to support the
consolidation of peaceful relations between the two
countries.
I would like to urge both Governments to seize
this opportunity to de-escalate the current situation and
move swiftly towards the establishment of the joint
border monitoring mechanism they agreed upon on
30 July. Only the two parties, working together, can
efficiently and effectively manage security at their
common border. As stated by the Secretary-General his
September report (S/2011/603) on Abyei, the United
Nations stands ready to support them in that respect.
The Panel will also resume post-Comprehensive
Peace Agreement negotiations at the end of the week in
Addis Ababa. In that connection as well, I would like

11-59366

S/PV.6660

to urge both Governments to demonstrate the necessary
flexibility and commitment and to agree swiftly on a
package of measures to resolve remaining differences
on financial transitional arrangements, Abyei and
border demarcation. Both meetings are critical to
reduce tensions, but the parties will also need to make
sure that any efforts aimed at providing support to
rebel groups one another’s territory seizes immediately.

Kiir has committed to enacting legislation on
transparency and accountability. The Government is
also forging ahead with its plan to establish the
national constitutional review commission in early
2012. Those actions will contribute to the
establishment of a fully functioning democracy, in
which the Government is accountable to the people and
acts in the people’s interests.

We also received reports this weekend of the
establishment of a new military alliance of Darfur rebel
movements and the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement-North, which is calling for the forceful
removal from power of the Government of the Sudan.
That represents a stage in a pattern of escalation that is
counter-productive. The United Nations continues to
stress that all parties to the different conflicts between
the Government of the Sudan and its peripheries need
to return to the negotiating table and resolve their
differences through political dialogue. There is no
military solution to the Sudan conflicts and all military
actions only endanger the lives of innocent civilians,
who deserve a return to peace and stability after so
many years of fighting.

The security situation in Jonglei and Upper Nile
states is of course a concern to my Government. We
underline that, on 9 July, President Kiir once again
extended an amnesty to all militia groups. Since then,
my Government has worked successfully to reach
agreements with several groups, resulting in their
integration into the South Sudan armed forces. Certain
groups have, however, chosen not to accept the
amnesty offer or to negotiate the terms of their
integration into the South Sudan armed forces. We will
redouble our efforts in that regard. In the meantime, the
Government takes very seriously its primary
responsibility for the protection of civilians and, as
noted by the Secretary-General, has mobilized
additional troops to the areas of greatest concern.

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Ladsous for his briefing.

Recently, the Republic of the Sudan accused the
Republic of South Sudan of facilitating and hosting
two meetings, in Juba and Yei, for the purpose of
uniting rebel factions to overthrow the Government in
Khartoum. That allegation is baseless. We stress
categorically that there is no element of truth to the
claims of accusations brought forth by Khartoum, nor
any sponsorship by the Government of the Republic of
South Sudan for any hostile activities to topple the
Government in Khartoum, militarily or otherwise.
Moreover, as a matter of policy, we are not providing
military assistance to the opposition forces operating in
the Sudan.

(spoke in English)
I now give the floor to the representative of South
Sudan.
Mr. Choat (South Sudan): On behalf of the
Government of the Republic of South Sudan, I wish to
thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report (S/2011/678). I would also like to take this
opportunity to thank Mr. Ladsous, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, as well as
Ms. Hilde Johnson, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for her role on the ground in the
successful establishment of the United Nations Mission
in the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS). Lastly, I
wish to thank all members that have contributed
military and police personnel to the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan. We are grateful for their
support of the Mission.
As noted by the Secretary-General in his report,
the Government of the Republic of South Sudan has
made progress on the 100-day programme established
by President Kiir following the appointment of his
Cabinet in early September. In particular, President

11-59366

The Republic of South Sudan encourages both the
Government of the Republic of the Sudan and the
opposition forces to engage in mutually beneficial
discussions that will enable a peaceful resolution of
hostilities and improve the current humanitarian crisis
in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile states.
In conclusion, the Republic of South Sudan will
continue to enhance its security and the delivery of
services to its citizens. We welcome the support of the
international community and that of United Nations
agencies.

5

S/PV.6660

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.

camp of the Ninth Brigade of the SPLA. I am not used
to telling lies. I am speaking concrete facts. I am —

Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me, first, to thank you, Mr. President, for giving us this
opportunity to participate in this meeting to enable the
Council to acquaint itself with the truth, in order that it
can adopt positive and objective resolutions. I should
like to make five points during my intervention.

(spoke in English)

My first point is that we are committed to the
peace process and negotiations to achieve a peaceful
solution to outstanding issues between us and our
brothers in South Sudan. Any allegations that the
Government in the north is seeking to carry out
military action against the south in order to occupy it
are unacceptable. We are the ones who granted the
south a peaceful transition towards independence, a
choice they exercised in complete freedom and in a
smoothly organized way.
The second point that I would like to emphasize
to the Council is that, regrettably, the Government of
South Sudan is continuing to support rebel movements.
It supervised two meetings, at Yei and Juba, which
resulted in the establishment of the Sudanese
Revolutionary Front, whose declared objective is to
topple the Government in the north through military
action. That is further confirmed by information I have
just received, to which I hope the members of the
Council will be patient enough to listen. The source is
Captain Hafez Hamza Abkar, who defected from the
Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA). He has
affirmed that General James Oshun and Major Mattur
supervised the transport of military equipment from
Serjas by plane to the Jamjam area in Southern
Kordofan. Those are confessions that we can provide to
the Council on video, with sound, from an officer of
the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement.
The third point I want to share with the Council
concerns the Yida camp. For the benefit of everyone,
the camp is on a lake called Lake Abyad. Part of the
lake is in the southern part of the Sudan and the other
part is in South Sudan. The camp is in the Sudan, in
Southern Kordofan. It is not a refugee camp at all. We
should be more precise and specific, Mr. Ladsous,
when we use terms. It is not a refugee camp; it is a

6

— dealing with the Council in all civility, according to
the dictates of diplomacy. Even if I have to differ with
anybody, I would start by saying, “I beg to differ”. I
never lie. I do not lie.
(spoke in Arabic)
It is my hope that this information can help the
Council to verify the facts and not rush to accuse and
condemn the Government of the Sudan of undertaking
military activities or aerial bombardment of civilians.
As I have said, we reserve our right to self-defence and
to carry out any military actions within our national
territory. I wish to assure the Council that we never
will carry out any military actions inside the territory
of the Government of South Sudan.
To show our good will, even though many defend
false and baseless accusations about us, the same day
that we were wrongly accused of bombing territories of
the Government of South Sudan, there were more than
30 trucks carrying goods, including food, on their way
from the north to the south at the Joda crossing. That
can easily be verified. It is part of the commercial
activities that we consider a humanitarian obligation,
because of the need of our brothers in South Sudan for
those supplies. Thirty trucks have crossed the border
through the Joda crossing point into South Sudan.
I hope the Council will take into consideration
what I have said and will link it to what is mentioned
in paragraph 10 of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2011/678) about shortages of basic commodities and
inflation reaching 61.5 per cent in South Sudan. That is
the spirit in which we confront those who defend
untrue accusations; they will only expose themselves in
the final analysis, however loud their voices may be.
The President: There are no more names
inscribed on the list of speakers. I now invite Council
members to informal consultations to continue our
discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.05 p.m.

11-59366
