VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

21. Strongly condemns the expansionist activities of Is­
rael in the Middle East and the continual bombing of Pal­
estinian civilians, which constitute a serious obstacle to the
realization of the self-determination and independence of
the Palestinian people;
22. Strongly condemns the Israeli aggression against
Lebanon in June 1982, which endangers stability, peace and
security in the region, and reiterates its support for the efforts
undertaken to implement the resolutions of the Security
Council, in particular those demanding the immediate and
unconditional withdrawal of Israeli forces from Lebanese
territory to internationally recognized boundaries and re­
spect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon;
23. Urges all States, competent organizations of the
United Nations system, specialized agencies and other in­
ternational organizations to extend their support to the Pal­
estinian people through its sole and legitimate representative,
the Palestine Liberation Organization, in its struggle to re­
gain its right to self-determination and independence in ac­
cordance with the Charter of the United Nations;
24. Demands the immediate and unconditional release
of all persons detained or imprisoned as a result of their
struggle for self-determination and independence, full re­
spect for their fundamental individual rights and the obser­
vance of article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, 19 under which no one shall be subjected to torture
or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment;
25. Recommends that the Security Council should make
urgent appeals for clemency to the South African authorities
in order that the lives of the three African National Congress
freedom fighters sentenced to death on 6 August 1982 may
be saved in accordance with General Assembly resolution
37/1 of 1 October 1982;
26. Demands the immediate release of children detained
in Namibian and South African prisons;
27. Reiterates its appreciation for the material and other
forms of assistance that peoples under colonial rule continue
to receive from Governments, United Nations agencies and
intergovernmental organizations, and calls for a substantial
increase in this assistance;
28. Urges all States, specialized agencies and compe­
tent organizations of the United Nations system to do their
utmost to ensure the full implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples and to intensify their efforts to support peoples
under colonial, foreign and racist domination in their just
struggle for self-determination and independence;
29. Requests the Secretary-General to give maximum
publicity to the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples and to give the widest
possible publicity to the struggle being waged by oppressed
peoples for the realization of their self-determination and
national independence;
30. Decides to consider this item again at its thirty­
eighth session on the basis of the reports that Governments,
United Nations agencies and intergovernmental and non­
governmental organizations have been requested to submit
concerning the strengthening of assistance to colonial ter­
ritories and peoples.
90th plenary meeting
3 December 1982
19 Resolution 217 A (III).

37/44.

179

Report of the Committee on the Elimination of
Racial Discrimination: General recommenda­
tion VI

The General Assembly,
Taking note of decision 1 (XXV) of 15 March 1982 of
the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination,
entitled ''General recommendation VI'' , 20
Acknowledging the burden which reporting obligations
under international instruments places upon States parties,
especially those with limited technical and administrative
resources,
Convinced, none the less, that the value of international
conventions relies upon the full and conscientious imple­
mentation of the obligations undertaken upon ratification or
accession,
Noting with concern that many periodic reports due under
article 9 of the International Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination21 are outstanding and
that in some cases initial reports are several years overdue,
1. Appeals to all States parties to the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Dis­
crimination to fulfil their obligations under article 9 of the
Convention and to submit their reports within the appro­
priate time;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to invite the views
and observations of States parties to the Convention on the
causes of the situation described in general recommendation
VI of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrim­
ination and to submit an analysis of the replies received in
a report to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session,
together with such suggestions as he might wish to make
with a view to improving the situation;
3. Also requests the Secretary-General, in preparing his
report, to consider the situation described in general rec­
ommendation VI of the Committee in the overall framework
of reporting obligations that Member States have under the
various human rights instruments in order to be able to take
into account similar and related problems which may have
arisen in compliance with such obligations;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit his
report, together with the records of the General Assembly's
consideration thereof, to the ninth meeting of the States
parties to the Convention, to be held in 1984.
90th plenary meeting
3 December 1982

37/45.

Status of the International Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3057 (XXVIII) of 2 November
1973, 3135 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973, 3225 (XXIX)
of 6 November 1974, 3381 (XXX) of 10 November 1975,
31/79 of 13 December 1976, 32/11 of 7 November 1977,
33/101 of 16 December 1978, 34/26 of 15 November 1979,
35/38 of 25 November 1980 and 36/11 of 28 October I 98 I,
Welcoming the increase in the number of declarations
made under article 14 of the Convention,
20 See Official Records of the General A,·sembly, Thirty-seventh Se,·sion.
Supplement No. 18 (A/37/18), chap. IX.
21 Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.
