United Nations

S/PV.4422

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-sixth year

4422nd meeting
Tuesday, 20 November 2001, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Miss Durrant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Jamaica)

Members:

Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Chowdhury
Mr. Shen Guofang
Mr. Valdivieso
Mr. Levitte
Mr. Corr
Mr. Ouane
Mr. Gokool
Mr. Kolby
Mr. Gatilov
Mr. Mahbubani
Mr. Jerandi
Mr. Krokhmal
Sir Jeremy Greenstock
Mr. Cunningham

Agenda
Children and armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict (S/2001/852).

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

01-64836 (E)

*0164836*

S/PV.4422

The meeting was called to order at 11.45 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Children and armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on children and
armed conflict (S/2001/852)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Belgium, Canada, Egypt, Iraq, Israel,
Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, Nigeria, the Republic of
Korea, Slovenia and South Africa, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. De Ruyt
(Belgium), Mr. Heinbecker (Canada), Mr. Aboul
Gheit (Egypt), Mr. Aldouri (Iraq), Mr. Lancry
(Israel), Mr. Motomura (Japan), Mr. Hasmy
(Malaysia), Mr. Navarrete (Mexico), Mr.
Adekanye (Nigeria), Mr. Lee Ho-jin (Republic of
Korea), Mr. Petrič (Slovenia) and Ms. Ndhlovu
(South Africa) took the seats reserved for them at
the side of the Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Olara Otunnu, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict to
take a seat at the Council table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council

2

agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mrs. Carol Bellamy,
Executive Director of the United Nations Children’s
Fund (UNICEF).
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite the Executive Director of UNICEF to take
a seat at the Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2001/852, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict.
I shall now give the floor to the SecretaryGeneral.
The Secretary-General: It gives me great
pleasure to join the Council today. As members know,
we had hoped to hold this debate in September to mark
the opening of the General Assembly’s special session
on children, but the meeting had to be postponed for
obvious reasons.
The United Nations has always sought to alleviate
the plight of children affected by war. The situation in
Afghanistan has only reaffirmed this concern. For that
reason, the United Nations Children’s Fund and the
Office of my Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict are working with Mr. Brahimi to
ensure that the protection of children and of civilians in
general is a key part of the efforts to restore and rebuild
Afghanistan. This generation of Afghan children must
become a harbinger of peace.
The draft resolution before the Council today tells
each of us what we have to do to protect children in
armed conflict. It calls on States to punish conduct that
fuels and exacerbates conflict. It draws attention to
issues such as the recruitment of children and
trafficking in arms and natural resources. It urges
donors, lenders and others to use their financial
leverage. And it insists that the Council, the United
Nations system, the international financial institutions
and others use their influence as well.
Field monitoring is also essential, and I shall
continue to ensure the deployment of child protection
advisers. The Council also needs timely, accurate
information about implementation of its resolutions,

S/PV.4422

and I am committed to providing those reports. I also
stand ready to bring to the Council’s attention the
identities of parties that are in violation of any of the
provisions of the draft resolution.
War, violence and political instability continue to
inflict appalling damage on the world of children. I
look forward to working with the Council in the
struggle to keep their needs uppermost in our minds,
and to ensure that the rights of children and their
protection is maintained as one of our main agenda
items. I hope that we will all agree on that.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement and for his commitment to protecting the
rights of children.
I now give the floor to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu.
Mr. Otunnu: As always, it is a great honour to
participate in this debate under your presidency,
Madam; you are a true advocate of the protection and
rights of children.
This is the fourth open debate of the Security
Council devoted to the protection, rights and
rehabilitation of children affected by conflict. Since
1998 we have seen the progressive integration of these
concerns into the peace and security agenda of the
United Nations. This has resulted in an impressive
body of practice, key elements of which include
resolutions 1261 (1999) and 1314 (2000); the
progressive inclusion of child protection provisions in
peacekeeping mandates; the creation of the role of
child protection advisers; the incorporation of child
protection issues into peace agendas and peace accords;
and the establishment, as a regular feature of reports to
the Security Council, of specific sections on child
protection.
The Security Council is at the centre of these
developments. On behalf of millions of war-affected
children, I would like to thank the members of the
Council for embracing and promoting their cause. My
Office has developed very close collaboration on this
agenda item with various United Nations partners,
particularly
the
Department
of
Peacekeeping
Operations and the United Nations Children’s Fund; I
express warm appreciation to Carol Bellamy and JeanMarie Guéhenno for their strong support and
cooperation. I must pay a special tribute to our partners

in the non-governmental-organization community;
quite simply, the advancement of this agenda depends
in large measure on their work — their advocacy and
programmes on the ground. I also thank members of
the Council for inviting to today’s debate a young
person who comes from a conflict situation where
children have experienced unbelievable horrors of war.
I extend to Alhaji Babah Sawaneh of Sierra Leone a
very warm welcome.
In spite of the impressive progress which has
been registered, especially at the levels of advocacy,
public opinion, policies and programmes, I regret to
report that the overall situation of children exposed to
war remains grave and entirely unacceptable. The full
magnitude and details of this situation are set out in the
report of the Secretary-General, which is before the
Council.
We share a common preoccupation: how to
change the situation for children on the ground. In this
context, I should like to underscore some measures,
drawn from the report of the Secretary-General and the
draft resolution before the Council, which I believe are
particularly important for changing the situation on the
ground.
There is an urgent need for the international
community to organize a more systematic and effective
way of monitoring and reporting on the conduct of
parties to conflict in terms of their treatment of
children. Who is brutalizing and targeting children?
When and where are they doing so? Which parties to
conflict are observing or flouting their obligations and
commitments concerning the protection of children?
Such monitoring and reporting, conducted on an
objective and impartial basis, would then serve as the
basis for concerted action, triggering targeted advocacy
and mobilization of pressure by all concerned.
We have good news on the Optional Protocol: just
last week we attained the required threshold of 10
instruments of ratification. This means that that
important treaty will enter into force in February next
year. The entry into force of the Optional Protocol will
constitute a milestone in our collective endeavours to
end child soldiering. But this milestone will remain
largely a theoretical achievement unless it becomes a
prelude to concrete measures on the ground. We need
to take the following actions, among others: ensure the
application of the Optional Protocol in theatres of
conflict; mobilize adequate resources for programmes

3

S/PV.4422

of demobilization and social rehabilitation for children
who have already been made to participate in conflict;
and, above all, address underlying causes — political,
social and economic factors — that create an
environment conducive to the alienation, exploitation
and radical indoctrination of children and young
people, thus facilitating their involvement in conflict.
A particular scandal in warfare today is the
pillage of natural resources by parties to conflict and
others. This is robbing children of their birthright.
Resources that should provide for rehabilitation,
education, health care and nutrition for children are
instead being plundered by networks of local,
neighbourhood and international actors. Who is reaping
the benefits of the rich diamond resources of Angola
and Sierra Leone, or the diamond, gold, coltan, timber
and coffee of the Democratic Republic of the Congo?
Certainly not the children of those countries. Moreover,
this has become a means of fielding and prolonging
conflicts in which children suffer most. For the
children of Angola, Sierra Leone, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and other countries, the
blessings of natural resources have been turned into a
veritable curse. I urge the Security Council to redouble
its efforts in this regard.
As indicated by the Secretary-General earlier, the
appointment of child protection advisers represents an
important innovation for integrating child protection
concerns into peacekeeping operations. This practice
needs to be strengthened and given wider application.
The current situation in Afghanistan and Burundi
present immediate opportunities for designing childconscious mission mandates and for deploying child
protection advisers.
We are eager to learn from our collective
experience thus far. For this reason, we have formed an
informal inter-agency working group to strengthen our
ongoing initiatives on incorporating child protection
into peacemaking, peacekeeping and peace-building
processes. Similarly, following the call made by the
Security Council, we have formed an informal working
group to strengthen the training of peacekeeping
personnel.
The international community is not doing as
much as it should to prevent harm to girls in times of
war and to ensure their recovery and rehabilitation.
Several recent examples underscore the very particular
vulnerability of girls in situations of war. I recall that

4

girls in Rwanda suddenly became the heads of some
60,000 households in the aftermath of the genocide; the
trafficking of girls from the Balkans into prostitution
rings in Western Europe; the abduction of schoolgirls
by the Lord’s Resistance Army in northern Uganda; the
systematic denial of education to girls in Afghanistan;
that in January 1999, the Revolutionary United Front
abducted more than 4,000 children from Freetown
alone, 60 per cent of them girls; and sadly, that there
are fighting groups we know whose preferred agents to
serve as suicide commandos remain girls. We must do
much more to protect and rehabilitate girls exposed to
war.
Last year the Security Council took up for the
first time the issue of the correlation between war and
the spread of HIV/AIDS, especially in the corridors of
war. We need to do a good deal more to ensure public
education and prevention.
We meet at a time when our collective attention is
focused on Afghanistan. Indeed, taking place in
Washington at this very moment is a very important
meeting, convened by Japan and the United States, on
recovery and reconstruction in Afghanistan. Children
today make up more than 50 per cent of the total
population of that country. Twenty-three years of war
in Afghanistan has defined the lives of at least two
generations of children and youth, most of whom have
grown up amid violence, death, deprivation, lack of
education and despair. Key indicators present a
sobering picture of the direct and indirect impact of
that conflict on Afghan children.
I appeal to the Security Council and the
international community in general to ensure that the
well-being and rehabilitation of war-affected children
become central concerns in any response to the
situation in Afghanistan. In order to facilitate this, I
urge the Council to support the efforts of the United
Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan to ensure that
child protection remains a priority throughout the
peacemaking and peace-building processes in
Afghanistan, including through the deployment of
specialized child protection staff. No peace is likely to
be sustainable there unless children and youth are
provided with rehabilitation and hope, so that instead
of being potential spoilers they become a constructive
force in rebuilding their country.
Only by doing what is right for children today
can we build a solid foundation for peace and security

S/PV.4422

tomorrow. However, while properly focusing on the
serious situation in Afghanistan, we must not lose sight
of the needs of other war-affected children who equally
need our attention and support.
The full text of my remarks will be distributed,
and therefore I will not read the entire text. However,
before concluding, I hope you will forgive me, Madam
President, for invoking the voice of Jamaica’s favourite
son, your special gift to the world, whose powerful
voice gave the world the gift of reggae music. Bob
Marley’s often deeply spiritual renditions of the themes
of suffering and redemption seem particularly
appropriate for our deliberations today. I hear Bob
Marley’s voice calling us to action on behalf of
children. I hear him saying something like this:
“Hear the children cryin’
We had told them in yesteryears
Don’t worry about a thing
‘Cause every little thing gonna be all right.
“Hear the children cryin’
From Afghanistan to Angola
Asking for the same thing –
One Love.
“Hear the children cryin’
From the Balkans to Burundi
Waiting for the same thing –
Redemption Songs. Redemption Songs.
“Won’t you help to sing
These songs of redemption
Rendering hope and protection.
“I hear three little birds
Perched on the doorsteps of the Council
Singin’ melodies pure and true
Sayin’ again and again
`This is our message to you-ou-ou.’”
The President: I now call on the Executive
Director of the United Nations Children’s Fund, Ms.
Carol Bellamy.
Ms. Bellamy: The draft resolution before the
Council today represents another step forward in
making the world a safer place for every child.
As all of us are only too well aware, and as the
Secretary-General noted, today’s debate on children
and armed conflict was to have been convened almost
exactly two months ago, in the midst of the General
Assembly special session on children. The world is a

very different place because of what occurred on 11
September, but, as the Secretary-General has observed,
we can take heart in the international community’s
strong reaffirmation of collective action in defence of
that most basic of human rights — the right of all
people to live in peace and security.
Today’s draft resolution builds upon the two
previous measures on the issue — resolution 1261
(1999) and resolution 1314 (2000) — as well as the
Council’s earlier resolutions on protection of civilians;
on women, peace and security; and on the threat of
HIV/AIDS. These measures are a testament to what the
United Nations does best — changing attitudes through
incremental development, establishing standards for
what is right and just, and making their implementation
obligatory.
The issue of child soldiers is a prime example. As
recently as five or six years ago, understanding and
awareness of the issue were limited. Recruitment of
children was usually carried out with little or no notice
and often with complete impunity. Since then, the
world has received the important contribution of our
good friend Graca Michel. I understand the Council has
received her latest publication, which I commend to
members for reading. The world also now has in force
an international legal standard, as Olara mentioned —
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child — which raises the age of recruitment and
prohibits the involvement of children under the age of
18 in hostilities.
The recruitment of children is defined as a war
crime in the Rome Statute for the establishment of an
International Criminal Court. Under the terms of the
draft resolution before the Council, those who recruit
or use children in violation of international obligations
will be brought to the attention of the Council by the
Secretary-General, who would be called upon to
prepare reports as necessary.
This is a crucial step in the campaign to end the
recruitment of children for armed combat and their use
as soldiers. It is a sign of serious and continuing
commitment, and it certainly is our hope that all
members of the Security Council will continue to
demonstrate that commitment by urging all States to
sign and ratify the new Optional Protocol.
Let me also commend the members of the
Council and especially you, Madam President, for
inviting a young person from Sierra Leone to address

5

S/PV.4422

us today. Alhaji Sawaneh’s presence is a reminder not
only of the suffering that children endure in armed
conflict, but also of the contribution that they can make
by participating in the realization of their own rights.
As the Council is aware, access to children
caught up in situations of conflict remains a major
problem. Most child fatalities in armed conflict occur
not as a direct result of violence, but because children
are denied access to such essential services as health
care, food security and clean water.
I know that this fact was underlined earlier this
year, when many Council members visited the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and saw evidence to
back up a study that showed that of the approximately
2.5 million civilian deaths above the million deaths that
might have been expected to occur in the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, one-third
were children under the age of five.
Resolution 1314 (2000) called for unhindered
access to children affected by armed conflict. Today’s
measure would reiterate that call with renewed urgency
and make explicit reference to internally displaced
populations. We thank the Council for endorsing this
imperative in its resolution, and we urge you to keep up
the pressure in all country-specific undertakings.
Today’s draft resolution also calls upon parties to
armed conflict to collaborate in days of immunization
and other opportunities for the safe and unhindered
delivery of basic necessary services. This year,
UNICEF, the World Health Organization and its
partners have been able to carry out successful national
immunization days for polio eradication in countries
such as Angola, Somalia, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Sierra Leone, Sudan and, just last week,
Afghanistan.
In so doing, we have been able to show that even
conflict need not be an obstacle to fundamental
development imperatives where the political will
exists. But let us not forget that these are partial steps
towards securing full, safe and unhindered access to
children in situations of conflict.
In this connection, I want to point out that later
today, UNICEF and the Fédération Internationale de
Football, joined by the Secretary-General, will launch
an initiative to dedicate the 2002 World Cup to
children. Part of this effort will be to call upon warring
parties around the world to take special measures

6

during the time of the World Cup to ensure
humanitarian access to children.
Let me also say how gratifying it is to see the
issue of HIV/AIDS addressed so forthrightly in the
draft resolution. The call to ensure that all
peacekeeping personnel receive appropriate guidance
and training is a vital follow-up to resolution 1308
(2000). And the request that the United Nations system
integrate HIV/AIDS awareness, prevention, care and
support into humanitarian programmes is both
appropriate and timely.
Clearly, we have an immense task before us. We
know from surveys on the ground in conflict-affected
countries that levels of awareness of HIV/AIDS and
how to prevent it are quite low. We know, too, that girls
and women in conflict situations are extremely
vulnerable because of sexual violence perpetrated by
armed forces and rebel groups, camp police and
displaced men and boys. Research has shown that, in
conflict areas, men and boys often talk about violence
against girls and women as normal and acceptable
behaviour.
In line with the draft resolution, UNICEF will
continue to seek to protect children from all forms of
sexual violence and to include HIV/AIDS education as
part of all emergency education programmes, with
particular attention devoted to the needs of
demobilized child soldiers.
In Afghanistan, the international community is
confronting a crisis in which the survival of millions of
children and women hinges on an immediate and
coordinated response. Our folks on the ground recently
estimated that without an adequate humanitarian
response, over 100,000 children could die during the
winter — which is why we are urgently seeking shortterm assistance in the form of continued funding,
access to those in need and security for humanitarian
staff.
But much more is needed if we are to ensure the
long-term well-being of the children of Afghanistan
and the sustainable protection of their rights.
A
major priority for us will be education, making certain
that girls, as well as boys, have access to schooling as
soon as possible.
In post-war situations — and even during the
worst times of conflict — education provides an
environment of relative stability and normalcy for

S/PV.4422

children. It offers an alternative to recruitment. And in
affording them opportunities to learn, education gives
children a chance to gain basic skills that will allow
them to work, to contribute to society and, in time, to
support their own families.
Other key priorities are child protection in all
areas of recovery, with an emphasis on landmine
awareness — Afghanistan is probably the most heavily
mined country in the world — and the full participation
of women in peace-building efforts.
The Council’s draft resolution pledges to put
children at the centre of recovery and rehabilitation
efforts, and whether in Afghanistan, Sierra Leone or
the Great Lakes region, I can assure you that we and
our partners, both within and outside the United
Nations system, will do everything to make that a
reality.
The work of UNICEF is inspired by a vision of a
world where leaders use their power and influence to
assure that every child grows to adulthood in health,
peace and dignity. It is a goal set out in the draft
outcome document for the Special Session on Children,
which will likely convene in May 2002 — a document
in which you, Madam President, have played a crucial
guiding role in your capacity as Chair of the
Preparatory Committee, and for which I want to take
this opportunity to extend on behalf of UNICEF our
heartfelt thanks.
The central message of the draft outcome
document from the Special Session is a challenge to all
of us to assert leadership for children in every sphere
of life. I believe that, in the resolution before you
today, the Security Council has again risen to that
challenge and, in so doing, affirmed that together we
can truly change the world with children.
In conclusion, it is my pleasure to introduce the
next speaker, Alhaji Sawaneh of Sierra Leone. He is 14
years old. He became a child soldier after being
abducted. He spent two and a half years with the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF), where he
commanded one of several child combat units. He was
later cared for by the group of Caritas Makeni. He has
a very special and important perspective on the issue of
children and armed conflict, including — as I pointed
out before — not only the problem but the enormous
and largely untapped contribution that young people
themselves can make.

The President: Let me, on behalf of the members
of the Council, extend a warm welcome to Alhaji
Babah Sawaneh, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Sawaneh: My name is Alhaji Babah
Sawaneh. I am 14 years old, and I come from Sierra
Leone.
In 1997, when I was 10 years old, I went for my
Christmas holiday to my uncle’s house in my village,
Madina Loko, in northern Sierra Leone. During the
second week of my stay, we heard that the rebels were
10 miles away from us. We ran into the bush to hide.
At night, we came out quietly and cooked whatever we
had in an old farm hut. On the second night, my elder
brother and I went to look for water to do the cooking
when we ran into the rebels. They searched our pockets
for money and, because nothing was found, we were
beaten up. We were taken back to our village where we
were tied up, beaten again and kept in the hot, burning
sun. Many houses were burnt down, properties
destroyed and people killed. A group of rebels who had
gone into the bush in search of food caught my uncle
and the rest of the family. My uncle was later killed.
That same night, we were ordered by the rebels to
go with them to their base behind Kabala town. It was
over 100 miles from the village. We walked for about
10 days in the bush, resting only a few hours in
between, most times on empty stomachs. On arrival,
we were trained for a week to shoot and dismantle AK47 guns. Thereafter, I was used to fight when we
attacked. During these attacks, we killed people, burnt
down houses, destroyed properties and cut off limbs.
But more often I went on food raids and did domestic
work for my commander’s wife. This is because I was
so skinny.
In January 2000, two years after my capture,
United Nations peacekeepers met with our commander
to explain the process of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR). We were told that the
discussion included the release of all child soldiers.
Our commander returned to our base the next morning
and ordered the other commanders to release us. He
said that those who failed to do so would be killed. The
information was passed on to all the fighters, and
within two days over 250 children were released to the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL)
in the town of Kabala. We were taken to a care centre
in Lunsar.

7

S/PV.4422

In Lunsar I was first registered for demobilization
and then, later, handed over to Caritas Makeni for care
and protection. I immediately reported to the health
centre for treatment because I was completely covered
in scabies. I had not seen any family member for about
two years, so when Caritas told us they would assist us
in finding our families I was very happy to give the
information requested. Unfortunately, it was not safe
for them to get to my village, so I was put into a
community secondary school. In May that year, the
leader of the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) was
detained again after a demonstration in Freetown. The
rebels decided to attack again, and they attempted to
recruit us again. We did not want to fight any more, so
we ran away into the bush with our social workers.
Over 200 of us were able to get to Freetown, where we
were picked up by Caritas.
In Lungi we met other children in the Caritas
programme who, also out of fear of being re-recruited,
had escaped from centres in Port Loko and Makeni.
There were over 350 children in that new centre. At
first, the Lungi people did not want us in their town,
and that was demonstrated by their highest-ranking
chief. The United Nations Children’s Fund and Caritas
Makeni had a meeting with him and the other local
leaders. They explained that we had been demobilized
and did not want to fight any more. This changed their
minds, and we were allowed to stay. I was again put in
a community school, together with other children.
The meeting with the people did not end with the
local leaders because the community school children
were not friendly to us. They kept calling us rebel
children. Thank God we attended the afternoon school,
and therefore were able to avoid them for the most
part. Caritas then had several meetings with various
people of the community to get them to forgive and
accept us. This worked very well because, at the end of
the year, a woman from the community agreed to
provide me with foster care. I am still living with her
because my family has not yet been found.
It is important for the Council to know that the
journey I have made so far has been less difficult
because I entered the DDR programme. I did bad
things in the bush, and I saw very bad things done to
both children and adults. Taking my gun from me was a
vital step for me. The programme helped me feel
natural and normal again. It helped me develop ways to
fit into society again.

8

As I have said, the road has not been easy. In
school I suffered resentment from other schoolchildren.
They looked at me differently, like an evil person.
Maybe they had good reasons. After all, we used to do
very horrible things to them, their families, friends and
communities. But we suffered just like them because
we were forced to do those things by our commanders.
We have to ask for forgiveness and demonstrate
extremely good ways of living.
I have faced a lot of distrust from family
members. Some doubt whether I will ever be a normal
child again. I am easily reminded of my past when I
make mistakes. “Do not bring your rebel life here”,
they say. People in the community can be really
dangerous. Some want revenge at all costs, and in
whatever form. With the support of families, friends
and agencies working for children, we are overcoming
this.
The DDR programme is coming to an end, and I
am very happy that thousands of children have been
given the chance to go through the process. I know
there are more children held back, especially our
sisters. I ask this body, on behalf of all the children of
Sierra Leone, to do all it can to bring our sad story to
an end. We want to be able to move about freely in all
parts of the country to attend the schools of our choice.
We want to be able to visit our friends and families
everywhere in the country without fear of abduction,
recruitment and other dangers. Above all, we want our
parents to be able to work and to educate us so that we
can become useful citizens. This is what peace means
for me in Sierra Leone.
I thank the Security Council for inviting me to
tell my story on behalf of my brothers and sisters in
Sierra Leone and in other countries at war. I hope that
the United Nations and Governments in all countries
will listen to children and take our words into account.
We want a better life. We want peace. We are counting
on continued support for this.
The President: Let me thank Alhaji Babah
Sawaneh for putting a human face — his face — and
the faces of millions of children on the issue before the
Council this morning, the situation of children in
armed conflict. Let me also thank him for coming to
New York to speak to the members of the Council.
Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I
think all of us will feel that what has already been said
in the Council this morning is all we really need to

S/PV.4422

hear. The statements by the Secretary-General, Mr.
Olara Otunnu, Ms. Carol Bellamy and, in particular,
Alhaji Babah Sawaneh have brought home to us that
the work of the Council is there to affect real people on
the ground in real ways. I am sorry that our
intervention, and the interventions of my colleagues,
will have to deal with the bureaucracy of what the
Council does. But we have been asked some questions
in this morning’s statements, and I think that we have
to try to point the way to some answers.
The Secretary-General’s report, which he has
addressed both to the Security Council and to the
General Assembly, is a very relevant document in this
respect, and I thank him for it. The Special
Representative and the Executive Director have also
pointed very sharply to ways in which the Council, as
one of the organs of the United Nations concerned with
children in armed conflict, has to act. Later on,
Belgium will make a statement on behalf of the
European Union that will also express some
fundamental points. But there are some things that I
would like to bring out.
The whole subject is of legitimate interest to the
Council, because how the international community
deals with this issue of children and armed conflict has
a direct consequence, not only for the welfare of
children in itself, but because failure to recognize the
subject and tackle its effects will have a damaging
impact on the international peace and security efforts
of the Council. This is not simply an issue of morality;
it is an issue of security. That is the point.
The report and our draft resolution outline very
well the importance of designing a robust normative
framework within which the practical work of the
wider United Nations system can have an impact on the
ground. The Geneva Conventions, the Convention on
the Rights of the Child, the Optional Protocol on child
soldiering, the Statute of the International Criminal
Court and the International Labour Organization (ILO)
Convention on the Elimination of the Worst Forms of
Child Labour are all vital policy tools in that respect,
and, of course, command the full support of the United
Kingdom.
But it is particularly important to make those
conventions bite. I welcome the Secretary-General’s
and the Special Representative’s intention to name and
shame those who contravene those norms and to take
follow-up action.

When considering the report within the Council
as well as the draft resolution we are to adopt, we
should be aware of the need to understand the linkages
between this subject and other relevant concerns in the
area of those most affected by conflicts. This is
important to ensure that we are developing the
comprehensive approach to conflict prevention and
peace-building that the Secretary-General exhorted us
to consider in his report of June 2001 and which is
enshrined in our resolution on the prevention of armed
conflict, adopted this August.
The thinking outlined in resolution 1325 (2000),
on women, peace and security, in last month’s
presidential statement on the same subject and in our
work on civilians affected by armed conflict, to be
discussed tomorrow, are all relevant here.
We welcome the progress that has been made in
establishing child protection units in the context of
peacekeeping missions. We are encouraged by progress
in this respect in the work of the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) and of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC), and the role that
child protection officers play in the implementation of
their mandates.
In resolution 1355 (2001), on MONUC, the
Council called for all relevant parties to ensure that
child-protection concerns were addressed. We
encourage the efforts of the United Nations Children’s
Fund (UNICEF) and of the Special Representative to
continue to work to strengthen the role of these units in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, especially in
the design of effective reintegration components of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programmes for child soldiers and other children most
affected by conflicts. I think that Babah Sawaneh has
brought that home to us in his statement this morning.
The United Kingdom will continue to support the
system’s efforts to extend the role of child protection
advisers both at Headquarters and in the field. We hope
that their work can also be linked, where appropriate,
to the need for the important work of mainstreaming
gender in the context of peace-building strategies,
especially in situations of rehabilitation and
reconstruction following the end of hostilities. Olara
Otunnu and Carol Bellamy have pointed this out this
morning, in particular in the context of the
vulnerability of girls in armed conflict.

9

S/PV.4422

The United Kingdom takes note of the emphasis
placed in the report and in the draft resolution on the
inimical effects of illegal trade in natural resources and
in small arms by parties to armed conflict and the
direct negative link to the interests and well-being of
children. We welcome the report’s and the draft
resolution’s emphasis on these areas, as well as the
direct link they draw to our work on HIV/AIDS, which
is recognized in our draft resolution.
Let me say a final word on the cohesion of the
system. Not least because resources are scarce, we
would like to underline the need for the various parts of
the United Nations system working on conflict issues
to do so in a complementary fashion. It is a familiar
theme, and perhaps we are now getting somewhere.
The integrated mission task force philosophy has to
spread out from New York to the ground and, of
course, back to the intergovernmental system. There is
a real chance to get this right again in the context of
Afghanistan.
The United Kingdom is a strong supporter of the
Office of the Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict, and we are working with UNICEF to
help build the capacity of its Emergency Operations
department to integrate children and conflict issues into
their programmes more effectively.
We look forward to seeing these two Offices
working increasingly closely together to continue to
share information and approaches with each other, with
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and other
members of the United Nations system, and with nonUnited Nations partners in the development of
effective, durable responses.
We share the Secretary-General’s disappointment
at the fact that the special session on children had to be
postponed from this September. But our debate today,
and the draft resolution we are going to adopt, can help
inspire a really effective preparatory process — begun
under your excellent coordinating role, Madam
President — for the special session next year. Perhaps
by then we shall feel that we have begun to make our
“redemption songs” a reality.
Mr. Cunningham (United States of America):
Madam President, I wish to thank you for convening
this meeting today, and especially for your continued
leadership on this issue. I also want to thank the
Secretary-General; his Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, Olara Otunnu; and the

10

Director of the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF), Carol Bellamy, for their statements this
morning. They were illuminating and help us, I think,
put this issue in perspective. It is important that the
United Nations, the Security Council and our
Governments as Member States keep the issue of
children and armed conflict in focus, and I agree with
Ambassador Greenstock that, for this Council, we also
need to look at it as an issue of security and of direct
relevance to our work and for the future of our work.
Mr. Otunnu and Ms. Bellamy’s statements show
that progress is being made and also that Member
States are moving forward to help. Five additional
nations have ratified the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict, the
instrument that works most directly to address the
problem before us today. With the tenth ratification
filed by New Zealand on 12 November, the Optional
Protocol will enter into force in 90 days. The United
States is a signatory to the Optional Protocol, and
President Bush has submitted it to the Senate for
ratification. The Secretary-General’s report also tells us
that there are additional gains on a number of fronts,
but that, unfortunately, there is still very much to be
done. This issue will be with us for some time.
We meet today at a time when a new conflict
dominates our thoughts and our work. The attacks on
the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, and the
subsequent action in Afghanistan, had not been
envisioned when the Security Council considered this
issue last year, or even when the Secretary-General
released, on 7 September, the report we are discussing
today. The war against terrorism has aspects that have
not been traditionally considered in the debate on
children and armed conflict, such as the thousands of
children who lost their parents on 11 September.
However, some aspects of the victimization of
children in this conflict are still frighteningly familiar.
As First Lady Laura Bush stated in last Saturday’s
weekly presidential radio address, the plight of women
and children in Afghanistan is a matter of deliberate
human cruelty, carried out by those who seek to
intimidate and control. The State Department report
released in conjunction with that statement, entitled
“The Taliban’s War on Women”, tells the story of an
Afghan mother with a feverish child badly in need of a
doctor. Unfortunately, she had no male family member
to accompany her in public, a Taliban rule. Striving to

S/PV.4422

save her child, she went into the streets anyway, where
she was shot by a Taliban guard. Luckily, bystanders
were able to intercede to save her and the child.
Mercifully, the Taliban have been pushed out of
most parts of Afghanistan, and the international
community can now help bring relief to the people of
Afghanistan, and especially the women and children.
My Government has the honour of hosting today in
Washington, together with Japan, a working session to
advance that effort and to prepare for a better future.
As we have heard this morning, in addition to
children as victims, the problem of child soldiers
continues. Children under the age of 15 are still being
conscripted or recruited and are being used directly in
armed conflict. As the Secretary-General identified
again this year, children become at the same time both
victims and perpetrators. Our collective action is
making this more difficult; we applaud that and are
committed to a continuing effort to deal with the
problem.
The situation in Sierra Leone, the land of the
young man who spoke to us so eloquently this
morning, remains daunting. We commend the work that
the United Nations Children’s Fund and others are
doing to address the physical, medical and
psychological damage done to the children of Sierra
Leone during the brutal civil war. These children are
maimed, torn from their families, forced to engage in
acts of brutality — helping them is an enormous
challenge, and one that we must meet.
We must continue to work together to protect
children affected by armed conflict. I have cited but
two examples, but there are, all too regrettably, many
more. We all have our roles to play, and the United
States will continue to do its part to support these
children and to make the world a safer place for them.
Mr. Kolby (Norway): Many of today’s wars are
internal, protracted, fought in developing countries
along ethnic, linguistic or religious divides, fuelled by
illicit economic activity and fought with small arms
and light weapons, and they involve a high proportion
of non-State actors. That combination of factors has
exposed children to an unfortunately high risk of death,
injury and suffering.
The important challenge of protecting civilians,
not least children, in armed conflict must take its
rightful place as an integral part of all relevant matters

dealt with by the Security Council. The reports and
recommendations of the Secretary-General and of his
Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict are highly relevant and should be given full
consideration.
The draft resolution before us imposes a number
of requirements on Member States, the United Nations
system, financial institutions, regional organizations
and, not least, the parties to armed conflict. That will
raise expectations. We must now live up to them. To
that end, improved cooperation among the whole range
of intergovernmental, regional and non-governmental
organizations is needed. My delegation is particularly
pleased by the fact that, as a means to bridge the gap
between short-term and long-term measures, the draft
resolution makes direct reference to the international
financial and development institutions and their
responsibilities in this regard.
It is encouraging that mandates of some
peacekeeping operations now include specific
provisions for the protection of war-affected children.
We also welcome the fact that child protection officers
are included in the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone and in the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Because we
all know that children are affected by armed conflict
wherever it occurs, the most appropriate approach for
the future will therefore be to include child protection
staff in United Nations peacekeeping operations more
as a rule than as an exception.
Small arms, including anti-personnel mines, play
a central role in internal conflicts and destroy the lives
of millions of people. Commitments made during the
United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects must be
followed up. In order to protect the lives of innocent
civilians, including children, we must continue our
efforts to establish more efficient control mechanisms
that will change today’s easy access to those weapons.
War affects boys and girls differently. Girls are
often more exposed to rape and other forms of genderbased violence. In wartime, increased numbers of
women and girls are forced into prostitution by
exploitation, poverty and hunger. Boys are exploited in
other ways, most commonly as child soldiers. All these
young people run a high risk of contracting HIV/AIDS,
a disease that spreads even more rapidly in connection
with conflicts and displacement.

11

S/PV.4422

Displacement also poses other extreme risks for
children. Displaced children have lost the security of
their communities and in many cases their families, and
are often regarded with resentment and suspicion when
they arrive in new communities. Because many of them
have experienced traumatizing violations of human
rights and humanitarian law, they may be in need of
special protection in the country where they seek
refuge. We support and encourage United Nations
agencies and non-governmental organizations in their
work to reunite children with their families.
Those responsible for exploiting children during
conflict should not enjoy impunity or be considered
under amnesty provisions. With the coming into force
of the International Criminal Court, the international
community will have a good basis for enhancing
accountability for crimes against humanity, including
the conscription and enlisting of children under the age
of 15 years into the armed forces and the use of
children in hostilities. We urge those States which have
not done so to consider ratifying the Rome Statute of
the Court at the earliest possible date. We also urge
States to provide financial support for the
establishment of the Special Court for Sierra Leone.
The peace-building process hinges on civil
society. Civil society’s engagement is crucial for
strengthening local healing processes and for
preventing future violence. We must support the often
imaginative endeavours of civil players to rehabilitate
and reintegrate war-torn societies. In order to heal the
wounds and truly integrate children back into their
communities, peace and reconciliation processes must,
to the extent possible, also include children.
Finally, my delegation finds that the draft
resolution before us has taken an imaginative step by
requesting the Secretary-General to attach a list of the
names of those parties to armed conflict that recruit or
use children in violation of relevant international
obligations in situations that are of concern to the
Council’s agenda. That will hopefully increase
accountability and provide more accurate information.
By adopting the draft resolution, the Council
would reaffirm its commitment to keeping the question
of children in armed conflict high on its agenda. We
have the normative framework in place. Our challenge
now is to find ways to apply it and to ensure that it is
respected. My delegation totally agrees with the

12

Secretary-General that it is now time to initiate an “era
of application” (S/2001/852, para. 5).
Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation thanks you, Madam President,
for arranging this important meeting on the question of
children in armed conflict. We wish also to thank the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, Ambassador
Otunnu and Ms. Bellamy for their important
statements.
In recent years, the Security Council has made
active efforts to press for a solution to the question of
children and armed conflict.
Thanks to these efforts, the international
community has been paying greater attention to this
issue. In his report, the Secretary-General has made
some concrete and focused proposals, which merit the
attention of the entire United Nations system and all its
members. We believe that the most urgent task is for
the various parties to abide by the relevant legal norms
universally accepted by the international community
and to implement the relevant Security Council
resolutions in earnest, so as to translate consensus on
this issue into action. The Security Council has the
primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security. In order to be truly concerned about
the protection of children and civilians in armed
conflict, priority should be given to taking effective
measures to prevent and end armed conflict. Only
when conflicts are resolved and crises are addressed in
a timely manner can the protection of children be
finally fully addressed.
The Security Council has considered the
protection of civilians, women and children in armed
conflict recently and on many occasions and has passed
resolutions and presidential statements. Regrettably, in
areas such as Palestine and Afghanistan, where
conflicts are quite grave, the protection and the rights
of these vulnerable social groups are not ensured, as
they should be. According to the statistics of the
relevant agencies, about 100,000 Afghan children and
adolescents may not survive the coming winter. We are
deeply concerned about this. We call upon the
international community to increase assistance to the
Afghan refugees and to find a political solution to the
issue of Afghanistan at an early date.
The protection of children in armed conflict
requires the joint efforts of the international
community. The Chinese delegation has always

S/PV.4422

attached great importance to the protection of children.
De jure and de facto protection of the rights of the
child is a basic principle followed by China in the
protection of children. Last year, the Chinese
Government signed the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict. We hope
that the various parties will abide by the relevant
provisions of this Optional Protocol, such as that on
recruitment age, at an early date. We hope that the
various United Nations agencies will do their jobs well
under their respective mandates and that, at the same
time, they will strengthen cooperation and coordination
so as to bring into full play their combined strengths.
We appreciate the various efforts made by the
United Nations Children’s Fund, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
the Secretary-General’s Special Representative,
Ambassador Otunnu, for their efforts over a long
period. The Chinese Government will continue to
support their work, and we are ready to strengthen our
cooperation.
Mr. Krokhmal (Ukraine): My delegation
welcomes the Secretary-General’s important statement.
I would like to thank the Executive Director of
the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), Ms.
Carol Bellamy, and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Mr. Olara Otunnu, for their continuing efforts to
strengthen the role of the United Nations in bringing
this issue to the attention of the international
community.
The story told this morning by a former child
soldier, Alhaji Sawaneh, clearly shows how painful the
realities of numerous armed conflicts are in various
parts of the world, including Afghanistan. They
represent a grave threat to the future of new
generations, and my delegation appreciates your
leadership, Madam President, in convening the
Security Council meeting on this particularly important
topic.
By adopting its landmark resolutions 1261 (1999)
and 1314 (2000), affirming the protection of children
affected by armed conflict as a peace and security
concern, the Security Council has become actively
engaged in the issue. Those documents became an
important basis for advocacy on behalf of children
affected by conflict.

Today is the time to analyze the progress
achieved in the implementation of our resolutions and
to determine ways to move forward in defending
children who have suffered in wars. In my delegation’s
view, the Secretary-General’s report to the Security
Council is, in fact, a very useful source of reference for
this debate. It contains a comprehensive overview of
the fate of children caught in conflicts, draws on
specific activities from the field, traces the progress
made thus far and provides a list of additional key
actions that may be taken in the near future. As the
report shows, real progress has been made.
The Ukraine welcomes the efforts of the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
Mr. Otunnu, aimed at generating a series of
child-protection pledges from the parties to conflict.
And we can now see that important commitments made
to the Special Representative and other relevant bodies
have been met in several zones of conflict.
We especially appreciate the fact that the reports
to the Security Council on some specific conflict
situations now contain distinct sections on the
protection and well-being of children. About 30 reports
submitted recently to the Council integrated
information and recommendations covering the
protection of children affected by armed conflict. On
this basis, seven Council resolutions and several
presidential statements included concern for the plight
of children affected by armed conflict.
We are pleased with the training on the rights of
the child, and child protection is now an integral part of
the curriculum of all peacekeeping training activities
conducted by the Training and Evaluation Service of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
We also support the increasing and widespread
engagement of non-governmental organizations in
advocacy work, as well as the provision of information
and programme activities on the ground. My delegation
welcomes all those steps taken so far to implement
resolutions and encourages all actors to continue these
efforts. In spite of the progress achieved so far, a great
deal remains to be done to ensure the effective
protection and rehabilitation of children in times of
war.
We are prepared to move ahead with the new
recommendations of the Secretary-General. Many of
those recommendations are built on and refine
elements of resolutions 1261 (1999) and 1314 (2000).

13

S/PV.4422

We share in particular the Secretary-General’s view
that the mandates of peacekeeping operations should
continue to include provisions for the protection of the
rights of children.
Peacekeeping missions have a critical role to play
in providing protection to children. In order to
implement this particular dimension of their mandate, a
child protection adviser should be responsible for
coordinating activities to ensure the protection and
welfare of children. Greater attention should be given
to appropriate training of peacekeeping personnel, both
civilian and military, in the area of the protection of the
rights of children. We are sure that the greater
involvement of women in peacekeeping missions will
help enhance the capacity of missions in terms of
protecting children and dealing with gender-sensitivity
aspects.
We totally agree with the Secretary-General that
the effective monitoring of adherence to the framework
of international law and to consequent obligations is
essential action contributing to the protection of
children and their rights. In this regard, it is very
important to continue to include observations
concerning the protection of children in the reports to
the Security Council on conflict situations.
Over the past few years, a number of parties to
conflict have made concrete commitments to the
protection of children. The challenge now is how to
ensure adherence to those commitments. Such
reporting can assist in exerting political pressure on
parties, whose conduct falls short of their childprotection obligations and commitments. The Security
Council can make a big difference in this regard by
using its collective influence to lean on parties to
conflict.
The demobilization and reintegration of soldiers
should be an integral part of humanitarian relief and
peace-building strategies. In this context, we fully
support the Secretary-General’s statement that there is
an urgent need for the international community,
especially for international and regional institutions, to
provide sustained and adequate resources to all
relevant actors, particularly peace operations, United
Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) engaged in implementing demobilization and
reintegration programmes for children.
In conclusion, Ukraine would like to thank the
delegation of France for its leadership in preparing a

14

new draft resolution on children in armed conflict that
will assign new initiatives to a number of actors,
including Member States, international financial
institutions, regional organizations, the United Nations
and the Council itself. We support this draft and look
forward to further progress in this direction, and we
express our readiness to contribute to the subsequent
consideration of the question of children in armed
conflict, in the Security Council and in the General
Assembly.
We also recall another initiative of France, to
convene a Security Council summit meeting on
children in armed conflict during the General
Assembly’s special session on children, which will
most likely take place in May 2002.
Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): The
problem of children in armed conflict is of increasing
concern to the Security Council in the exercise of its
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. This is also a crucial
question for the countries of West Africa, which, for
more than a decade, have been torn by conflicts in
which children have been both the victims and the
perpetrators. The touching testimony of Alhaji Babah
Sawaneh this morning is revealing in this regard.
Mali, one of the initiators of the World Summit
for Children — which led to the adoption of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, whose Optional
Protocol focuses great attention on the question under
consideration — welcomes the holding of today’s
debate, and we are grateful to you, Madam President,
for having taken the initiative on this.
We also extend our thanks to the SecretaryGeneral for his very useful and detailed report and his
very important statement this morning.
We must not fail to congratulate and thank Mr.
Olara Otunnu, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
for his intelligent and sustained action and, on this
occasion, for his, as usual, lucid and detailed briefing.
Of course, I would also like to underscore the
important work accomplished by the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) for children affected by
conflict. I thank Ms. Carol Bellamy, the Executive
Director, for her highly useful contribution to our
debate this morning.

S/PV.4422

We have carefully considered the report under
consideration, on which I would like at the present time
to make a few comments. First, Mali welcomes this
second report of the Secretary-General on children and
armed conflict, above all because it contains important
measures, whose objective is to ensure the protection
of children during and after armed conflict. We also
welcome it because it reviews the measures that have
been taken to follow up on past recommendations of
the Secretary-General and relevant resolutions of the
Security Council. Likewise, we are delighted at the
forthcoming entry into force of the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict, of which
Mali is completing the formalities of ratification.
Along the same lines, we support the recommendations
of the Secretary-General contained in paragraph 22 of
his report, which are aimed at ensuring respect for the
obligations and commitments undertaken for the
protection of children in armed conflict.
Secondly, I would like to emphasize the
increasingly active role of the Security Council on the
question of children and armed conflict. My delegation
is delighted in this respect with the efforts of the
Secretary-General to make available to the Security
Council first-hand information on children affected by
conflicts, especially in specific countries. I have in
mind in particular Sierra Leone, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Angola and Afghanistan. In
this regard, my delegation is pleased at Mr. Otunnu’s
visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
followed by his briefing to the Security Council and its
adoption of a resolution calling for greater attention to
be given to the protection of children in that country
and to strengthening the child-protection component of
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC).
My third comment relates to the need to adopt a
regional approach to ensure the protection of children
in armed conflict. In fact, it is essential to take
measures to put an end to the transboundary activities
that are harmful to children in times of armed conflict,
such as the transboundary recruitment and kidnapping
of children, the sale of or trafficking in children,
attacks on refugee or displaced-persons camps and
installations, the contraband in precious minerals, the
illicit traffic in small arms and other criminal activities.
In this regard, Mali took an active part in the
adoption, in April 2000, of the Accra Declaration and

Plan of Action on War-Affected Children in West
Africa. Likewise, Mali made a useful contribution to
the training of officers of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) for the protection of
children in armed conflict, to the meeting in Libreville
in February 2001 on the economic exploitation of
children and to the Arab-African forum in Rabat, from
24-26 October 2001, on the sexual exploitation of
children. Along the same lines, we must welcome the
holding in Cairo, in May 2001, under the auspices of
the Organization of African Unity (OAU), of the Pan
African Forum on the Future of Children in Africa, at
which a Declaration and Plan of Action were adopted
that envisage suitable measures for the protection of
children affected by armed conflict. It is also
reassuring to welcome the adoption by the members of
ECOWAS, in April 2001, of an agreement to establish
a Child-Protection Unit, which will ensure the
integration of child-protection mechanisms into all
relevant ECOWAS institutions and also the
implementation of the Accra Declaration and Plan of
Action.
These various initiatives are accomplishments
that must be consolidated, inter alia, through sufficient
financial aid from the United Nations and the donor
community to regional organizations, such as
ECOWAS, that have shown their determination to
ensure the protection of children during and after
armed conflict but that do not have the means to do so.
Concluding as I began, I would like to reiterate
Mali’s steadfast commitment to children, especially
those that are affected by armed conflict. It is our hope
that the special session of the General Assembly on
children, to be held in May 2002, will give Member
States, the United Nations agencies, non-governmental
organizations and civil society a useful opportunity to
follow the example of the Security Council, through its
resolution 1314 (2000) and the resolution to be adopted
at this meeting, by taking decisive measures to ensure
the protection of children.
Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The rights of the child have become among
the most important areas of human rights throughout
the United Nations system. We recently marked the
tenth anniversary of the Convention on the Rights of
the Child, a document that was the first-ever universal
bill on the rights of the child and provides legal
protection of children’s rights. The strength of the
Convention lies in its recognition of the need to ensure

15

S/PV.4422

special protection and assistance to children.
Unfortunately, those lofty principles are not always full
applied in practice. The suffering of children from
hunger, sickness and violence is not a thing of the past,
but the bitter reality of today.
Adults start wars, but it is mainly children who
suffer in them. Today, we heard first-hand one of the
hundreds, perhaps thousands, such stories of suffering.
The nature of conflict has changed and over 90 per cent
of victims are now civilians, at least half of whom are
children. Children constitute over 65 per cent of
refugees and internally displaced persons. Behind these
dry statistics lies enormous human sorrow, borne on the
still frail shoulders of children. They lose parents, their
homes are destroyed, their families are shattered, they
live in destitution, they are unable to pursue an
education and they suffer long-term psychological
trauma.
Obviously, the international community must take
steps when serious situations develop that cause
children to suffer. The best way to protect children,
however, is to prevent conflicts from erupting or to
settle them before they become so destructive. The role
of the United Nations and its Security Council can
hardly be overstated in that regard.
We are pleased that our Council, the organ
bearing primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, is focusing on the
child dimension of armed conflicts. Moreover, Russia
believes that the undertaking of humanitarian tasks in
the context of protecting children is primarily the
prerogative of the specialized agencies and
humanitarian organizations, including the World Health
Organization, the United Nations Children’s Fund, the
World Food Programme, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the
International Committee of the Red Cross and other
bodies with their own mandates that are autonomous at
the operational and financial levels.
An important achievement in protecting the
interests of children was the General Assembly’s
adoption on 25 May 2000 of the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the

16

involvement of children in armed conflict. That
document is intended to offer real help to children in
war, but we need not stop at that. The Russian
Federation calls on all States to raise the army
recruitment age to 18 years. This issue was thoroughly
discussed at the International Conference on WarAffected Children, held last September in Winnipeg, in
which the Russian delegation participated. We believe
that the exchange of views there was extremely useful
and should be pursued.
We are deeply convinced that the problems of
children are not confined to armed conflict alone. The
protection of children should be approached from a
somewhat broader angle. Neglect, childhood drug
abuse, the traffic in children and even in their organs
and tissues, the sexual exploitation of children — this
is far from being a complete list of the bitter problems
that threaten children in the world today and thus the
future of the entire human race.
An altogether different issue is the problem of
terrorism, which is becoming increasingly conspicuous
and spares neither adults not children. It is our common
duty effectively to prevent the proliferation of these
universal evils.
We greatly appreciate the Secretary-General’s
report prepared for this meeting of the Security
Council. We are pleased that many of its
recommendations have been taken into account in the
Council’s draft resolution and will thereby form the
basis of a further intensification of our joint efforts in
this very important area.
Children will be the custodians of this new
century. By protecting them from war today, we will be
taking an important step in building a world without
violence or conflict, a world of democracy and
prosperity.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers on my list for this meeting. In view of the
lateness of the hour, I intend, with the concurrence of
the members of the Council, to suspend the meeting
until 3.15 this afternoon.
The meeting was suspended at 1.20 p.m.
