United Nations

S/PV.4886

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-eighth year

4886

th meeting
Wednesday, 17 December 2003, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Passy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Bulgaria)

Members:

Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Belinga-Eboutou
Mr. Maquieira
Mr. Cheng Jingye
Mr. De La Sablière
Mr. Pleuger
Mr. Zoumanigui
Mr. Pujalte
Mr. Akram
Mr. Gatilov
Mr. Arias
Mr. Atieh
Sir Emyr Jones Parry
Mr. Negroponte

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999)
and 1244 (1999)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

03-65935 (E)
*0365935*

S/PV.4886

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998),
1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Albania, Italy and Serbia and
Montenegro, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item of the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter on rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
aforementioned representatives took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.
It is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Guéhenno
took a seat at the Council table.
The President: The Security Council will begin
its consideration of the item on the agenda. The
Security Council in meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno.
I now give the floor to Mr. Guéhenno.
Mr. Guéhenno: Thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on recent
developments in Kosovo since Mr. Holkeri’s last
briefing on 30 October.

2

The past two months have been eventful in
Kosovo, particularly with regard to political
developments that chart a way forward in Kosovo in
accordance with resolution 1244 (1999) and the agreed
policy of “standards before status”.
On 5 November, an initiative to establish a
mechanism to review the Kosovo Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government’s progress towards
meeting the benchmarks in the “standards before
status” policy, endorsed by this Council, was launched
under the auspices of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Holkeri. The initiative is
designed to give new momentum to the “standards
before status” policy and to structure and refocus the
work of the Kosovo Provisional Institutions on meeting
the benchmarks contained in the eight standards:
functioning democratic institutions; rule of law;
freedom of movement; returns and reintegration;
economy; property rights; dialogue with Belgrade; and
the Kosovo Protection Corps.
As stated in the recent Presidential Statement, the
review mechanism, under the authority of the Council,
envisages regular and structured reviews of the
Provisional Institutions’ progress in meeting the
standards, based on the assessments contained in the
Secretary-General’s quarterly reports to the Security
Council. Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Holkeri, who will be in charge of the review
mechanism on the ground, will closely consult and
coordinate with key Member States, particularly those
in the Contact Group.
Depending on progress made towards reaching
the standards, as assessed during the periodic reviews,
a general review of the Provisional Institutions’
progress will be undertaken. A first opportunity for
such a general review should occur around mid-2005.
During the general review in 2005, progress by the
Provisional Institutions towards meeting the eight
standards will be assessed. Further advancement
towards the process leading to a determination of
Kosovo’s future status will depend on the positive
outcome of the comprehensive review. If the
Provisional Institutions have not fulfilled the standards
by that time, it is proposed that they should be given a
further period in which to work on meeting them,
during which the periodic reviews would continue,
leading up to the next general review. It is clear that
there is no deadline and that the future status process
will not start automatically on the review date. A

S/PV.4886

prerequisite for any discussion on Kosovo’s future
status remains the achievement of the eight standards.
At the same time, achieving the standards would lead
to a qualitative change in Kosovo, which is a goal in
itself and an essential precondition to advance
democracy and a multi-ethnic society in Kosovo.
An important step in the process was the launch
of the “Standards for Kosovo” document on 10
December by Mr. Holkeri, welcomed in the Council’s
Presidential Statement of 12 December. The standards
document elaborates on the original standards and
benchmarks paper and contains detailed benchmarks
within each of the eight standards that Kosovo’s
Provisional Institutions will be required to meet as part
of the review process. This document, together with the
upcoming joint implementation workplan, will provide
the basis for the periodic reviews of the progress
achieved by Kosovo’s Provisional Institutions in
reaching the eight standards. The standards document
has been supported by the leaders of Kosovo’s
Provisional Institutions. Kosovo’s President and the
Prime Minister, the leader of the Kosovo Democratic
Party (PDK), as well as several leaders of non-Serb
minority communities who participated in the launch of
the document, have stated their commitment to the
process. Assembly President Daci and Alliance for the
Future of Kosovo (AAK) leader Haradinaj did not
attend the launch, despite lengthy consultations on the
document and their stated agreement with the
standards. Kosovo Serb leaders have also distanced
themselves from the document, following a statement
issued by the Government of the Republic of Serbia
that the document in its current form was unacceptable.
There was also disagreement between United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and the Provisional Institutions on the
introduction originally contained in the statement,
which included inter alia a sentence on full compliance
with resolution 1244 (1999), the Constitutional
Framework and other applicable law and the original
standards and benchmarks statement. This introduction
has had to be omitted for the time being owing to
opposition by the Kosovo Albanian leaders of the
Provisional Institutions to the term “applicable law.”
Mr. Holkeri has stated that he will continue his efforts
aimed at ensuring that an introduction would be
incorporated in the document at a later stage that will
be in accordance with these fundamental principles,
drawing on language from the Presidential Statement

of 12 December. The Special Representative of the
Secretary-General is discussing the wording of the
introduction with the Prime Minister.
The standards document will be followed by a
joint implementation workplan for the Provisional
Institutions to provide transparency and clarity to all
involved. The workplan will set out in detail the
specific, concrete and measurable steps that these
institutions will need to take towards achieving the
benchmarks and will differentiate between the
respective responsibilities of UNMIK and the
Provisional Institutions. A steering group, co-chaired
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and the Kosovo Prime Minister, has been formed to
lead the process and in its first meeting on 10
December set up five joint UNMIK/Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government working groups, which
will elaborate an implementation workplan. At present,
Provisional
Institutions
of
Self-Government
representatives are actively participating in the drafting
of the workplan. As was the case with the standards
document, UNMIK intends to keep Belgrade fully
abreast of the process of elaboration of the work plan.
We will keep the Council regularly informed on
developments and, once the plan is complete, it will be
presented to this Council.
UNMIK has continued the transfer of nonreserved responsibilities to the Provisional Institutions
and will finalize the transfer of the non-reserved
competences in chapter 5 of the Constitutional
Framework by the end of 2003. A small number of
specific responsibilities will not become operational
until the relevant legislation is passed — for example,
legislation on the creation of an independent media
commissioner. In addition, UNMIK has continued to
seek to increase the involvement of the Provisional
Institutions in an advisory and consultative capacity in
the administrative and operational functions in the
specific reserved areas identified in chapter 8 of the
Constitutional
Framework.
Their
increased
involvement will not affect the powers and
responsibilities of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in those areas, and those reserved
responsibilities will not be transferred. As part of the
process, UNMIK is reviewing the Kosovo
Government’s proposal to create additional structures
within the Government, or as liaison between UNMIK
and the Government, in order to build capacity and
increase transparency. One such measure, which has

3

S/PV.4886

already been implemented, is the appointment of a
Kosovo Government liaison in the Office of the Special
Representative.
No laws have been promulgated in the past two
months. However, the Government approved seven
draft laws, and has forwarded them to the Kosovo
Assembly, including a draft anti-discrimination law,
which was initiated by the Office of the Prime
Minister. For the first time, the Assembly initiated a
draft law — on gender equality — sponsored by the
Assembly’s Gender Equality Commission. The
Assembly has held a number of public hearings on
draft laws — on anti-discrimination, gender equality
and health — and the Assembly’s budget and finance
and economy committees have been holding twiceweekly meetings with municipalities and offices within
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government and
UNMIK to discuss budget proposals for 2004. Recent
plenary sessions of the Assembly, however, have been
marked by severe procedural violations and
inconsistency in the counting of votes. A significant
number of Assembly members have raised objections,
but the practice has not yet been corrected.
On 11 December, following a motion by the
Kosovo Government, and acting on a recommendation
of the Assembly’s committee for judicial, legislative
and constitutional framework matters, the Assembly
adopted a decision to abrogate all laws, decisions and
acts relating to Kosovo enacted in Yugoslavia and
Serbia after 22 March 1989. The Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Holkeri,
immediately issued a determination that that decision
of the Assembly was beyond its competence and was
without validity and effect.
As a result of enforcement of the rule of law
through timely interventions at the local level, UNMIK
civil administration has reported signs of improvement
in the municipalities acting within the scope of their
responsibilities in accordance with UNMIK Regulation
No. 2000/45, on local self-government. UNMIK
municipal representatives have intervened in order to
suspend decisions relating to the misuse of public
funds and attempted misappropriation of lands under
the administration of the Kosovo Trust Agency. As a
result of the civil administration’s welcome action and
intervention, there has been an increase in the
constructive engagement between UNMIK and local
officials in the municipalities.

4

The representation of Kosovo Serbs and non-Serb
minorities remains poor in the structures of the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government: none have
reached the target percentages and the disparity in the
proportional representation persists in senior-level
positions. Progress remains slow in that regard within
the 30 municipalities as well. Generally, non-majority
communities also have little impact on the decisionmaking process, particularly in the municipalities. The
use of official languages in assembly sessions in
municipalities tends to be satisfactory; however, the
translation
of
official
documents
in
many
municipalities remains reliant on UNMIK initiatives
and resources. While the timely provision and quality
of official documents in all official languages varies by
ministry, the translation of official documents at the
central level is gradually improving and, contrary to
the municipal level, is not dependent on UNMIK or
international resources.
The past two months have been characterized by
an increase in serious crimes, including attacks against
Kosovo Police Service (KPS) officers. Two KPS
officers were murdered near the town of Decani, in the
region of Pec, on 24 November. Encouraging successes
in investigations against organized crime may be a
cause for some of those attacks. Crimes directed
against Kosovo Serbs decreased, as did ethnically
motivated crimes. A number of public demonstrations
took place across Kosovo. Two significant public-order
incidents occurred in Mitrovica. On 28 November, a
crowd demonstrated against the decision to take down
an Albanian flag that had been illegally raised over the
Mitrovica municipality; and, on 6 December, a violent
mob attacked a World Bank delegation and the Kosovo
Prime Minister during a visit to northern Mitrovica.
UNMIK condemned that attack, in which one member
of the World Bank delegation was slightly injured and
four vehicles, including two police vehicles and a
United Nations bus, were burned.
UNMIK police have made progress in the arrest
of suspected perpetrators of serious crimes. For
example, the police arrested one suspect in the case of
the bombing of the railway bridge in northern Kosovo
earlier this year, as well as suspects on charges relating
to war crimes committed against Kosovo Albanians in
1999, trafficking and suspected terrorist activities.
Since the beginning of September, the anti-trafficking
unit has made 25 arrests, closed down 128
establishments and rescued 70 victims of prostitution.

S/PV.4886

Police have also seized 36 kilograms of heroin and 6
kilograms of other narcotics. UNMIK has established
an
investigation
task
force,
comprised
of
representatives of the United Nations Office of Internal
Oversight Services, the European Union Anti-Fraud
Office and the Financial Investigation Unit, which will
coordinate investigations of fraud and corruption
involving Kosovo’s Provisional Institutions, public
enterprises and UNMIK.
The development of the KPS and the local
judiciary continued. Seven police stations are now
under KPS command. Six additional judges and one
prosecutor from the Kosovo Serb community were
appointed, although parallel judicial structures still
exist in four Kosovo Serb-majority municipalities, as
well as one in Nis.
On 4 November, the Dubrava Commission of
Inquiry issued its recommendations on the prisoner riot
and resulting fire at Dubrava Prison on 4 September.
The recommendations are being implemented within
budget constraints. The situation at Dubrava remains
tense due to crowded conditions throughout the penal
system. However, prison officials have stabilized the
situation.
Regional police cooperation was enhanced with
the signing of a cooperation agreement with
Montenegro, adding to the existing protocols with the
police authorities in Belgrade, in Albania and in the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. That regional
approach produced success on 29 November 2003,
when a Kosovo-Albanian businessman abducted in
Serbia was rescued and four Serbian abductors were
arrested in the first joint operation by UNMIK police
and Serbian police.
Although freedom of movement has improved
somewhat, it still remains an obstacle to many people
in certain areas of Kosovo. Controls on movement
between the southern and northern parts of Mitrovica
have been lifted. Members of the Kosovo Serb
community in northern Kosovo have yet to avail
themselves of the UNMIK-issued vehicle registration
plates, which could improve their freedom of
movement. Nonetheless, UNMIK has reported that a
moderate number of Serbs from elsewhere in Kosovo
and in the remainder of Serbia are visiting Pristina and
speaking Serbian on the city’s streets without incident.
The rate of minority returns has continued to
increase, although the overall number of returns

remains low. As of 30 November, a total of 3,370
members of non-majority communities returned this
year, including over 1,300 Kosovo Serbs, reaching a
total of 9,485 overall.
The 2004 Strategy for Sustainable Returns was
launched last week, providing detailed information on
returns-funding needs for 2004, totalling €38.5 million.
The 2004 strategy also includes expanded engagement
by the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government and
displaced persons in the returns process, improved
information flow to displaced persons and addressing
property-related obstacles to return. The Kosovo
Government also concretely engaged in the returns
process. Seven million euros were allocated from the
2002 surplus in the Kosovo consolidated budget for
returns, with €5 million being used in municipal
returns projects and €2 million supporting
municipalities that contribute positively to returns.
Returns projects are ongoing in a number of
municipalities, with the active involvement of municipal
authorities. Security remains a problem in some areas,
and there is sometimes resistance at the community or
village level. While such resistance is generally dealt
with effectively through dialogue efforts, when such
steps are not taken, the result can be serious, as
illustrated last week in Klina, near Pec, where 11
persons who had attempted to return spontaneously
were met by Kosovo Albanian protestors. The Kosovo
Force (KFOR) had to evacuate the group of returnees
to prevent an escalation of the situation.
In response to pressure to ensure fair-share
financing, municipalities are spending more on
minority needs. Despite gradual improvement, less than
one-third of the municipalities have met the minimum
levels. The level of integration between communities
remains extremely limited. Kosovo Albanians and
Kosovo Serbs continue to use separate health care and
education facilities. No Albanian language schools that
offer classes in minority languages include Serbian. No
Serbian language schools offer classes in Albanian. In
addition, the provision of equitable public services to
all communities remains problematic. For example, the
Kosovo electric company continues to disconnect
minorities who have not paid debts accumulated by
illegal occupants.
(spoke in French)
The issue of privatization has been a prominent
issue in Kosovo during the past several months. While

5

S/PV.4886

there is consensus that privatization is necessary to
bring economic development to Kosovo, uncertainties
as to the legal and operational modalities according to
which socially-owned enterprises should be privatized
have slowed down the process. Yesterday, a Kosovo
Trust Agency (KTA) board meeting was held with a
view to move the privatization process forward. The
board made the decision to proceed with the
privatization of 23 enterprises from the first and second
waves of privatization and agreed that a third wave of
privatization, involving 19 enterprises, would be
carried out in the near future. After weeks of
controversy and uncertainty, these decisions will
facilitate the easing of political tensions associated
with discussions about privatization.
I wish to say a few words on the question of
dialogue with Belgrade. Unfortunately, UNMIK has
informed us that direct dialogue on practical matters of
mutual concern between Belgrade and Pristina has not
moved forward since the launching of the dialogue in
Vienna on 14 October 2003. In part, this has been due
to the position of the Kosovo Government, which, for
political reasons, has not publicly endorsed the process,
even though preparatory work is ongoing within the
Government. UNMIK hopes that this approach will
change following the launch of the standards
document, which includes dialogue with Belgrade as
one of the eight standards on which the process will be
judged. Another obstacle has been the Serbian
parliamentary election campaign, which has recently
resulted in the Coordination Centre for Kosovo not
being willing to discuss preparations for the dialogue.
We welcome with satisfaction the recent encouraging
statements by Foreign Minister Svilanović regarding
Belgrade’s intention to proceed with the dialogue.
Regarding the Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC),
on 3 December the Special Representative ordered the
suspension of 12 KPC members for an initial period of
six months, as a result of a joint KFOR and UNMIK
inquiry regarding allegations of those members’
association with organized crime, abuse of their
functions and other illegal activities. The investigation
was launched after the bombing of a railroad bridge in
northern Kosovo on 12 April 2003. A police
investigation is being carried out in order to determine
whether the grounds exist for dismissal or for criminal
prosecution of these KPC members. The KPC
leadership, as well as several Kosovo Albanian leaders,
initially resisted the decision. In the end, the decision

6

was accepted due to the resolute stand by the Special
Representative and the KFOR Commander, and to
interventions by the Kosovo Prime Minister.
In an unrelated incident in October, the head of
the KPC was arrested in Slovenia under a year-old
warrant against him issued by a parallel court operating
in Nis, in southern Serbia. He was released following
intervention by the Special Representative, who
informed the Slovenian authorities of the invalidity of
the arrest warrant handed down by this parallel court.
The Kosovo Protection Corps has made progress
in meeting standards. The organization has also
continued to improve the quality of its work within the
mandated function of a civil emergency agency,
training more members and fulfilling planned tasks in a
professional manner. The Kosovo Protection Corps has
intervened in emergencies ranging from forest fires to
floods. Outreach in non-majority communities has
continued. The Kosovo Protection Corps has provided
assistance to those communities in the area of medical
care, the provision of fuel and firewood and
construction lumber and the construction of fire
stations and water-supply lines. However, lack of
funding for equipment and training may hinder further
progress in that type of action. Non-majority members
of the KPC now represent five per cent of the KPC
membership. At the same time, supervision and
ongoing intervention by UNMIK, as well as KFOR
day-to-day supervision on the ground, remain
necessary, particularly regarding serious allegations of
misconduct, through ongoing investigation and
effective action.
In conclusion, I wish to highlight the fact that the
achievement of the eight standards remains a
prerequisite for the start of a political process leading
to the determination of Kosovo’s future status. During
the entire process, UNMIK will remain very active and
in the lead on the ground in order to continue the
necessary momentum, while at the same time
safeguarding the authority given to it by the Council
under resolution 1244 (1999) and continuing to
exercise its reserved responsibilities fully and
effectively. UNMIK will also continue to monitor,
attentively observe and, when necessary, intervene, to
ensure the compliance of the Provisional Institutions
and municipalities with resolution 1244 (1999), the
Constitutional Framework and the other laws in force
in Kosovo.

S/PV.4886

We count on the Council’s continued support for
consistent implementation of the “standards before
status” policy based on resolution 1244 (1999). The
support of the Council and key Member States for
UNMIK will be essential for the full implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999), including within the
framework of the initiative for implementing the
review process I described in my briefing, in order to
structure the way towards launching the political
process to determine Kosovo’s future status.
Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First, the Russian delegation welcomes the
fact that today’s meeting of the Security Council is
being chaired by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Bulgaria, Mr. Solomon Passy. Your participation,
Mr. Minister, in this meeting underlines the importance
of the question before the Council.
We would like to express our appreciation to
Under-Secretary-General Guéhenno for his thorough
briefing on the work of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and on
the situation in Kosovo and the region.
An important step in the settlement process in
Kosovo is the establishment of a mechanism
monitoring compliance with internationally recognized
standards in Kosovo, on the basis of the principle of
“standards before status” and under the Security
Council’s comprehensive political monitoring.
The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Kosovo, Mr. Holkeri, has issued a
document on standards for Kosovo which establishes a
set of criteria for assessing the region’s movement
towards establishing a multi-ethnic democratic society
in which human rights are equally guaranteed for all, in
particular the rights of the members of all Kosovo
communities of all ethnic origins with respect to
security, mobility and return to homeland areas.
In that regard, we are greatly perplexed by the
removal, under pressure by Kosovo Albanian leaders,
of information from that text: the removal of the
preamble, which contains important basic provisions,
including references to resolution 1244 (1999), the
Constitutional Framework and applicable law in the
region. That approach is hardly in keeping with the
international community’s objectives in Kosovo.
We believe that the region must carry out
significant work to achieve the standards set by the

international community. In spite of some progress, a
great number of important challenges are still far from
being resolved. Key requirements not being fulfilled
relate to the status of non-Albanian residents of
Kosovo and the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons. Reliable security does not exist
equally for the entire population of the region. There is
a lack of equality in fundamental rights and freedoms,
including the right to equal employment opportunities.
There is inadequate representation of minorities,
particularly Serbs, in the agencies of the region’s
Provisional Institutions.
Despite the general decline in crime levels, as
noted in the most recent monthly report of the Kosovo
Force, there are still serious, clearly ethnicallymotivated incidents of violence. We condemn all acts
of violence, especially those with ethnic overtones. We
would like to convey our condolences with respect to
the incident that occurred in northern Mitrovica. As
well, we believe it is appropriate to draw the Council’s
attention to the particular responsibility of the leaders
and the authorities for preventing situations in which,
given the elevated tensions and the particular
sensitivity of the parties, such acts could provoke
uncontrolled
reactions,
with
unforeseeable
consequences.
The statements by the leaders of the regional
Provisional Institutions on their commitment to the
multi-ethnicity of the area must be followed by real
actions. Unfortunately, we see that in practice, the
interests of minorities still often go ignored. Like other
members of the Council, we are convinced that without
a radical improvement in the situation with respect to
these matters, the process of building a democratic and
multi-ethnic society in Kosovo will continue to fail to
gain traction.
A substantive element of the standards for
Kosovo is the establishment of a direct dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina on technical matters of
common concern. We hope that talks in the working
groups will begin in the very near future. We cannot
help but be concerned by the attempts of the leadership
of the regional Provisional Institutions to question the
powers of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, as was the case in particular on the question
of applicable law in Kosovo. We believe that such
actions demonstrate a lack of willingness on the part of
the Kosovo Albanian leaders to comply with the

7

S/PV.4886

standards set by the international community in
Kosovo.
We reaffirm our support for the work of the head
of UNMIK, Mr. Holkeri. We believe there is need for
full compliance with resolution 1244 (1999) on the
basis of the agreed principle of “standards before
status”. The launching of a political process designed
to determine the final status of Kosovo must entail
compliance with the standards established by the
international community and the building in the region
of a democratic, multi-ethnic society. Based on that,
Russia will continue to participate actively in collective
efforts in the search for a just, balanced and lasting
solution to the question of Kosovo.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Russian Federation for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. Pujalte (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): First,
on behalf of my delegation, I warmly welcome you,
Sir, to the Chamber. It is an honour for my country to
take part in a Security Council meeting presided over
by you. I also thank Under-Secretary-General
Guéhenno for his briefing and for the information he
has just given the Council on the situation in Kosovo.
Without doubt, the document on standards for
Kosovo presented last week constitutes a great
opportunity for the future of Kosovo. But it also sets
out a number of challenges. Among those challenges
are the expectations surely generated by the very
mention of a tentative date for a broad assessment of
the degree of compliance with those standards.
As has been rightly indicated, the document is a
critical road map that should be followed by the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government and
Kosovo society as a whole in the next 18 months,
before the subject of status can be discussed. The
implementation plan for the policy of “standards before
status”, to be presented in the near future by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Kosovo, Mr. Harri Holkeri, will surely be a useful
supplement to that document.
The document on standards describes a society
that little resembles the current reality in Kosovo.
Therefore, the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment and Kosovo society as a whole will have
to make great efforts to achieve the eight established
standards.

8

Although in the past two years we have witnessed
some significant progress in the process of normalizing
life in Kosovo, a series of factors persist that are
hindering its transformation into a multi-ethnic,
tolerant, democratic and prosperous society in which
the rule of law prevails. The transfer of non-reserved
responsibilities to the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment has proceeded very swiftly, as has
legislative work. However, there is a certain tendency
among public officials and deputies to issue statements
or to take decisions that exceed their sphere of
competence, in contradiction to Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999) and the Constitutional
Framework itself. The most recent example was the
Assembly’s decision to revoke all laws promulgated by
Belgrade after 22 March 1989 concerning Kosovo. It is
important that the process of building the
administrative structure and political institutions take
place in conformity with the resolution and the
Constitutional Framework.
With regard to relations with Belgrade, the
beginning of direct dialogue on practical issues in
October 2003 was a step in the right direction. It is
essential that that dialogue continue and be intensified.
As we have previously indicated, the parallel
structures continue to be a significant obstacle to the
normalization of life in Kosovo. It has not escaped our
notice that that is one of the points addressed in the
document “Standards for Kosovo”. It is important that
Belgrade stop supporting the existence of those
structures. But, at the same time, conditions need to be
created so that the Serbian minority will trust the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government and the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK).
The return of refugees and internally displaced
persons belonging to minority groups, particularly
Serbs, is an essential condition for Kosovo’s
development. Obviously, the number of displaced
persons who have chosen to return to their places of
origin continues to be quite limited compared with that
of those who remain abroad. One cannot speak of a
process of sustainable return to Kosovo unless the
security situation and freedom of movement improves
for the general population, but also — and in
particular — for minorities. The situation of the
economy and the work force is also an essential
condition for the return of displaced persons, but even
that will depend to a great extent on whether those who

S/PV.4886

choose to return feel that they can travel to any part of
Kosovo in conditions of security.
The establishment of the rule of law is also
essential for Kosovo’s future. In that context, it is
important that those responsible for a series of
unsolved crimes — particularly those committed solely
for ethnic reasons — be investigated, found and
punished. In that connection, the suspension of the 12
members of the Kosovo Protection Corps — to whom
the Under-Secretary-General referred — while they are
being investigated for possible responsibility for the
attack against a railway bridge last April and for other
reasons, is a correct decision. We hope that it will bear
fruit.
Just as the Albanian majority and their leaders
have the principal responsibility to build a tolerant
society, the Serbian minority and their leaders must
participate more in Kosovo’s public and political life.
Incidents such as the one that occurred in northern
Mitrovica on 6 December, in which a mob attacked a
World Bank delegation shortly after Prime Minister
Bajram Rexhepi had visited the place where the
delegation was, do not benefit the Serbian minority; on
the contrary, they jeopardize it.
Finally, as this is the last time that my delegation
will participate as a member of the Security Council in
a meeting on Kosovo, I wish to reaffirm my
Government’s support Mr. Holkeri and the members of
UNMIK for the work they are doing.
Mr. Negroponte (United States of America): We
are delighted, Sir, that you are presiding over our
Council meeting today. We also want to thank UnderSecretary-General Guéhenno for his comprehensive
briefing.
We were pleased to join the Council last Friday in
supporting the presidential statement welcoming
Special Representative Holkeri’s “Standards for
Kosovo” paper and a review mechanism to assess
Kosovo’s progress towards meeting the eight
internationally endorsed standards. We look forward to
the rapid completion of the implementation plan, which
will provide specific and measurable benchmarks and
indicators for achieving the standards.
It is important to stress that only when substantial
progress towards meeting the standards has been
made — as outlined in the standards for Kosovo and
the implementation plan — can the international

community begin to address the question of Kosovo’s
future status. If the comprehensive review called for by
mid-2005 determines that Kosovo’s progress in
achieving the standards is insufficient, then another
review date will be set. The international community
stands ready to assist Kosovo in that endeavour.
In order to keep the focus on achieving the
standards, there should be no decision on process or
outcomes of status discussions until the standards are
met. Such a transparent approach to handling Kosovo’s
future status will give an incentive to Kosovo to make
real progress on the standards. At the same time, it will
guarantee that the outcome of Kosovo’s future status
can be determined only in the overall context of
resolution 1244 (1999).
It is important now for Kosovo’s Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government to focus on achieving
the standards. As a first step, we call upon all parties to
resume a direct dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina. Such a dialogue is one of the eight standards,
and it can provide tangible benefits for citizens of both
Kosovo and Serbia in the areas of transportation,
energy, missing persons and internally displaced people
and refugee returns.
Previous Council meetings on Kosovo have
focused on the series of violent attacks that occurred in
late summer, which targeted primarily members of the
minority Serb community and law enforcement
officials of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We are troubled that, yet
again, we must address this issue. The deadly 24
November 2003 attack against three Kosovo police
service officers, and the recent attack in North
Mitrovica, against Prime Minister Rexhepi and
international representatives, are the latest examples of
violence that endangers the future of Kosovo. We call
upon all in Kosovo to refrain from violence. We
reiterate the need to work within the legitimate
institutions of Kosovo to address political grievances.
We call upon law enforcement officials in Kosovo
to redouble their efforts to find the perpetrators of these
violent incidents. In particular, we also call upon the
citizens of Kosovo to cooperate with the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and the Kosovo Police Service in their
investigations of these crimes. To meet the standards
and to ensure respect for the rule of law, substantial
progress must be made in solving murders and assaults

9

S/PV.4886

against members of
enforcement officials.

ethnic

minorities

and

law

Although Kosovo has made notable progress in
achieving a multi-ethnic democracy, much remains to
be done. The United States remains committed to
standards before status, and looks forward to assisting
UNMIK and the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment in their effort to implement Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999).
The President: I thank the representative of the
United States for his kind words. I apologize to both
the representative of France and the representative of
the United States for changing their places in my
speakers list. I ask for your apology. I will now resume
the normal order of speakers. I give the floor to the
representative of France.
Mr. De La Sablière (France) (spoke in French):
First of all, I would like to tell you, Sir, how pleased
we are to see you chairing the Council for this
important discussion. I thank Mr. Guéhenno for his
briefing
which
accurately
described
recent
developments in Kosovo. We associate ourselves with
the statement that will be made by the presidency of
the European Union and, at the same time, I would like
to emphasize three points.
First, I would like to note the importance of the
initiative that was announced on 5 November 2003, to
break the impasse concerning the issue of Kosovo.
That initiative, as the Security Council noted in its
presidential statement dated 12 December 2003, is
fully along the lines of the framework established by
resolution 1244 (1999) and the policy line that the
international community has set forth, namely, the
principle of standards before status.
France is pleased that this initiative has been
favourably received in Pristina and Belgrade. That
positive reaction has created a new impetus which
should allow us, at the right time, to chart out a final
solution for Kosovo. At this time, we must not lose
time, and we must make certain that this initiative
proceeds exactly as the Council has decided. A first
step was made last week by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General who issued a document
entitled “Standards for Kosovo” (UNMIK/PR/1078).
A second step which is just as important, must be
taken quickly, and we hope that this will be done
before the end of January 2004 — the adoption of an

10

implementation plan for those standards, for the period
up to mid-2005. That plan needs to be established by
the Special Representative for the Secretary-General,
in close consultation with the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government in Kosovo, which will be
responsible for its implementation. However, we would
like that consultation to be extended, as needed, to
other parties concerned — including the Belgrade
authorities, which must be in a position to express their
viewpoint in those areas where they would have
responsibility — but without delaying or blocking the
process of adopting the implementation plan.
We also hope that the States or institutions that
have a specific responsibility in Kosovo, including the
European Union, would be involved by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in preparing
that important document, which will serve as the basis,
to a large extent, for the evaluation in mid-2005, that
we will make of the progress made in the
implementation of the Standards for Kosovo.
Secondly, I would like to reiterate our full support
for the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Holkeri, who now, more than ever, will
have a critical role to play in the upcoming months,
both for seeing to the implementation of the standards
for Kosovo, and to provide, on a regular basis, at least
every quarter, an assessment of progress made.
Mr. Holkeri will need to take difficult decisions. His
presence on the ground, as much as possible, will be
necessary in order for the implementation plan to be
established and implemented without delay. In those
circumstances, it is equally important that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, as head of
UNMIK, redouble his efforts in the daily management
of other affairs relating to Kosovo. We fully trust him
to do so and we call on all parties to cooperate with
him.
In conclusion, let me be certain no ambiguity
exists concerning what the international community
expects from the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment in Kosovo during the 18-month period
before us. The implementation of Standards for Kosovo
is based on those authorities and only on those
authorities.
We are pleased they have reacted positively
towards the initiative that was announced in November
2003. Their constructive attitude at that time was a step
in the direction set by the United Nations. On the other

S/PV.4886

hand, we clearly regret the decision they took on the 11
December 2003, in an effort to unilaterally put an end
to one portion of the regime of applicable law in
Kosovo. As was stated by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, that vote of the Parliament of
Kosovo was taken in vain and had no effect. We regret
this kind of counter-productive action which is
contrary to the decisions of the international
community and which can only complicate the
situation.
We remind the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment in Kosovo that we are prepared to support
them, as they advance in implementing the Standards.
We would also point out to them, that for the good of
Kosovo and all its inhabitants, there must be strict
compliance with the rules established by the Security
Council. That is the sine qua non and the absolute
precondition for any progress towards a final solution.
We would also remind them, as well as the
Belgrade authorities, that a direct dialogue on technical
questions of common concern must be rapidly engaged
in and must be conducted by both sides in good faith.
The President: I thank the representative of
France for his kind words.
Mr. Atieh (Syria) (spoke in Arabic): I would like,
at the outset, to express my pleasure to see you
assuming the presidency of this meeting of the Security
Council, because of the importance of the issue under
consideration today and its regional and international
implications. We would like to extend our thanks to
Mr. Guéhenno for his comprehensive and detailed
briefing on the recent developments in Kosovo.
The review mechanism launched on 5 November
on the initiative of the Contact Group on Kosovo and
under the auspices of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Holkeri, is an effort that
deserves all our support and follow-up because it gives
a new momentum to the implementation of the
“standards before status” policy that was established by
the Security Council in its resolution 1244 (1999). That
initiative, as I mentioned earlier, requires international
support, which the Security Council expressed in the
Presidential Statement dated 12 December 2003
(S/PRST/2003/26). It also requires direct dialogue
between the parties concerned, particularly between
Pristina and Belgrade, because of the importance of
that dialogue in ensuring that the political process can

move forward towards an agreement on practical issues
of concern to the two parties.
We hope that, between the present time and the
middle of 2005, we can set a time for the overall
review of the progress made by the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government in Kosovo, which will
assess developments in all areas, particularly with
regard to the eight standard benchmarks, so that the
Council can determine the final status of Kosovo in the
future.
We support the transfer of unentrusted
responsibilities outlined in chapter five of the
Constitutional
Framework
to
the
Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government in Kosovo in a gradual
and organized manner, and in cooperation with the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government. We look
forward to establishing a harmonious, tolerant, multiethnic society in Kosovo and we believe that that
requires consolidating the rule of law, improving the
security situation, promoting the rights of minorities
and returnees and supporting economic development,
in addition to combating organized crime and
prohibiting trafficking in weapons and narcotics. All of
that will help to create the appropriate climate to
encourage internally displaced persons and refugees to
return to their homes and contribute to the political and
economic reconstruction of Kosovo.
In conclusion, and since this is the last time my
delegation will participate in discussions on the issue
of Kosovo in the Security Council, I would like to
express the Syrian Arab Republic’s appreciation for the
efforts made by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Kosovo and his staff in working
to bring stability and security to that region.
Mr. Zoumanigui (Guinea) (spoke in French):
First, on behalf of my delegation, I would like to
welcome you, Mr. President, and say how pleased we
are that you are presiding over our work on the
question before us. I would also like to thank
Mr. Guéhenno for his briefing, which sheds new light
on recent developments in Kosovo.
The constant attention the Council has dedicated
to the question of Kosovo emanates from its will and
determination to make a contribution to the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999).
At the Council’s meeting on 21 January 2002, my
delegation welcomed the progress made in

11

S/PV.4886

implementing that resolution over the course of the
prior year. That progress included, among other things:
the promulgation of the Constitutional Framework; the
signing, on 5 November 2001, of a common document
between the Government of the former Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK); the
successful legislative elections held on 17 November
2001; and the establishment, on 10 December 2001, of
the Kosovo Assembly, along with the election of the
Assembly’s President.
Two years later, it should be noted that that
progress has been followed up by other, equally
important, advances, even though serious concerns still
remain, including the effective establishment of
political and administrative institutions in Kosovo;
high-level meetings between UNMIK representatives
and the Belgrade authorities, particularly the one held
on 21 January 2002 on the question of missing,
detained or repatriated persons; the conversion of
transitional departments into provisional selfgovernment ministries; the expansion of the UNMIK
administration into the northern part of Mitrovica; the
gradual transfer of powers to the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government; and the holding of
municipal elections.
My delegation is pleased with the progress made
so far and we consider that it is now up to all the
participants and all sectors in Kosovo to come together
and consolidate their efforts in a spirit of tolerance and
unity, so that they can assume their responsibilities in
the search for adequate solutions to the issues that
remain unresolved.
A recent evaluation of the situation in Kosovo
leads my delegation to make the following
observations. The leaders of the democratic Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government must act in strict
compliance with the powers given to them under the
Constitutional Framework. In that regard, we support
the position taken by Mr. Holkeri following the
Assembly’s 11 September 2003 decision to abrogate all
laws relative to Kosovo enacted in Yugoslavia and
Serbia after 22 March 1989. Kosovar leaders have to
make greater efforts towards reconciliation, avoiding
any action that might deepen existing divisions, while
cooperating with UNMIK.
Particular attention should be paid to the media so
that they can function to increase public awareness

12

among the various communities. Developing
professional and independent media that will be better
able to assume their responsibilities will require
significant assistance.
In regard to the establishment of the rule of law,
the various murders that have occurred recently and the
attack on a World Bank delegation in the northern
sector of Mitrovica on 6 December demonstrate that
security continues to be an issue of real concern. My
delegation appreciates the special security measures
taken by the multinational forces and the local units,
following information received concerning possible
attacks against international organizations in Kosovo.
In that regard, we would like to emphasize once again
the need to consolidate existing mechanisms in order to
improve the operation of the police services, the justice
system and prisons, in order to facilitate equal access
to justice and to combat impunity.
On the question of freedom of movement and
maintaining the cultural heritage of each community,
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government should
focus their efforts on developing a culture of mutual
acceptance among the different communities.
In addition, the appointment of Mr. Nenad
Radosavljevic as a Senior Adviser to UNMIK on
repatriation and effective integration of ethnic
minorities and the setting up of a special group to
speed up the return of refugees and facilitate their
reintegration and the restitution of their property, are
welcome developments. Now we need to support those
mechanisms by giving them the necessary resources.
The input of the international community, in particular
the donor community, will be extremely useful in that
regard.
The same applies for housing and real estate
programmes. In that connection, the efforts of UNMIK
and the United Nations Development Programme,
which have facilitated the start of construction on 50
homes, should also be supported.
With respect to the economy, we must strengthen
the current legislative and administrative framework,
focus more attention on job creation and on the
regional dimension of economic exchanges, and define
the appropriate mechanisms to that end. My delegation
is pleased with the establishment by Mr. Holkeri of a
special group tasked with detecting possible fraudulent
and corrupt activities in UNMIK and in institutions that
operate on public money, and we hope that the work of

S/PV.4886

this group will provide definitive results. With respect
to the dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade, the
different parties must do some bold thinking to
continue to look for peaceful solutions to problems of
common concern for the benefit of their people and for
the region.
With respect to the Kosovo Protection Corps, my
delegation continues to emphasize that they must
maintain their legal status to avoid any ambiguity. In
this respect, we would encourage the actions taken by
UNMIK and the Kosovo Force to better structure and
better operate this institution.
Settling the question of Kosovo requires the
international community, and particularly the
Kosovars, to better assume their responsibilities in
implementing resolution 1244 (1999). My delegation is
pleased with the launching on 5 November 2003, in
Belgrade and Pristina, of a review mechanism, which
gives new impetus to implementation of standards
before status, and we therefore support the statement
made last Friday on this subject by the President of the
Security Council. We are of the view that the
implementation plan that Mr. Holkeri will be working
on in close collaboration with the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government and, if needed, with
other interested parties, will allow us to assess progress
made by the Institutions in satisfying these standards.
It is our hope that, based on progress made during
periodic assessments, that the comprehensive review in
2005 of progress made will allow us to chart future
strategies to resolve the Kosovo question, particularly
with respect to final status determination.
And finally, my delegation remains convinced
that bringing about lasting peace in Kosovo depends on
the ongoing commitment of all the Kosovars to ignore
their differences and their senseless quarrels and to
focus on questions of common concern so as to
promote the general welfare. Only that way can the
efforts of the international community in the province
succeed.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): My delegation wishes to
welcome the Presidency of this meeting of the Council
on Kosovo by the Foreign Minister of Bulgaria. It is
also a great pleasure to see you again, Mr. Deputy
Minister, in the Council. We would also wish to
welcome Mr. Guéhenno to the Council and thank him
for his detailed briefing on the situation in Kosovo.

I would like to restrict my comments today to the
“Standards for Kosovo” document introduced last week
by Special Representative Holkeri in Pristina.
Pakistan’s reservations on the standards before
status issue are well known. This policy was devised
only for Kosovo and should not set a precedent for
other situations in similar circumstances, either past,
present or future. Moreover, the standards that have
been set out in the document should be implemented in
a manner that serves the broader interests of the people
of Kosovo. Standards should not become an excuse to
avoid addressing the status question, which is the
underlying problem in Kosovo.
Having said that, we have nevertheless joined in
welcoming the Standards document. We will study the
work plan being devised by the United Nations Interim
Administration in Kosovo (UNMIK) to implement its
provisions. We take note of the statement of the Prime
Minister of Kosovo, Bajram Rexhepi, who said
“Each sentence in the Standards document is a
challenge in itself, but we look forward to working
together to overcome all of these challenges”.
In devising the work plan, we must ensure that its
objectives are achievable and the benchmarks realistic.
More importantly, we must guard against the
possibility of this process being derailed by the
intransigence of one or the other party.
While we attach high importance to all the eight
standards set out in the document, we wish to
emphasize that among its most crucial issues are those
related to the upholding of the rule of law, freedom of
movement, use of languages, sustainable returns of
refugees and internally displaced persons, and the
protection of the rights of all communities in Kosovo.
Also important is the socio-economic recovery of
Kosovo, which the international community must
continue to support generously.
Last but not least is the important issue of a
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina on practical
matters. This process needs to be strengthened and
regularized. We regard this as a useful mechanism for
confidence-building, which could eventually facilitate
addressing the more delicate issue of status.
Pakistan hopes that satisfactory progress will be
made in achieving the objectives of the Standards
document by mid-2005, thus opening the way for
progress on the issue of status. The international

13

S/PV.4886

community and the Security Council must begin to
give early consideration to the eventual but inevitable
solution to the status issue. Such a solution would have
to be based on the wishes of the people of Kosovo, in
accordance with the United Nations Charter’s principle
of self-determination, and, at the same time, respond to
the interests and welfare of all the people of Kosovo.
In conclusion, I wish to commend Mr. Holkeri
and UNMIK for their achievements thus far and assure
them of Pakistan’s continued support for their efforts to
establish peace, stability, good governance and selfgovernance in Kosovo.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to
start by saying that we are very honoured that both
you, Deputy Minister, and Minister Solomon Passy
could come to the Council to preside over this
important meeting.
This adds to the prestige of the Council, and of
course, to that of the Bulgarian Presidency, and we are
very, very pleased to see this. We also thank Mr. JeanMarie
Guéhenno,
Under-Secretary-General
for
Peacekeeping Operations, for his comprehensive
briefing on Kosovo, a subject which has in recent years
been at the centre of attention and concern in the
Security Council and in the international community.
My delegation commends the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Holkeri,
since his assignment as head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
and we reiterate our strong support to him in the
challenging tasks ahead aimed at achieving the full
implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999).
My delegation welcomes UNMIK’s strategy,
“Standards for Kosovo”, and sees it as a real key and a
prerequisite for achieving as quickly as possible the
full implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) and
defining the final status of the region. This set of eight
standards constitutes a coherent and comprehensive
package, and its implementation has to be equally
coherent to be satisfactory. We are confident that this
new instrument will lead to a successful outcome of the
efforts deployed by the United Nations and by the
international community for the final resolution of the
Kosovo issue.
We fully share the objectives outlined by the
“Standards for Kosovo” policy concerning the

14

functioning of democratic institutions, the rule of law,
freedom of movement, sustainable returns and the
rights of communities in the spheres of economic
development, property rights, dialogue and the Kosovo
Protection Corps. The objectives set by the policy
ensuring that the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment effectively represent the interests of all
Kosovo, including the ethnic minorities, must be
effectively enforced, as must their responsibilities,
including the promotion and application of just criteria
in the engagement of personnel for Kosovo’s public
administration. In this regard, we support a
comprehensive and periodic review of the progress
achieved by Kosovo’s Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment.
It is our hope that the resolve of the Security
Council and of UNMIK, outlined in the strategy, will
produce tangible results in guaranteeing full respect for
the rule of law and for human and minority rights,
including the full participation of the Serb minority at
the central and local levels of Government. The rule of
law is a paramount element of this strategy and should
be enforced by the effective operation of the police,
and the judicial and penal systems, based on the legal
framework. It is necessary that all of those aspects of
law enforcement be improved in order to promote
democratic freedoms and the return of refugees and
displaced persons, under conditions of real security and
freedom of movement for all citizens of Kosovo. We
would like to underline the crucial role played by
UNMIK’s police in building the capacity of Kosovo
police, enabling it to fight more effectively against the
plagues that affect the region: ethnic violence,
terrorism and organized crime.
My delegation strongly hopes that constructive
dialogue and confidence-building between Belgrade
and Pristina will be strengthened, leading to concrete
agreements on the various issues that Kosovo is facing.
The solution of these issues, which impact directly on
people’s lives, represents an essential step towards the
attainment of stability, prosperity and truly functioning
multi-ethnic, multi-cultural and democratic institutions
in Kosovo.
The President: I thank the representative of
Angola for his kind words of support for the
presidency.
Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I am
pleased to see such an important presence in the

S/PV.4886

delegation of Bulgaria here, with the Minister for
Foreign Affairs presiding over this important meeting.
We would also like to welcome and express our thanks
to Mr. Guéhenno for his briefing.
Spain fully endorses the statement that will be
made by the Permanent Representative of Italy, on
behalf of the European Union. My country has
unreservedly supported the “standards before status”
policy, which it feels is fully valid. In this regard, we
believe that the initiative of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Holkeri, reflected in the
document “Standards for Kosovo”, is a reaffirmation of
this policy and a step forward towards full
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999). The
establishment of guiding objectives for compliance
with the standards set forth in this document through
an implementation plan, which includes impartial,
measurable and precise criteria, is the necessary
complement for making this “standards before status”
policy a tangible reality.
Full compliance with the provisions of both
documents is a necessary precondition for us to begin
consideration of the question of the status of Kosovo.
The objective set forth by the international community
for Kosovo is none other than that of ensuring
democratization and stabilization of the province and
consolidating a multi-ethnic society that guarantees
fundamental rights and freedoms for its citizens, with
values compatible with those of Europe. This is the
nature of the “standards before status” policy, the
objective of resolution 1244 (1999) and the general
European strategy for the region. Ultimately, for Spain,
the review process in 2005 — or subsequent processes
of review — should consider in a comprehensive
manner whether the Provisional Institutions and the
level of economic development in Kosovo have
attained those standards.
Therefore, it is not so much a question of
timetable but rather one of the emphasis to be placed
on the substantive elements of the policy. The
European Union has a general strategy for the five
States of the region — a process of stabilization and
association. Such a global and balanced approach
implies that Kosovo should apply the same standards
and have the same institutions and legislation as its
neighbours. Thus, the institutions of Kosovo should be
the first to be interested in establishing sustained,
substantive and direct dialogue with Belgrade, which
should effect the same reforms as Pristina.

The President: I thank the Ambassador of Spain
for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, as other delegations before me, I would
like to convey to you how pleased Cameroon is to see
you personally here this morning to chair this meeting.
Your presence vividly demonstrates the importance that
your country attaches to the development of the
situation in Kosovo in particular and in the Balkans
region in general.
I would also like to thank Mr. Guéhenno for his
very useful briefing, which highlights the efforts being
conducted by the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative to implement Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999) on Kosovo, as well as the
results garnered to date.
We would also like to thank all those men and
women who, through their dedication and commitment,
are providing ongoing and steadfast support to the
work of Mr. Harri Holkeri, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
The meeting of the Council held on 30 October to
consider the situation in Kosovo revealed the new
prospects before the province with regard to the
ongoing stabilization process. During the period from
July to October 2003, thanks to mediation by UNMIK
officials, we witnessed the establishment of direct and
concrete cooperation between Belgrade and Pristina in
a number of areas. In addition, on 14 October in
Vienna, a direct political dialogue at the highest level
between the authorities of the two capitals regarding
practical issues of common concern took place for the
first time. Four expert working groups were established
to familiarize themselves with matters related to
energy, missing persons, returns, and transport and
communications.
In addition, the report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) that was presented to the Council
illustrated the great progress that had been made in the
functioning of the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment. The information provided today seems to
confirm the great hopes that arose at the meeting held
on 30 October. On 5 November 2003, on the initiative
of the Contact Group under the auspices of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, a mechanism
was launched in Pristina and Belgrade to monitor the

15

S/PV.4886

implementation of the policy of standards before status.
And, on 10 December 2003, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General issued a declaration on the
standards applicable to Kosovo. The Security Council
was pleased to note that in the presidential statement
issued in document S/PRST/2003/26, of 12 December
2003.
At this juncture, it is the view of my delegation
that one of the most urgent challenges before the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General is to
develop an implementation plan for those standards,
given the crucial impact they will have on the process
that the Council must carry out towards a final and
appropriate resolution of the issue of Kosovo. Given
the importance of that plan, my delegation believes that
its drafting, and its finalization in particular, must take
place on the basis of consensus among all the parties,
in order that all obstacles to the implementation of the
standards may be overcome.
With regard to dealing with the issue of Kosovo,
the Security Council is often reproached for its
approach that seems to defer consideration of the
province’s final status and avoid the establishment of a
timetable for doing so. My delegation believes that the
great progress recently made provides eloquent
testimony with regard to the policy of standards before
status, to which Cameroon has always demonstrated its
commitment. The satisfactory implementation of the
eight standards — namely, the functioning of
democratic institutions, the establishment of a State
based on the rule of law, the right to free movement,
the return and reintegration of displaced persons, the
establishment of a market economy based on a stable
foundation, the recognition and re-establishment of the
right to property, a candid and direct dialogue between
the authorities of Belgrade and Pristina and, lastly, the
training and professionalization of the Kosovo
Protection Corps — continues to be essential to an
orderly debate on the final status of Kosovo. How
could one imagine reversing the process in Kosovo,
where today we continue to see a rise in targeted acts
of violence against the Serb minority community and
UNMIK staff, including the recent attack on the World
Bank delegation at Mitrovica? How could we imagine
a Kosovo in which extremists on all sides utilize mafialike methods to foment intolerance, hatred and fear,
and where freedom of movement remains a luxury for
some people, and the right to property even more so?

16

The direct dialogue between Pristina and
Belgrade
is
gradually
taking
place.
The
operationalization of the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government continues apace, and those continue
to function better every day. Combating corruption and
organized crime has had undeniable success in Kosovo.
The economy, which for a long time was under ground,
is resurfacing on the solid and reliable foundations of a
market economy. The core of a judicial system for a
State based on the rule of law is being established with
the assistance of the United Nations. And the training
of the Kosovo Police Service is almost completed.
With all that progress, which we owe to the concerted
efforts of all the members of the international
community and to Kosovars themselves, my delegation
is inclined to be optimistic about the future of
Kosovo — a Kosovo that is multi-ethnic, multicultural,
reconciled unto itself and prosperous, in which peace,
justice and social harmony reign through the force of
law rather than the law of force. Such a Kosovo is no
longer just a hope, it is within our grasp.
We therefore launch an appeal to the parties
concerned to reaffirm their commitment to the process
under way and resolutely engage themselves, without
ulterior motives. We express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative,
UNMIK, KFOR, the European Union and all other
international organizations acting in Kosovo for the
work they are doing pursuant to the ideals and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations in order
to return peace and security to Kosovo and the region.
As a Member of the United Nations, Cameroon will,
through its contingent, continue to take part in those
joint efforts. We will continue to make our contribution
to the search for a solution to the situation in Kosovo
on the basis of the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council.
In conclusion, I would like to thank all the men
and women who are daily risking their lives to return
peace and social harmony to Kosovo.
The President: I thank the representative of
Cameroon for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. Maquieira (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first of all like to express our gratitude to the
Foreign Minister for being with us today. I also wish to
express my gratitude for the holding of this meeting of
the Security Council on the situation in Kosovo and
Serbia and Montenegro. We would also like to thank

S/PV.4886

Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie Guéhenno for his
comprehensive briefing, which has adequately brought
us up to date on the situation on the ground during the
past few months. As on other occasions, we would also
like to reiterate our support for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Harri
Holkeri, as well as all the staff of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
We ask the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government
in Kosovo and all interested parties to cooperate fully
with the Special Representative.
Without tangible progress on the eight standards,
UNMIK’s mandate will not be fulfilled in accordance
with resolution 1244 (1999).
That is why, in our view, in November and
December, two significant events for Kosovo took
place. First, we saw fresh momentum in the
implementation of the “standards before status” policy
through the initiative of the review mechanism,
submitted on 5 November in Pristina and Belgrade on
the initiative of the Contact Group and under the
auspices of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral. Independent of the circumstances that
surrounded its presentation on 10 December, the
document on standards for Kosovo led to a great deal
of hope in the practical value of that document.
Moreover, we trust that the implementation plan
to be submitted by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General will serve as an objective basis for
the assessment of the scope, the speed and the
sustainability of progress achieved by the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government in meeting the
standards.
We agree with the approach of carrying out future
reviews. That is why we await the results of the
periodic report, and subsequently those of a
comprehensive review of the progress achieved by the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in meeting
the standards. Trustworthy proof of positive results will
have a key impact on progress towards a process to
determine the future status of Kosovo, in accordance
with resolution 1244 (1999). We must bear in mind the
expectations that this will generate among the parties,
which must do everything possible to comply with the
standards.
Once again we reiterate that without a significant
and sustainable return of internally displaced people
and refugees it will be impossible to build a

democratic, multi-ethnic society that is capable of
integrating all inhabitants of Kosovo without
exception.
We support recent measures adopted by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Holkeri, on the investigation into the bombing of
the railway bridge on 12 December, and we hope that
explanations will be provided in the very near future.
To conclude, in addition to dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina, intensified dialogue between
UNMIK and the Kosovo Assembly will certainly
contribute to the achievement of positive results, which
will ultimately be reflected in the well-being of the
population of Kosovo.
The President: I thank the representative of
Chile for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. Pleuger (Germany): I would like, Sir, to
welcome your presence in the Chair, which underlines
the importance that you attach to this meeting. We
would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Guéhenno for his very concise and comprehensive
briefing. From what we have heard, I feel that, in the
future as well, Kosovo will require our full attention.
I would like to state at the outset that we fully
subscribe to the statement that the Italian presidency of
the European Union will shortly make on behalf of the
Union.
The document on standards for Kosovo that
Mr. Holkeri presented in Pristina last week is another
major step forward. Germany very much appreciates
the care the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) took in drafting that
document and the close consultations it undertook with
the Contact Group as it was put into its final form.
Working groups that are focused on achieving these
standards have begun to meet, and the drafting of the
implementation plan is under way. We hope the plan
can be finished in the next few weeks, because the
momentum created must be maintained or, even better,
accelerated if the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment are to achieve what is necessary before the
first possible review date, around the middle of 2005.
Germany commends both Pristina and Belgrade
for their positive attitude towards the review
mechanism and for voicing their acceptance of the
underlying rules and the tentative time frame.
However, we are disappointed that, despite extensive

17

S/PV.4886

consultations between UNMIK and Belgrade, Serbia
and Montenegro seems not to support the document on
standards for Kosovo for the time being. All sides have
much to gain if the blueprint is made into reality and a
democratic and tolerant Kosovo that respects the rule
of law is created. Only this outcome offers the prospect
of economic development and the prospect for the
return of refugees to their homes. Only this offers the
prospect that members of all ethnic communities can
travel wherever they wish without being subjected to
humiliation or violence. And most important, only this
outcome offers the prospect that the future for both
Belgrade and Pristina lies in Europe, rather than in
isolation and stagnation.
We strongly supported the European Union (EU)
Council decision this month to endorse the standards.
The implementation of the standards will be closely
linked to the EU association process, and, conversely,
obstruction of efforts to meet the standards will surely
have serious consequences for aspirations to draw
closer to Europe. The immediate priority now, besides
finishing the implementation plan, is starting the direct
dialogue at the level of expert working groups. It is
very disappointing indeed that months after the official
launch of the talks between Pristina and Belgrade,
groups from both sides, focused on issues such as
energy, transportation and returns, have not yet begun
to meet. I can only repeat what I have said in previous
meetings: in addition to being an essential standard that
must be fulfilled, direct dialogue is the best way to
build trust between the parties. The approach taken to
direct dialogue is one of the earliest indicators on
which we and the rest of the international community
will judge the sincerity of efforts by Pristina and
Belgrade. We strongly urge both parties to ensure that
the groups begin meeting in the next few weeks.
Another area where we would like to see rapid
progress is privatization. Privatization is so important
to economic development in Kosovo. We understand
that the vast majority of outstanding privatization
contracts could be approved, and that another round of
privatization tenders could be organized, without great
difficulty. Under those circumstances, we urge the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government and the
Kosovo Trust Agency board to certify and transfer to
private owners, as soon as possible, all those sociallyowned enterprises that have been duly screened by the
Kosovo Trust Agency.

18

In my remarks to the Council in October (see
S/PV.4853), I stressed the importance Germany places
on political decentralization in Kosovo. We were
pleased that the Council of Europe presented proposals
last month that can serve as a good basis to begin work
on this issue. As UNMIK works these proposals into a
concrete plan, it will have to focus on the special
factors that make decentralization so difficult and yet
so important in Kosovo.
The task will be to accommodate the needs of the
various ethnic communities while not creating further
institutional barriers to reconciliation. Since effective
decentralization will be so important to achieving the
standards, it is essential to implement it soon.
Next year will be a critical one for Kosovo.
Pristina, Belgrade and, above all, the people of
Kosovo, have much to gain if the standards are
achieved quickly.
The President: I thank the representative of
Germany for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. Cheng Jingye (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I would like to express our pleasure at
seeing you, Sir, preside over today’s meeting. I also
wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Guéhenno for
his briefing.
This will be the year’s last meeting of the Council
on the question of Kosovo. In the past year, some
positive progress has been made on the Kosovo
question. What merits special mention is that in
October, through the efforts and impetus of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the parties
concerned, Belgrade and Pristina held their first direct
dialogue. In addition, to facilitate implementation of
the “standards before status” policy, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General recently
released the document on standards for Kosovo, which
was subsequently endorsed by the Security Council in a
presidential statement (S/PRST/2003/26). We welcome
those positive developments and believe they are of
crucial significance for advancing the Kosovo political
process. We look forward to the early formulation of a
concrete, specific implementation plan by the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), in consultation with the bodies concerned.
However, we also realize that Kosovo is presently
faced with multiple difficulties and challenges. There is
still a high rate of violent crime. Security for ethnic

S/PV.4886

minorities and their freedom of movement have not yet
been effectively ensured. The return of refugees
remains at a trickle. The comprehensive settlement of
the Kosovo question is therefore a formidable
challenge that requires a redoubling of efforts by the
parties concerned and the continued attention and
assistance of the international community.
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) provides
the basis for resolving the Kosovo question and the
“standards before status” policy provides the guiding
principle. Dialogue and cooperation offer an effective
way forward. We hope that the parties concerned will
assiduously fulfil their obligations to effectively
achieve the standards, resolve their differences through
dialogue and actively strive for harmony among the
ethnic communities in order to create the necessary
conditions for a final and satisfactory settlement of the
question of Kosovo.
Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): It is a
particular pleasure, Minister Passy, to see you in the
Chair. Welcome. I associate myself with the remarks
about to be made by the Italian presidency of the
European Union. I join others in thanking UnderSecretary-General Guéhenno for his briefing.
The
efforts
of
Special
Representative
Mr. Holkeri, the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to move forward the political
process in concert with the European Union, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the other international actors are very welcome. To
do that in dialogue with Belgrade is especially
important, and we look forward to the contribution
later of Mr. Šahovič, who is with us. That dialogue
needs cooperation, it needs substance and it needs
goodwill on the part of both participants. We look
especially to the authorities in Kosovo to display that.
It is very important that the working groups on areas of
practical cooperation, and especially on the areas of
concern, should be put in place and begin their work
quickly. The dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade is
critical to this process. No less critical are the
standards, and the document which has been released is
a vital step forward. The standards and what they
represent — democratic institutions, the rule of law, the
question of returns and reintegration into society of
different groupings — are basic to the future of
Kosovo. And they are basic to whatever future Kosovo
has.

Kosovo has been given an opportunity to emerge
from the shadows and to move forward. The whole
concept of standards before status is not rhetorical. It is
absolutely basic to the sort of Kosovo that all of us
want to see created. Under resolution 1244 (1999), if
status is to be discussed, then it should be absolutely
clear to all of us — and consistent with the
requirements of that resolution — that it must be on the
basis of an entity which is meeting the standards which
we expect of most European States — I say European
quite deliberately because it is a European destination
that Kosovo is likely to have. But the standards
currently enjoyed by others are essential for Kosovo. I
do not say that to patronize Kosovo. I say it because it
is the way the European Union and its associated
countries have evolved and will continue to evolve. If
Kosovo wants to be part of that, living as the sort of
entity we want to see — in harmony with itself and at
peace with its neighbours — then it must do this.
Thus, the implementation of the standards and the
review mechanism is crucial. We will all be watching
the implementation plan very carefully, but it needs
especially to be discussed by those involved and
worked up in conjunction with Belgrade and then —
especially — put in place.
That should be the priority for the authorities in
Pristina and, more widely, in Kosovo. Unilateral
actions and rhetorical resolutions which are prejudicial
to that process will not deter us. There can be no
question that until the standards are achieved, the
developments that we would all like to see in Kosovo
will not be put in place. There is an opportunity. We all
look now for those involved on the ground to fulfil
their responsibilities and to deliver that better future.
The President: I thank the representative of the
United Kingdom for his kind words addressed to me.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the representative of Bulgaria.
As a European Union country, Bulgaria also
aligns itself with the statement to be made shortly by
the Permanent Representative of Italy, on behalf of the
European Union. I would like to make some additional
comments in my national capacity.
Bulgaria supports from the very beginning the
policy of standards before status in Kosovo, based on
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). We consider
the initiative of the Special Representative of the

19

S/PV.4886

Secretary-General, Mr. Holkeri, to set out more
concrete guidelines for progress to operationalize the
“standards before status” policy and to launch a
comprehensive review mechanism, to be a logical and
useful continuation of the existing efforts of the contact
group and the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral under the auspices of the Security Council.
We take note that a first opportunity for an
overall review could occur in mid-2005 or earlier, if
sufficient progress is made. My country is satisfied that
the “Standards for Kosovo” document was endorsed by
the Security Council through a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2003/26) on 12 December. Bulgaria considers
the eight standards to be a sound basis for a society
built on tolerance, justice and peace for everyone. We
believe that once those standards are reached, the pace
has to be maintained and implementation further
developed. Bearing that necessity in mind, Bulgaria has
proposed including sustainable implementation of the
standards as an additional criterion in the
implementation plan. We are convinced that such a
criterion may serve as a guarantee for the accelerated
development of political and economic life in Kosovo
and as an important impetus for its emerging civil
society.
The Bulgarian Government welcomes the start of
a direct dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina
focused on practical issues of mutual interest. My
country is of the opinion that that dialogue should
continue without further delay. We would be prepared
to host in Bulgaria one of the working groups set up
within the framework of that process.
Bulgaria expects that the Kosovo authorities will
adhere strictly to the principles of a democratic, multiethnic, multicultural and multi-religious society and
that it will cooperate actively with the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
so that the return of refugees and displaced persons can
improve. We should like to express our conviction that
a multi-ethnic society cannot function without
participation by all ethnic groups in public and political
life. I should like to take this opportunity to stress the
need to protect and preserve all religious monuments in
Kosovo, including the Orthodox Christian monasteries,
whose cultural and spiritual value cannot be measured.
Bulgaria welcomes the beginning of the review
mechanism for Kosovo within the framework of the
Stabilization and Association Process of the European

20

Union. As a technical, non-political process, it will
enable Kosovo to benefit from the great opportunities
for cooperation offered by the European Union.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Serbia and
Montenegro.
Mr. Šahović (Serbia and Montenegro): At the
outset, I should like to congratulate Bulgaria on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I should also like to take this
opportunity to say that we highly appreciate the fact
that you, Sir, are personally presiding over the
Council’s deliberations today, which is a sign of the
great importance that Bulgaria attaches to regional
issues. In addition, I thank Under-Secretary-General
Guéhenno for his detailed briefing.
The current stage of making the “standards before
status” policy operational signifies a new and
exceptionally important step in the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), which is the
basic framework for addressing the issue of Kosovo
and Metohija. Once again, I should like to emphasize
my Government’s principled support for the “standards
before status” concept, including the sequence of
events that it clearly defines. Democratic standards
leading to a multi-ethnic society based on the rule of
law and respect for human rights must be achieved
before a political discussion aimed at determining the
final status of the province is considered.
However, the “Standards for Kosovo” document,
submitted a week ago by Special Representative Harri
Holkeri as the first stage of the implementation of the
“standards before status” policy, raises serious
concerns. Primarily, the document failed to define the
standards in a way that would open up prospects for the
creation of a multi-ethnic society in Kosovo and
Metohija. As the Government of Serbia stated on
8
December,
the
United
Nations
Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) rejected,
inter alia, the proposals to make the unconditional and
progressive return of refugees and displaced persons a
key standard for Kosovo and Metohija, to require full
protection of cultural heritage and to list measures to
reform the Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC). Our
Government considers the last-minute deletion, under
pressure from the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment, of the introductory paragraph of the

S/PV.4886

“Standards for Kosovo” document to be an equal cause
for serious concern. How can one justify the removal
of the reference to resolution 1244 (1999), the
Constitutional Framework and other applicable law and
the original standards/benchmarks as the basis for that
important document?

six-month paid leave pending the results of a police
investigation. We are not aware of any similar
examples of tolerance for that kind of activity
anywhere else. Furthermore, we do not consider it to be
an auspicious beginning for the establishment of
security for all and the rule of law in the province.

In a related development, we have yet again
witnessed an attempt by the Kosovo Assembly to
overstep its authority and to encroach on the Special
Representative’s
reserved
responsibilities
by
challenging the UNMIK definition of applicable law in
Kosovo and Metohija. We welcome the fact that the
Special Representative promptly declared the
Assembly’s decision to be invalid, and we look forward
to further information on steps taken to avoid that kind
of action in future.

With regard to the issue of privatization, we
continue to request full respect for the rights of owners
and users and for the rights of the Republic of Serbia in
the privatization process and in defining the status of
public and commercial debts. Serbia is a major creditor
to companies in Kosovo and Metohija; it provided
guarantees for foreign loans granted to them. It should
be quite obvious that those companies cannot be put up
for sale without the consent of major creditors. We
expect that issue to be properly addressed in the near
future.

Dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina is one of
the standards envisaged in the original UNMIK
standards/benchmarks as well as in the new “Standards
for Kosovo” document. The launching of the dialogue
on 14 October in Vienna foresaw the speedy
commencement of expert-level talks in four working
groups. However, that has not yet happened, and the
reason has nothing to do with the elections in Serbia,
but solely with the refusal of the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government to take part in the
process. We therefore look forward to the results of the
calls by the Security Council, the Contact Group and
the European Union for the start of working group
meetings.
Once again, we reaffirm that Serbia and
Montenegro is fully prepared — as has been the case
from the very beginning — to engage in discussions on
practical issues of mutual interest that would improve
the daily lives of all inhabitants of Kosovo and
Metohija. I should also like to reiterate that the
composition of the Pristina working groups must be
multi-ethnic.
I now turn to the issue of the KPC. It seems
necessary to recall that the original standards/
benchmarks require the KPC to thoroughly comply
with its mandate as a civilian emergency organization.
However, according to the extensive UNMIK/Kosovo
Force investigation, 12 KPC officers are suspected of
involvement in the terrorist bombing of the railway
bridge in Loziste in April 2003. Given that fact and the
general security context in the province, it is difficult
to believe that those officers were essentially offered a

UNMIK’s
cooperation
with
Serbia
and
Montenegro in the preparation of the “Standards for
Kosovo” document was insufficient and lacked
substance. That should not be the case in the future,
especially with regard to the standards implementation
plan called for by the Security Council. Such a plan
should devise a set of measurable criteria for assessing
implementation of the standards. It should also
preclude the possibility of lowering the level of the
standards themselves or of allowing for different
interpretations of the criteria for their implementation.
Serbia and Montenegro emphasizes its willingness to
engage constructively in the preparation of the plan.
My Government expects to consult regularly and
substantively with the Special Representative on this
matter, and we seek the Security Council’s support in
that regard. I am grateful for the comments of the
representative of the United Kingdom on this issue.
The need for continued and constructive
cooperation between our Government and UNMIK was
recognized more than two years ago in the Common
Document of 5 November 2001. The implementation of
the “standards before status” policy is a real
opportunity to translate that principle of cooperation
into practice for the benefit of all concerned. The
implementation plan should also establish a continuous
mechanism for transparently reviewing progress in
implementing the standards. Such a mechanism must
provide for regular and active involvement by Serbia
and Montenegro, whose sovereignty over Kosovo and
its territorial integrity are basic elements of resolution
1244 (1999).

21

S/PV.4886

No one should doubt that a stable and democratic
Kosovo and Metohija, where human rights are fully
respected, is in the best interests of Serbia and
Montenegro. To that end, we stand ready to work with
the international community. Without involvement by
all concerned, including Belgrade, durable and
sustainable solutions cannot be found. If such solutions
are imposed, it can only further complicate the
situation. On the other hand, only a balanced approach
and mutually acceptable solutions can lead to muchneeded stability in Kosovo and Metohija and in the
region as a whole.
The President: I thank the representative of
Serbia and Montenegro for the kind words he
addressed to me.
I now give the floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Spatafora (Italy): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia
and Slovenia, the candidate countries, Bulgaria,
Romania and Turkey, and the European Free Trade
Association (EFTA) country Iceland, member of the
European Economic Area, declare that they align
themselves with this statement.
First of all, allow me to express our deep
appreciation for your presence here, Sir. The fact that
you preside over this meeting confirms and emphasizes
the substantial importance that the Security Council
and the European family attaches to the issue under
discussion today. I also wish to join my other
colleagues in thanking Under-Secretary-General
Guéhenno for his comprehensive briefing, which has
provided us with an overall picture on the current
situation in Kosovo and still more importantly, has
indicated the way ahead.
The European Union underlines, once again, the
continued validity of the “standards before status”
policy of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) as upheld by the United
Nations Security Council in accordance with resolution
1244 (1999). It therefore supports the initiative of the
United Nations Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Harri Holkeri, to set out more
concrete guidelines for progress and to operationalize
that strategy. It welcomes the Presidential Statement,
issued on 12 December, on the “Standards for

22

Kosovo”, a document that is a first concrete step in the
process.
The European Union believes it is necessary to
build on the current momentum by working out, as
soon as possible, the relevant implementation plan and
by establishing a body to continually review the
progress achieved. That process should be led by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
through regular consultations with the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government and other relevant
parties as appropriate.
There is considerable work to be done to achieve
the agreed standards: democratic governance must take
hold in a multi-ethnic Kosovo in order to make
progress in anticipation of the comprehensive review
envisaged for mid-2005, or earlier, if sufficient
progress is made. The European Union stands ready to
assist in that process and considers the Stabilization
and Association Process Tracking Mechanism (STM)
as an important complementary instrument to that end.
The European Union believes that the direct
dialogue initiated on 14 October 2003 in Vienna
remains an indispensable element of the “standards
before status” strategy based on Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999). It therefore encourages all
parties concerned to continue the direct dialogue by
convening meetings of the expert working groups
without further delay.
Finally, the European Union underlines the
importance of structural reforms in Kosovo, of which
privatization is a key element. It calls upon the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government to exercise
their responsibilities constructively so to allow the
privatization process to resume as soon as possible.
The President: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Albania. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Dilja (Albania): Allow me to extend my
delegation’s appreciation, Sir, for your presence here
today, and in particular for your presiding over this
very important meeting. Allow me also to thank
Mr. Guéhenno for his very comprehensive briefing.
Let me state here at the very beginning that the
Albanian Government fully supports the operational
plan entitled “Standards for Kosovo” presented this
month and welcomes its endorsement by this body.

S/PV.4886

That plan comprises an important step forward
towards the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999). It gives new momentum to the
implementation of the “standards before status” policy
already designed for Kosovo; it demonstrates the
political will of the international community to find a
final and timely solution to the Kosovo issue; and it
accelerates the positive processes that Kosovo is
already going through.
The eight standards, namely: functioning
democratic institutions, rule of law, freedom of
movement, returns and reintegration, economy,
property rights, dialogue with Belgrade and the Kosovo
Protection Corps, all constitute a clear cut agenda of
work for the Kosovo Provisional Institutions, the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and Kosovars in general. Hard work
needs to be done, progress needs to be marked and
standards need to be met.
The Albanian Government will encourage the
Provisional Institutions and the people of Kosovo in
this very crucial endeavour. We reaffirm our support to
UNMIK and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Holkeri, in this new phase of
their mission in Kosovo and we support and urge
broader cooperation and confidence between them
both, and all others concerned.
Albania is of the opinion that the comprehensive
review of the “Standards for Kosovo”, set to occur in
mid-2005, and the advancement towards a process to
determine the final status of Kosovo will contribute to
this very important dimension, as well as boost the
confidence of the international community in local
Kosovar institutions.
We urge the people of Kosovo, their institutions
and political parties to reflect the awareness, as they
already have done, that all the eight standards together
and each of them separately are of great importance for
the building of a democratic Kosovo where all people,
regardless of ethnic background, or race or religion, are
free to live, work, and travel; and where the rule of
law, justice, peace and tolerance prevail.
The people of Kosovo should be equally aware
that each of those standards is a big challenge to be
faced and to be met successfully. My delegation would
like to articulate our confidence that hard work, change
and constant progress will be the trend; that democratic
institutions and the rule of law will function better with

each passing day; that the process of returns and
reintegration, based on the current progress, will
successfully continue; and that dialogue between
Pristina and Belgrade — which we have supported and
continue to strongly support — on practical issues of
mutual interest, will proceed constructively.
We base our confidence on the current
achievements in Kosovo, which, as Mr. Holkeri
recently stated, “has made enormous progress over the
last four years”.
In the meantime, we call upon all of the interested
parties in the region to be part of and positive
contributors to solutions and progress there. Violent
acts, as the most recent one in the northern part of
Mitrovica, involving the World Bank Board of
Governors and Kosovo Prime Minister Rexhepi, and
the establishment of parallel structures in Northern
Kosovo, only aggravate the polarization of the society
there and, what is more, run counter to and directly
contradict the philosophy of the Standards for Kosovo.
I would like to conclude by thanking this Council
for the attention it has placed on this very serious and
important issue, important not only for the Kosovars
but for the region as well. I would also like to reiterate
my Government’s full support for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Harri
Holkeri, who, as mentioned here today, will have a
challenging task ahead and quite a role to play in the
upcoming months.
The President: I invite the representative of
Albania to resume the seat reserved for him at the side
of the Council chamber.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list.
I will therefore take this opportunity, in my
national capacity, to express my deep satisfaction with
the work of Bulgaria over the past two years on the
Security Council.
The Security Council has a unique role in
maintaining peace and stability in the world. In 10 or
15 years, when Bulgaria will again have the chance to
preside over the Security Council, I believe the world
will be a better place. And who knows? Perhaps by that
time Bulgaria will be a permanent member of the
Security Council, I do not know. We will keep abreast
of progress in the reform of the United Nations.

23

S/PV.4886

Now, on behalf of the Bulgarian Government and
the Bulgarian people, I would like to extend my wishes
for a happy holiday season and a happy New Year to all

24

delegations and to all nations of the world. God bless
you.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.
