A /68/PV.80

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-eighth session

80th plenary meeting

Thursday, 27 March 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ashe  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Antigua and Barbuda)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 138 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
Note by the Secretary-General (A/68/716/Add.7)
The President: Before proceeding to the item on
our agenda, I should like to inform members that, since
the issuance of document A/68/716/Add.6, Dominica
has made the payment necessary to reduce its arrears
below the amount specified in Article 19 of the Charter.
That information will be reflected in document
A/68/716/Add.7 to be issued at a later date.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly takes
note of that information?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 33
Prevention of armed conflict
(b) Strengthening the role of mediation in the
peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict
prevention and resolution
Draft resolution (A/68/L.39)
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Andrii Deshchytsia, Acting Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine, to introduce draft
resolution A/68/L.39.
Mr. Deshchytsia (Ukraine): Thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s meeting. It is a

great honour and privilege for me to address the General
Assembly. What has brought us here today is an issue
of paramount importance. It is of crucial importance to
my nation, of vital importance to every United Nations
State Member and of even greater importance to the
United Nations and the world order it embodies.
It has now been a month during which all
possible and impossible boundaries of international
law that had been so laboriously nourished by
humankind — especially under this institution — have
been ruthlessly trampled. What has happened in my
country is a direct violation of the Charter of the United
Nations. Many still struggle to grasp the reality that it
happened in Ukraine, in the very heart of Europe. It
happened in the twenty-first century.
Over the past month, we have witnessed the
most flagrant violations of international law since
the inception of the United Nations. After two weeks
of military occupation, an integral part of Ukraine
was forcibly annexed by a State that had previously
committed itself to guaranteeing the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of my country in
accordance with the Budapest Memorandum, by a State
that happens to be one of the permanent members of
the Security Council, entrusted by the membership of
the United Nations with the primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security.
That act of aggression was meticulously calibrated
to strike at a time when Ukraine was forming an
inclusive Government. Now, despite all odds, such
a Government is up and running. The act was aimed
at — and continues to be aimed at — undermining the

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

14-27868 (E)

*1427868*

A/68/PV.80

presidential elections in my country. Let me assure the
General Assembly that Ukraine is determined to carry
out its elections as scheduled on 25 May.
Eight rounds of urgent discussions on the Russian
military intervention in Ukraine held by the Security
Council clearly demonstrated how isolated Russia is
on the issue. The mixture of false justifications, halftruths, deliberate distortions, insults and naked lies
offered by the Russian side have failed to impress the
Council.
Just a few days ago, at the opening session of the
third Nuclear Security Summit, Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon stressed the need to build a culture of nuclear
security. He rightly emphasized that the time had come
to strengthen the rule of law in both disarmament and
non-proliferation. Speaking about efforts by the United
Nations to achieve a world free of nuclear weapons,
the Secretary-General pointed out that the assurances
provided to non-nuclear-weapon States by nuclearweapon States must be honoured:
“In the case of Ukraine, security assurances were
an essential condition for its accession to the
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. However, the
credibility of the assurances given to Ukraine in the
Budapest Memorandum of 1994 has been seriously
undermined by recent events. The implications
are profound, both for regional security and the
integrity of the nuclear non-proliferation regime.”
We cannot agree more. Two years ago, when we
proposed to the Russian side to sign a bilateral agreement
on security and confidence-building measures, it
refused, saying that the idea of an attack on Ukraine
was absurd. Six months ago, we were preparing to have
a trilateral meeting in The Hague among the leaders
of Ukraine, the United States of America and Russia
to celebrate the twentieth anniversary of Ukraine’s
nuclear-free success story. Yet that plan was crushed
almost overnight by the Russian aggression against
Ukraine and its annexation of Crimea.
“We have consistently called for the recognition
of a polycentric world order, equal and indivisible
security in full conformity with the United Nations
Charter’s basic principles of sovereign equality,
territorial integrity of any State, inadmissibility
of intervention in the domestic affairs ... A just
and democratic world order cannot be achieved
without a strict observance of the principles of

2/27

27/03/2014

the supremacy of international law, mainly of the
United Nations Charter”.
Mr. President, you may think that the foregoing are
my words. They are not. They are in fact an excerpt
from the statement of position of the Russian Federation
before the opening of the sixty-eighth session of the
General Assembly.
“Recently a common argument has been
increasingly made to the effect that the threat or
use of force, directly prohibited by the Charter
of the United Nations, is virtually the most
effective method of addressing international
problems, including the settlement of domestic
conflicts ... despite the fact that recent experience
with such interventions has proved that they are
ineffective, meaningless and destructive. That is
an extremely dangerous path leading to the erosion
of the foundations of today’s world order and the
subversion of the weapons of mass destruction
non-proliferation regimes.” (A/68/PV.15, p. 34)
That paragraph is also not Ukraine’s, although we
fully agree with its thrust. It is taken from a statement
made by my colleague, Russian Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Mr. Sergey Lavrov, at the general debate last
September. There are volumes of such statements made
by representatives of the Russian Federation at the
United Nations.
“Practice what you preach”, one might think. We
in Ukraine do. As does the African Union, whose
Constitutive Act, of 2001, calls in Article 4 for, inter
alia, sovereign equality and interdependence among
Member States of the Union, respect for borders
and the prohibition of the use of force or threat to
use force among Member States of the Union, and
non-interference by any Member State in the internal
affairs of another.
As does the Organization of American States, whose
Charter clearly states that no territorial acquisitions or
special advantages obtained either by force or by other
means of coercion shall be recognized.
As does the Association of Southeast Asian Nations,
with its Charter renouncing aggression or other actions
in any manner inconsistent with international law.
As does the European Union.
As does the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, with its 1975 Helsinki Final
Act.
14-27868

27/03/2014

The list goes on and on.
Despite all the wrongs that have been inflicted
on my country over the past month, draft resolution
A/68/L.39, before the Assembly today, was drafted
with the sole and strict goal of upholding the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. The
purpose of the draft resolution is to reinforce core
United Nations principles at a moment when they are
experiencing a major challenge. The text addresses
respect for territorial integrity and the non-use of force
to settle disputes. It does not break any new legal or
normative ground. Yet it sends a crucial message that
the international community will not allow what has
happened in Crimea to set a precedent for further
challenges to our rules-based international framework.
It clearly serves a de-escalatory purpose and explicitly
welcomes international efforts, including those by the
Secretary-General, in support of a peaceful settlement
of the situation with respect to Ukraine.
I am convinced that a strong vote today will help
deter further aggressive moves. I sincerely thank all
sponsors of the draft resolution, entitled “Territorial
integrity of Ukraine”, and look forward to its adoption
by the General Assembly.
One month has cost us dearly. More inaction may
cost us the Organization itself. By voting in favour of
the draft resolution, the General Assembly will vote in
favour of the United Nations Charter; a vote against it or
abstention in the voting is tantamount to undermining
the Charter.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): On 21 March an event occurred that is of truly
historic significance. Following the referendum in the
Crimea, during which the overwhelming majority of
the Crimean population voted in favour of being with
Russia, there was a reunification of Crimea and the
Russian Federation. We call on everyone to respect that
voluntary choice, just as Russia has done.
Russia could not refuse the Crimeans’ wish to
support their right to self-determination in fulfilling
their long-standing aspirations. Historical justice has
been vindicated. Crimea was an integral part of our
country for several centuries. It shares with our country
a common history, culture and, most important, a
common people. Only when an arbitrary decision by
the leadership of the former Soviet Union in 1954 to
transfer the Crimean Sevastopol to the Ukrainian
republic in the framework of a single State was that

A/68/PV.80

natural state of affairs upset. After the break-up of the
Soviet Union, it became clear that Crimea was cut off
from Russia. In 1992, the people of Crimea adopted a
Constitution that established that Crimea would be an
independent State within Ukraine. However, soon after
that, the Constitution was changed by Kyiv without
consulting the people of Crimea, and the status of the
peninsula was reduced to an autonomous republic as
part of a unitary Ukrainian State.
The Crimeans never accepted that state of affairs.
They openly demonstrated their sympathy for Russia.
Their patience snapped against the background of a deep
political crisis that occurred in Ukraine. The crisis was
to a large extent provoked by the adventurous actions
of the current political forces, which sought to break
the centuries-old ties of Russia and Ukraine, by giving
Kyiv a false choice between either the European Union
and the West or Russia. That policy was carried out
with unprecedented bluntness. They could either sign
a Ukraine-European Union association agreement, as
demanded of the Ukrainian Government, or they could
face sanctions. Within the ranks of anti-Government
demonstrators were representatives of the European
Union and the United States, who openly marched
alongside them and called on them to openly carry out
anti-Government actions.
The central square of the city — Maidan
Nezalezhnosti — was turned into a militarized camp.
Well-trained and equipped units of militants carried
out violent attacks against law enforcement bodies
and seized administrative buildings. In one of those
buildings, the trade unions building, the so-called
common diversion of the Maidan was organized. On
the seventh floor of that building was a permanent staff
member of the United States Embassy. By the way, it is
from that building that snipers were shooting at police
and demonstrators; that action was clearly aimed at
provoking a violent overthrow of the Government.
At some point, it appeared that it would be
possible to stop before the situation became worse. On
21 February, President Yanukovych and the leaders
of the main opposition party signed an agreement,
which provided for disarming the militants, freeing
the administrative building that had been seized,
establishing a Government of national unity, launching
a constitutional process and holding presidential
elections by the end of the year. However, someone
thought that such a scenario was not sufficiently radical.
The violence continued. Under the threat of physical

14-278683/27

A/68/PV.80

violence, President Yanukovych had to leave Kyiv and
then Ukraine.
The legitimate Government stopped operating
in Kyiv. Violence became the rule of politics. In the
Verkhovna Rada, the parties that supported the
Yanukovych majority became victims of that violence.
As a result, the Rada was reshuffled and, instead of a
Government of national unity, a so-called Government
of victors emerged. The shots were called by those
who conducted an armed coup, national radicals
who — according to the definition of the European
Parliament — preached racist, anti-semitic and
xenophobic views and seemed to hate everything that
was Russian and did not conceal that they considered the
Ukrainian allies of nazis as their ideological ancestors.
Nearly the first decision of the new Government was
to revoke the official status of the Russian language,
which the Crimeans and the inhabitants of eastern and
southern Ukraine use. In those regions, Kyiv began
appointing Governors who were rejected by the local
people. Threats were addressed to Crimea to send
so-called friendship trains there — groups of militants
that would continue the kind of violence being carried
out in Kyiv and in the western and central regions of
Ukraine. All that created a kind of critical mass that led
the Crimeans to take a decision on self-determination
and reunification with Russia. I think that one has to be
very misanthropic to criticize them for that.
In the light of all the reasons I just referred to,
Russia is against the draft resolution A/68/L.39. It is
confrontational in nature and seeks to put into question
the meaning of the referendum that took place in
Crimea, which has already played a key historical role.
It would be counterproductive to challenge it.
At the same time, we think that the draft resolution
contains some important and correct statements; for
example, the call to refrain from unilateral actions or
inflammatory rhetoric, which could lead to increased
tensions. We think that, in order to heed that appeal, it
is not necessary to adopt any resolutions. It is simply
important to base our position on the interests of the
Ukrainian people — the interests of normal international
relations. We hope that kind of understanding will
prevail in the course of today’s discussion and in the
course of the dialogue on Ukraine.
Russia has taken part in this dialogue in a most
constructive fashion. Our advice is simple — it is
important to implement the main provisions of the

4/27

27/03/2014

agreement of 21 February. Ukraine requires a true
constitutional process with the participation of all
civilized political forces in all regions that could lead to
the kind of conditions where people do not have to fear
for their lives and their safety and that would ensure
that their fundamental rights can be exercised.
The President: I now give the floor to the Head of
the Delegation of the European Union.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (European Union): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting of the General
Assembly. I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union and its member States. Montenegro,
Albania, Norway and Georgia align themselves with
this statement.
After the horrors of the Second World War, the
international community agreed on a new system
of international relations based on the Charter of the
United Nations. That system was designed to protect
the peace and security of all countries around the world.
It is our collective responsibility to safeguard it.
The European Union supports draft resolution
A/68/L.39, on the territorial integrity of Ukraine, and all
28 States members of the European Union are sponsors.
The draft resolution reconfirms the importance of the
fundamental principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, notably the obligation of all States to refrain
in their international relations from the threat or use
of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State and to settle their disputes
by peaceful means in full respect of international law.
Significantly, the draft resolution also affirms the
General Assembly’s commitment to the sovereignty,
political independence, unity and territorial integrity of
Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders.
Those principles are also prominently included in the
political provisions of the Association Agreement
signed on Friday, 21 March, between Ukraine and the
European Union.
The European Union remains committed to
upholding the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine. The European Union does not recognize the
illegal referendum in Crimea, which is in clear violation
of the Ukrainian Constitution. It strongly condemns
the illegal annexation of Crimea and Sevastopol to the
Russian Federation and will not recognize it.
The European Union firmly believes that there
is no place in the twenty-first century for the use of

14-27868

27/03/2014

force and coercion to change borders in Europe or
elsewhere. The European Union strongly condemns the
clear violation of Ukrainian sovereignty and territorial
integrity by acts of aggression by the Russian armed
forces. The Russian actions are not only in breach of
the Charter of the United Nations, they are also in clear
breach of the Final Act of the Conference on Security
and Cooperation in Europe and its subsequent processes
and instruments within the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), which over the past
40 years have contributed to overcoming divisions in
Europe and building a peaceful and united continent.
Those actions also violate specific commitments to
respect Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity
under the Budapest Memorandum of 1994 and the
bilateral Treaty between the Russian Federation and
Ukraine on Friendship, Cooperation and Partnership of
1997.
The European Union urges Russia to take steps to
de-escalate the crisis, immediately withdraw its forces
back to their pre-crisis numbers and garrisons in line
with its international commitments and avail itself
of all the relevant international mechanisms to find
a peaceful and negotiated solution, in full respect of
its bilateral and multilateral commitments to respect
Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
The European Union welcomes the meeting
of Russia’s Foreign Minister with his Ukrainian
counterpart in The Hague this Monday, but deplores
that Russia has still not taken steps to de-escalate the
crisis and that direct talks between Ukraine and the
Russian Federation have still not started. We call on
both Ukraine and Russia to start a meaningful dialogue
as soon as possible and without preconditions.
The European Union fully supports multilateral
initiatives aimed at fostering peace, stability and
security, and respect for human rights in Ukraine. We
commend the visit of the Secretary-General to Moscow
and Kyiv last week.
The European Union welcomes the agreement
reached on 21 March on the deployment of an OSCE
special monitoring mission to Ukraine to monitor and
support the implementation of OSCE principles and
commitments. The European Union is fully committed
to the monitoring mission’s success and calls for its
early deployment throughout Ukraine.
We also applaud the deployment of a United
Nations human rights monitoring mission to Ukraine.

A/68/PV.80

We welcome the fact that Assistant Secretary-General
Šimonović was finally given access to Crimea. We
call on the United Nations mission to be given such
access as well. We strongly share the view of Assistant
Secretary-General Šimonović that there is an urgent
need to assess and report on human rights violations and
on the implications of recent events and to monitor the
current situation throughout the country so as to help
investigations, prevent further violations and verify
the truth with regard to the human rights situation. We
also welcome the valuable contribution of the Council
of Europe.
We commend the measured response shown thus far
by Ukraine. We welcome the Ukrainian Government’s
commitment to ensuring the representative nature and
inclusiveness of governmental structures reflecting
regional diversity, to ensuring the full protection of
the rights of persons belonging to national minorities,
to undertaking constitutional reform, to investigating
all human rights violations and acts of violence and to
fighting extremism. In that context, the European Union
encourages the Government of Ukraine to ensure that
the presidential elections to be held on 25 May are free
and fair.
The European Union is ready to stand by Ukraine
and committed to providing strong financial support to
its economic and financial stabilization. We encourage
other Member States and international organizations,
including financial institutions, to assist in restoring the
stability of Ukraine and supporting structural reforms.
The European Union supports the Ukrainian
people and their right to choose their own future.
Our common goal is to restore Ukraine’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity and uphold its independence.
The European Union stands ready to facilitate and
engage in a meaningful dialogue involving Ukraine
and Russia, including through the establishment of a
multilateral mechanism. The European Union will
remain at the forefront of efforts to find a political
solution in accordance with the fundamental principles
of the Charter of the United Nations.
Ms. Power (United States of America): We meet
today to express our collective judgement on the legality
of the Russian Federation’s military intervention in,
and occupation of, Ukraine’s Crimea region.
The draft resolution before us (A/68/L.39) is
about one issue and one issue only — affirming our
commitment to the sovereignty, political independence,

14-278685/27

A/68/PV.80

unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine. Through it,
we make clear our ongoing support for the fundamental
idea that borders are not mere suggestions. At the same
time, this draft resolution expresses the desire of the
international community to see a peaceful outcome to
the dispute between Ukraine and Russia and stresses
the importance of maintaining an inclusive political
dialogue that reflects every segment of Ukrainian
society.
We have always said that Russia had legitimate
interests in Ukraine. It has been disheartening in the
extreme to see Russia carry on as if Ukrainians have no
legitimate interests in Crimea, when Crimea is a part
of Ukraine. Self-determination is a value that all of us
here today hail. We do so while recognizing the critical,
foundational importance of national and international
law. Coercion cannot be the means by which to achieve
self-determination. The chaos that would ensue is not
a world that any of us can afford — it is a dangerous
world. We echo the views expressed by all regions of
the world these past weeks calling for a de-escalation
of tensions and an electoral process in Ukraine that
will allow the people of that country, in all of their
diversity, to choose their leaders, freely, fairly and
without coercion.
Speaking at The Hague two days ago, President
Obama said,
“If the Ukrainian people are allowed to make their
own decisions, their decision will be that they want
to have a relationship with Europe and they want to
have a relationship with Russia, and that this is not
a zero-sum game”.
Ukraine was wise to bring its concerns before the
General Assembly. It is wise to seek our backing for
the preservation of its rights, which are also the rights
of all of us to have our territory and independence
respected. Ukraine is justified in seeking our votes in
reaffirming and protecting its borders. It is justified in
asking us not to recognize the new status quo that the
Russian Federation has tried to create with its military.
Ukraine merits our commendations for the restraint it
has shown and the positive steps it has taken to prevent
a further escalation of the crisis and deserves our full
support in trying to persuade Russia to end its isolation
and to move from a policy of unilateral confrontation
and aggressive acts to a good faith diplomatic effort
informed by facts, facilitated by dialogue and based on
law.

6/27

27/03/2014

We urge members to vote in favour of a draft
resolution that enshrines the centrality of territorial
integrity and calls for a diplomatic — not a
military — solution to the crisis.
Mr. Patriota (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this plenary meeting. The situation in
Ukraine is serious, and the international community
must reaffirm its strong resolve to urgently find a
peaceful solution to the crisis. It is appropriate that
we discuss it under an agenda item that highlights
the importance of prevention and diplomacy, namely,
“Prevention of armed conflict: Strengthening the role
of mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes,
conflict prevention and resolution”.
Brazil has been following the escalation of tensions
in Ukraine attentively. Our concern reflects our close
bilateral ties with Ukraine, which in 2009 were elevated
to the level of a strategic partnership. Together Brazil
and Ukraine are developing high-technology projects,
including in the field of space technology. Brazil is
also proud to be host to one of the largest communities
of people of Ukrainian descent outside Europe. Brazil
has stated its concern about the gravity of the situation
since the very early stages of the crisis. We expressed
deep regret over the deaths in Kyiv and urged all parties
to conduct dialogue, underscoring that the political
crisis should be addressed peacefully and on the basis
of respect for institutions and human rights.
Brazil has consistently upheld that the Charter
of the United Nations must be respected under all
circumstances. That position reflects our unflinching
defence of an international system based on cooperative
multilateralism and respect for international law. In
that regard, Brazil supports all efforts to achieve a
peaceful solution to the crisis and urges the Russian
Federation and Ukraine to engage in constructive talks
aimed at resolving their differences. We commend the
Secretary-General’s initiatives to de-escalate tensions,
restore calm and promote dialogue. We encourage him
to continue working on a diplomatic solution to the
crisis. Brazil invites the parties to engage in an inclusive
political dialogue that takes into account the diversity
of the Ukrainian people and respects the rights of all
Ukrainians, including all minorities.
In this situation, it is of the utmost importance that
all stakeholders exercise maximum restraint.
Mr. Reyes Rodríguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
On 22 February, President Raúl Castro Ruíz said that

14-27868

27/03/2014

the intervention of Western Powers must stop in order
to enable the Ukrainian people to exercise their right
to self-determination in a legitimate way, and that we
should not ignore the fact that such acts could have
very serious consequencse for international peace and
security.
As Cuba’s Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Bruno
Rodríguez Parrilla, pointed out at a press conference
in Havana on 6 March, subsequent events have
demonstrated the gravity and validity of that statement,
and that we cannot accept the violent overthrow of
a constitutional Government at the cost of dozens of
dead and wounded as a result of an intervention by the
United States and some of its NATO allies, threats to
citizens’ integrity based on their national origin and
the destruction of legitimate and legally recognized
institutions and entities. He added that those threatening
the Russian Federation with sanctions and reprisals
were the Governments that brought about regime
change in Ukraine, and, prior to that, started wars
of conquest, interfered or intervened directly in the
internal affairs of various States around the world that
disagreed with their goals of domination and defended
their own sovereignty and independence.
While earnestly opposed to the imposition of
sanctions on the Russian Federation, Cuba condemns
hypocrisy, double standards and the aggression manifest
in the actions and pronouncements of NATO concerning
the matter. The Cuban Foreign Minister warned that
history would demand that the United States and its
allies take responsibility for an increasingly offensive
military doctrine outside the borders of the North
Atlantic alliance, which threatens the sovereignty and
independence of every State and constitutes a flagrant
violation of international law and the Charter of the
United Nations. The attempt to extend NATO up to the
borders of the Russian Federation is a serious threat to
international peace, security and stability.
In his statement of 22 February, President Castro
noted that numerous analogies could be found in United
States unconventional warfare manuals that have been
applied in various countries of our region and, with
related refinements, on other continents, as the cases
of Syria and Ukraine testify. He invited those who had
doubts on the matter to look at United States Army
Training Circular, TC 18-01, published on 30 November
2010 and entitled Special Forces Unconventional
Warfare. Can the United States and NATO provide
assurances that the use of force and the concepts of war

A/68/PV.80

envisaged in that document are not applicable to, nor
can be applied against other countries, including some
in Latin America and the Caribbean, a region that the
second Summit of the Community of Latin American
and Caribbean States proclaimed a zone of peace?
I would like to conclude by emphasizing that Ukraine
and Cuba are united by deep, historic, unbreakable ties.
We will always remember Ukrainians’ contribution to
our development. In a modest way, we have tried to
live up to our duty of solidarity, particularly with the
children affected by the Chernobyl accident. No one
has done more or with greater care for those children
than the people of Cuba.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): The recent events
and the current situation in Ukraine are a major challenge
to the rule of law. All members of the Organization are
bound by the obligation to refrain from the threat or
use of force against the territorial integrity of any State.
The annexation of Crimea and Sevastopol is therefore
a very serious violation of international law and of
grave concern to the Government of Liechtenstein. We
consider that action null and void and will not recognize
it or its consequences. The annexation was preceded
by an illegitimate declaration of independence based
on a referendum held in violation of the Constitution
of Ukraine and of basic tenets of international law,
including paragraph 4 of Article 2 of the Charter of
the United Nations. The events also starkly illustrate
the continued relevance of an internationally agreed
definition of aggression. Such a definition was agreed
on by consensus at the 2010 Review Conference of
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
in Kampala. We hope that States will continue to
expeditiously ratify the amendments to the Rome
Statute on the crime of aggression.
The Charter commits us to both the principle
of territorial integrity and the right of all peoples
to self-determination. The two are designed to be
compatible, and the relationship between them was
further elaborated in subsequent texts. In adopting
the Declaration on Friendly Relations in 1970, the
Assembly struck a careful balance between the
right of self-determination and the principle of
territorial integrity. Some 20 years ago, Liechtenstein
presented an initiative to help operationalize the
right to self-determination through various degrees
of self-administration. The initiative was aimed at
encouraging States to provide appropriate levels of
self-administration to entities within their borders,

14-278687/27

A/68/PV.80

based on consultation and negotiation, with third-party
assistance when necessary. Those ideas were designed
to prevent dissatisfaction on the part of communities
within States that could lead to claims of independence,
without at the same time excluding independence as an
option. Under that model, the various stages of selfadministration, as well as the independence option,
become the result of an agreement between the parties
concerned. We are fully committed to the right of
self-determination, exercised in conformity with
international law. It is that very commitment that leads
to the conclusion that the draft resolution before us is a
balanced and faithful reflection of current international
law. We therefore support it without any reservation.
The failed adoption of the draft resolution in the
Security Council earlier this month raises important
governance questions for the Organization. There has
been a worrisome increase in the use of the veto and the
threat thereof in the recent past, sometimes in a manner
that prevented the United Nations from fulfilling its
core functions. But the vote in the Council on 15 March
(see S/PV.7138) gave rise to an additional concern that
requires further consideration.
According to paragraph 3 of Article 27 of the Charter
of the United Nations, Council members that are parties
to a dispute shall abstain from voting on decisions
under Chapter VI of the Charter. It seems to us that
this provision should have been applied — a perception
that has been only strengthened by the events since. It
is important that the question finds the attention of the
wider membership, together with other urgent issues
concerning the use of the veto.
We support all efforts that will help prevent a
further escalation of the situation in Ukraine, which
remains volatile. We welcome the commitment of the
Secretary-General and the efforts undertaken by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
under the chairmanship of Switzerland. We applaud in
particular the agreement to deploy a special monitoring
mission, and are confident that those international and
regional efforts can greatly contribute to de-escalating
the situation on the ground.
Before the events discussed in today’s draft
resolution and thereafter, the situation in Ukraine has
been fuelled by a serious human rights crisis and at
least partial breakdown of the rule of law. The strong
and early engagement by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights has therefore been

8/27

27/03/2014

crucial, and we support the deployment of a mission by
her Office throughout Ukraine. We believe that a return
to the rule of law and effective protection of the rights
of all persons belonging to minorities in the country
are indispensable prerequisites for an inclusive political
dialogue.
Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
The draft resolution before the General Assembly
(A/68/L.39) is of universal importance, yet its relevance
is even greater to States that, due to their small size and
limited resources, depend solely upon the legitimacy
of international law to protect their sovereignty, defend
their integrity, strengthen security and preserve peace.
The draft resolution arises from a severe bilateral
crisis of disturbing global implications. But its text
is broader than a specific geographic location and
focuses on reaffirming the principles and standards
of conduct that are crucial for stability, peace and
international coexistence. Among those principles
and standards must be noted respect for the territorial
integrity of States, fulfillment of formal commitments
among States, including rejection of the use of force in
settling disputes, and full and genuine exercise of selfdetermination without falsehood or condition. For all of
those reasons, it is also a draft resolution on respect for
the Charter of the United Nations.
The Charter of the United Nations clearly defines
rights and obligations in regard to which compliance
is not optional. All Members of the Organization must
respect them. But perhaps an even greater obligation
weighs on the five States that, under Articles 23
and 27 of the Charter, possess special powers and
responsibilities regarding the Organization, and hence
to its other Members and the international community.
Costa Rica has no such power or competency, or
any means to defend itself against external aggression.
Our weapon is international law. We view the draft
resolution as a way to reaffirm and defend the law.
Staying silent now, in the light of the very serious
implications, risks leading to further, perhaps worse,
future violations.
The illegitimate violation by force of Ukraine’s
territorial integrity is clear. Also clear is the fact
that one of the three States that pledged in 1994 to
respect Ukraine’s borders in exchange for Ukraine’s
renunciation of nuclear weapons has failed to uphold
its commitment, with serious implications for nuclear
non-proliferation. That is a source of concern for the

14-27868

27/03/2014

entire international community, but in particular
for countries such as those of Latin America and the
Caribbean that have declared themselves nuclearweapon-free.
Similarly, we are concerned that in the light of
real or perceived disputes, the first line of action has
been the deployment of military force rather than the
launching of dialogue. Neither conduct is acceptable.
All lead to disturbing precedents and, added to other
elements, in terms of the voting of 16 March in Crimea,
more than opposing Ukraine’s Constitution, such action
has violated the legitimate exercise of the right to selfdetermination.
To be genuine, self-determination must be preceded
by open debate based on clear rules accepted by all
parties, impartial authorities and the presenting of real
options to the people. Furthermore, self-determination
must be exercised without exclusion, influence or
intimidation. Unfortunately, those elements were
absent in this case.
The fait accompli could impose a reality on the
ground, but it will not establish rights. We hope that,
with the Assembly’s adoption, the draft resolution will
be able to rectify the violations that have occurred and
prevent worse ones from taking place, and thus ensure a
more respectful, stable and peaceful future coexistence
with respect for the rule of law.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada): Russia’s military
intervention in Ukraine is a grave threat to international
peace and security. Canada joins our partners and allies
in condemning in the strongest terms this unilateral
and unjustified assault on Ukraine’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity.
Under Article 2 of the Charter of the United
Nations, all States are obliged to refrain from the
threat or use of force against the territorial integrity
or political independence of any other State. Article 2
also reaffirms States’ obligations to settle international
disputes through peaceful means. Any attempt at
disrupting the national unity or territorial integrity of
a State is incompatible with the fundamental purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
(spoke in French)
Through its unilateral actions in invading and
seeking to annex Crimea, Russia has blatantly violated
those core principles. Crimea’s so-called referendum
was not authorized by Ukraine. It was conducted while

A/68/PV.80

Crimea was under Russia’s illegal military occupation.
The referendum is therefore illegitimate and null and
void. We do not and will not recognize its outcome.
(spoke in English)
As a result of Russia’s refusal to de-escalate,
Canada has been forced, along with our Group of
Seven partners and other allies, to take action. We
have recalled our ambassador from Moscow for
consultations. We have limited our engagement with
Russia and suspended military-to-military contacts.
We have frozen the assets of former Ukrainian officials,
including former President Yanukovych. Last week,
we imposed financial sanctions and entry bans on
Russian and Crimean officials who bear responsibility
for the crisis in Crimea and for threatening Ukraine’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity.
It is not too late for Russia to choose an alternate
path. Canada fully supports efforts in the deployment
of a comprehensive special monitoring mission by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
We welcome Russia’s support for the mission. However,
the mission needs to be given access to all of Ukraine,
including Crimea. Canada also supports the United
Nations decision to send monitors to investigate reports
of human rights violations across Ukraine, no matter
the alleged perpetrators. That mission, too, must be
allowed into Crimea.
We believe that Ukraine has the right to choose its
own future, free of coercion and the threat of violence
by outside Powers. As a result of Russia’s aggression
in Crimea, and its refusal to de-escalate, Canada
strongly supports draft resolution A/68/L.39 on the
territorial integrity of Ukraine. The draft resolution
reaffirms the international community’s commitment
to the sovereignty, political independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders.
(spoke in French)
The draft resolution also stresses the importance
of protecting the rights of all persons in Ukraine,
including the rights of Crimean Tatars and other
minorities. Finally, it calls upon all States, international
organizations and agencies to oppose any alteration
to the status of Crimea or the city of Sevastopol on
the basis of the referendum of 16 March, which is
illegitimate and has no validity.

14-278689/27

A/68/PV.80

(spoke in English)
The international community cannot return to
the days of the 1930s, when stronger Powers carved
up weaker nations. Relations between States must be
governed by the rule of law, not the law of the jungle.
Canada calls on the Russian Federation to respect
Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, to
conform to international law, to avoid any further loss
of life and to fully reverse its occupation of Crimea. We
therefore urge all Member States to support the draft
resolution.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for holding this important debate today on the situation
in Ukraine.
Japan fully agrees with the draft resolution entitled
“Territorial integrity of Ukraine” (A/68/L.39), and
therefore decided to sponsor it. With your permission,
Sir, I would like to state some key points regarding
Japan’s position on this matter.
The Russian Federation’s recognition of the
Autonomous Republic of Crimea’s independence, along
with its illegal attempt to annex Crimea, represents an
infringement of the unity, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine. It is a clear violation of the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. Whether
the international community looks at what is happening
in Ukraine as a bystander or chooses to stand up and
take appropriate action could have a grave impact on
what the international community will look like in 10 or
20 years. As Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon recently
said, we are at an important crossroads.
This is not a problem for Ukraine or Europe alone.
Any attempt to change the status quo with the threat
of force in the background is a serious challenge to
the entire international community. No country in the
world should overlook an attempt by another State to
alter the status quo by such means.

27/03/2014

Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and other
international and regional organizations to support a
de-escalation of the situation with respect to Ukraine.
Japan is ready to support such initiatives and has
decided to contribute €100,000 to the activities of the
OSCE in the field of the promotion of political dialogue
in Ukraine.
At the same time, in order to ensure the economic
stability of Ukraine, which is now facing severe
financial conditions, strong support by the international
community is indispensable. In this spirit, Japan has
decided to make a financial contribution of up to
$1.5 billion for the stability and prosperity of Ukraine.
I would like to conclude by saying that Japan
will vote in favour of the draft resolution. I further
reaffirm Japan’s commitment to the pursuit of a
peaceful solution to the situation in Ukraine, working
in close cooperation with the United Nations and other
international organizations. Japan will remain seized of
this matter and continue to play an active role.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China has
been paying heightened attention to the developments
in the situation in Ukraine. Recently, the spillover
effects of the Ukraine crisis have become very obvious.
The current stance of confrontation between the parties
is something that China does not want to see at all.
The question of Ukraine involves the interests and
concerns of various parties, so there should be a balanced
approach to addressing the question. All parties should
exercise restraint, refrain from exacerbating the
situation and continue their efforts to iron out their
differences through political and diplomatic means to
solve the question of Ukraine within the framework of
law and order.

Paragraph 3 of the draft resolution urges all parties
to pursue immediately the peaceful resolution of the
situation. In that regard, the meeting of the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine and the Russian
Federation on 24 March is an important step. Continued
and serious dialogue between both parties is of crucial
importance.

China has been calling on the international
community to make constructive efforts, including
through good offices, to ease the situation in Ukraine.
We believe that the actions the United Nations has taken
on the question of Ukraine should reflect consensus by
all parties and should be conducive to the relaxation
of tensions and to achieving a political settlement of
the crisis. China supports the mediation efforts by
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. We have also taken
note of the host of proposals put forward by the parties
concerned on solving the question of Ukraine.

As stated in the draft resolution, we welcome the
efforts of the Secretary-General, the Organization for

In the context of ongoing diplomatic mediation
efforts by the parties concerned, an attempt to push

10/27

14-27868

27/03/2014

ahead with a vote on draft resolution A/68/L.39, on the
question of Ukraine, will only further complicate the
situation.
China has always been opposed to intervention in
the internal affairs of other countries and has always
respected the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of all countries. China has adopted a consistent,
balanced and impartial approach to the question of
Ukraine. China has proposed an initiative comprising
three principled points for the political settlement
of the crisis in Ukraine. China calls for the early
establishment and implementation of an international
coordination mechanism, with the participation of all
parties concerned, in order to explore and consider the
ideas, concepts and proposals for a political settlement.
The most pressing matter now is to identify those
ideas, concepts and proposals so as to prevent further
escalation of tension.
China will continue to do its utmost to promote the
maintenance of peace and dialogue and to play a more
constructive role in achieving a political settlement of
the Ukrainian crisis.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): Turkey attaches importance
to the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity
and political unity of Ukraine. The results of the illegal
referendum held in Crimea on 16 March, in violation
of the Ukrainian Constitution and international
agreements, do not bear legal validity. Turkey does not
recognize the developmente facto situation. We believe
that establishing faits accomplis through military
means is extremely dangerous and inimical and can
lead to negative consequences for the stability and
security of the entire region.
Turkey also places strong emphasis on the security,
well-being and rights of the Crimean Tatar Turks, who
are an integral part of the Crimean population. Since the
onset of the crisis, they have responsibly and peacefully
voiced their views and concerns, as they always have
in the past. We will continue to closely follow their
situation.
A political solution to the crisis in Ukraine should
be found through diplomatic means on the basis of
Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, within
the framework of universal democratic principles and in
accordance with the law and international agreements.
We will continue to convey that message in all relevant
bilateral and multilateral platforms.

A/68/PV.80

Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): At the outset, I would like
to express our appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
opening the floor in this timely debate of the General
Assembly under the agenda item “Prevention of armed
conflict” in relation to the current situation in Ukraine.
As a sponsor of the draft resolution before us
(A/68/L.39), Georgia also aligns itself with the
statement made by the observer of the European Union.
In my national capacity, I would like to make the follow
remarks.
Georgia unequivocally supports the political
independence, national sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders. It does not recognize the
referendum conducted in Ukraine’s Crimea region on
16 March as legal and legitimate.
What happened in Ukraine reminds us of what we
saw in Georgia in 2008, when Russia seized Georgia’s
Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions. Six years after the
war, 20 per cent of my country remains under illegal
Russian occupation, with more than 400,000 internally
displaced persons and refugees denied the right of
return to their homes. Georgia’s continuous calls on the
Russian Federation to reciprocate a pledge of non-use
of force remain unanswered. Moreover, the violation of
Georgia’s airspace by Russian gunships and drones has
become a frequent phenomenon of late.
The latest developments make it apparent that
the existing security architecture of the current
international system is being undermined and the
credibility of United Nations threatened. We support
closer international engagement in Ukraine through
the United Nations, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and other international and
regional organizations. We deem it absolutely necessary
that the internationally mandated mission have access
to the whole territory of Ukraine, as requested by the
Ukrainian Government. That is our principled position,
again based on our own experience, when, following
a Russian veto on the extension of the mandate of a
United Nations mission to Georgia, six years after
the war, we see a void in which no one is allowed to
monitor the violations of human rights in the occupied
territories.
Georgia joins the international community’s call
for no partial or total disruption of the national unity
and territorial integrity of Ukraine or modification of
its borders to take take place through the threat or use

14-2786811/27

A/68/PV.80

of force or other unlawful means, as stipulated in the
draft resolution before us.
Concerted action is needed. Only through such
action can we restore the stability of the United Nations
system and prevent the annihilation of international
law. Georgia once again calls on all Member States to
vote in favour of the draft resolution.
Ms. Gunnarsdóttir (Iceland): For a small country
such as Iceland, respect for international law and
relations between States are of crucial importance.
Russia’s actions in Crimea have challenged the core
principles of the United Nations. The annexation of
Crimea is contrary to the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations, which stipulate, inter alia, the non-use
of force to settle disputes and respect for the sovereignty,
political independence, unity and territorial integrity
of Member States. Other international agreements
have also been violated, such as the 1994 Budapest
Memorandum and the 1997 Treaty between the Russian
Federation and Ukraine on Friendship, Cooperation
and Partnership.
Neither the so-called referendum of 16 March or
Russia’s annexation of Crimea change the legal status
of the region. According to international law, Crimea is
part of Ukraine. The referendum, which was held while
Russian forces were in complete control of Crimea,
was illegal and did not meet the basic standards for
democratic elections.
The crisis must be resolved by peaceful means.
We urge Russia to cooperate with the Ukrainian
Government and the international community in order
to find ways out of the crisis.
In this forum, it is natural to focus on international
law, the preservation of peace and security and respect
for human rights. The message from the international
community is clear — violations of international law
are unacceptable. It is important to demonstrate a strong
international consensus on the crisis in Ukraine. The
recent vote in the Security Council on a draft resolution
in support of Ukraine, co-sponsored by Iceland, shows
that Russia is isolated in this matter (see S/PV.7138).
The Foreign Minister of Iceland visited Ukraine
last week. His message was clear — Iceland strongly
supports the Ukrainian people and condemns Russia’s
actions. The use of military force to redraw national
boundaries is unacceptable and will have serious
consequences for Russia’s international standing.

12/27

27/03/2014

Iceland is fully aligned with the European Union with
regard to the introduction of restrictive measures in
support of Ukraine.
In the current situation, Ukraine deserves our
full political and economic support. Iceland calls for
strong international support for Ukraine, not only here
at the United Nations but also from other international
organizations, including the international financial
institutions. The situation in Ukraine is of grave
concern to all States that value international law and
peaceful cooperation. The violation of the sovereignty
and territorial borders of Ukraine is not acceptable.
The most effective way to bring stability and
security to Ukraine is to provide economic and political
support to the Ukrainian people, who took to the streets
in November last year, demanding change, political and
economic reform and respect for democratic values
and human rights. They suffered great losses but
kept their hope. We cannot let them down. It is also
therefore of the utmost importance that the Ukrainian
Government successfully meet the demands of its
people in the democratic reform process ahead, while
emphasizing the rule of law, good governance and
robust anti-corruption measures, and safeguarding the
rights of all people, including minorities.
We urge all parties to resolve the crisis by peaceful
means through direct political dialogue, respecting the
will of the Ukrainian people.
Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): Once again, the General Assembly has been
convened as a result of the use of force against sovereign
States through measures aimed at overthrowing
Governments elected by the votes of their citizens.
That total rupture of the constitutional order leads to
widespread violence and gives way to coups d’état.
This growing trend to destabilize legitimate,
democratically constituted Governments in order
to overthrow them, violating the sacred principles
of non-interference in the internal affairs of States,
which leads to crisis situations, real human tragedy
and untold suffering for their peoples, is reprehensible
and extremely worrying. Those who are speaking
of democracy are precisely those who are actually
subverting it by undemocratic methods in order to
advance their own interests. We will not tire of repeating
that such a policy of double standards is in truth the real
threat to international peace and security.

14-27868

27/03/2014

We have seen in recent years how they have
organized, financed and directed from outside internal
situations of violence and terrorism in countries that do
not yield to their interests, manipulating human rights
and civil liberties with disinformation campaigns that
start from their own centres of power to force regime
change and replace them with regimes that will comply
with their policies.
Our President Daniel Ortega Saavedra recently
pointed out with clarity:
“We are witnessing these crises in Africa, Latin
America and the Caribbean, Asia and recently in
Eastern Europe, and the world remains turbulent.
And who is turning the world upside down? Those
who want to maintain the oppression of the peoples
of our planet, who are trying to establish new forms
of colonization, new forms of slavery in the name
of democracy, in the name of liberty, stimulating
barbarism.
“The same scheme that was used in Honduras
to oust President Manuel Zelaya is what we have
just seen in Ukraine — just as barbaric, just as
brutal, just as bloody! Now in Ukraine there
is a president put in place by the intervention.
And Ukraine has a minority population that
agrees with these brutal events, and another
group — the majority — that is against them,
which has led autonomous communities to demand
their independence.”
It is not through policies based on double standards
that we strengthen a world of peace. It is not through
coups d’état to bring about regime change that we
strengthen a world of peace. It is through unity,
solidarity and the brotherhood between our peoples,
through policies that favour of peace and development,
and through diplomatic efforts and solutions that we
will achieve the international peace and security. We
uphold the principle of the right of peoples to selfdetermination, particularly when it is exercised in a
sovereign, peaceful and legitimate manner through the
vote.
Because we want peace and believe in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts by peaceful means, we reject
all unilateral methods, such as political or economic
sanctions against the Russian Federation, as they
violate international law and do not contribute to easing
the tense atmosphere. We support an inclusive political
settlement, the result of goodwill on all sides, so that

A/68/PV.80

stability and peace may prevail. That is why we will
vote against draft resolution A/68/L.39.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): Once again, Bolivia exercises its
right to take the floor before the General Assembly.
The fact that the Assembly has been convened to
deal with an issue that could not be resolved in the
Security Council shows once again the ossified and
anachronistic ways in which the Organization works.
It is no exaggeration to reiterate that Security Council
reform and the revitalization of the Assembly cannot be
postponed in order to bring about their democratization
and to guarantee that they work effectively in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.
Bolivia is closely following the events that have
been taking place. We are extremely concerned to
see the possibility of an escalation of violence with
unthinkable consequences. We call upon the parties
to maintain restraint and resolve the situation through
corresponding diplomatic and political channels. We
welcome the steps taken to that end by the SecretaryGeneral.
Bolivia is a pacifist country that respects
international law and actively contributes to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Bolivia will not take a position on the referendum that
took place in Crimea nor on the territorial situation of
that region.
Respectful of democratic principles and the principle
of sovereign equality of States, Bolivia cannot remain
silent in the light of the interruption of a constitutional
process, in the light of a legitimately elected Government
being overthrown. The phrase “regime change” can be
heard in many parts of our planet. The same words and
some of the same methods have been used for several
decades to overthrow democratic Governments on all
continents. Democratically elected Governments are
stifled in the name of democracy. Wars are begun in
the name of peace. Poverty is brought into being in
the name of prosperity. That is the logic of the double
standard — the double standard that a few insist on
imposing on others.
Bolivia is asking whether it is a threat to international
security when international law is talked about only
when it serves one’s interests. Is it not a threat to
international security when some violate the sovereignty

14-2786813/27

A/68/PV.80

of peoples? Is it not a threat to international security
when some are trying to rebuild a unipolar world? Is
it not a violation of the principle of non-interference
in the internal affairs of a State when millions of
dollars are provided through non-governmental
organizations, when the media bombards countries with
disinformation and when opponents of democratically
elected Governments receive financial support? Is it
not a threat to international peace and security when
any Power can incessantly build up arms and needlessly
use military force in all parts of the globe? Is it not a
threat when the major Powers drag other countries into
new confrontations as they see fit? Neither threats nor
tanks should replace diplomacy.
The series of attacks suffered by our countries
in recent years force us to remain vigilant. Bolivia
condemns both the logic that seeks to impose isolation
and the sanctions that are being implemented outside of
international law. Our vote therefore does not represent
support for or condemnation of a particular country.
Rather, it is an expression of disagreement that matters
affecting peoples can be manipulated by major Powers,
undermining the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations. For that reason, Bolivia will vote
against draft resolution A/68/L.39 before us today.
Mr. Pedersen (Norway): Norway fully aligns itself
with the statement made by the observer of the European
Union. In addition, in the light of the fundamental
principles of international relations and international
law that we are discussing today, I would like to make a
national statement on behalf of my country.
Norway supports the draft resolution contained
in document A/68/L.39 on the territorial integrity of
Ukraine. The draft resolution reconfirms the importance
of the fundamental principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, notably the obligation of all States to
refrain in their international relations from the threat or
use of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State and to settle their disputes
by peaceful means in full respect of international law.
Significantly, the draft resolution also affirms the
General Assembly’s commitment to the sovereignty,
political independence, unity and territorial integrity of
Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders.
Respect for international law is fundamental in
international relations. That is a key priority in Norway’s
foreign policy. One of the most basic and important
rules under international law is the prohibition of the

14/27

27/03/2014

use of force. No State has the right to intervene in the
affairs of another State through the use of armed force
or coercion. The international community must react
when such fundamental principles and rules under
international law are violated. We need to be clear on
such important issues. Further, as was mentioned by
the representatives of Costa Rica and Iceland, that is of
particular importance for small countries.
Norway does not recognize the illegal annexation
of Crimea or Sevastopol. There are no independent
reports of abuse of Russian-speaking minorities in
Crimea or in eastern Ukraine. If such abuse had been
the case, several international mechanisms for dealing
with such situations within the framework of the United
Nations, the Council of Europe and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) could have
been called upon. Those mechanisms were not used in
Crimea. Norway welcomes the adoption of the mandate
for an OSCE special monitoring mission to Ukraine,
and we commend the Conflict Prevention Centre for
the swift deployment of personnel.
Over the past few weeks, the international
community has tried to engage Russia in a political
dialogue with Ukraine. Norway will strongly urge
Russia to engage in such a political process in order to
find a political solution and negotiated resolution to the
conflict.
Mr. Menelaou (Cyprus): Cyprus aligns itself with
the statement made by the observer of the European
Union and the European Council conclusions. We will
also vote in favour of draft resolution A/68/L.39.
Developments in Ukraine are a source of major
concern. As a country that is enduring a foreign
occupation, Cyprus stresses the importance of adhering
to the principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity
and independence which must be applied uniformly
and for all. We believe that a political solution based
on full respect for the principles of and obligations
under international law is possible and must be pursued
by all parties involved. We encourage restraint and a
consensual approach and reiterate the importance of
defusing the situation through diplomatic means.
In that regard, we welcome the mediation efforts of
the Secretary-General and the deployment to Ukraine
of Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson and Assistant
Secretary-General Šimonović. We also welcome the
deployment of the mission of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, as well as the

14-27868

27/03/2014

continued cooperation of the United Nations with other
regional actors, such as the Council of Europe.
Cyprus enjoys close relations with both Ukraine
and Russia. We encourage the Ukrainian authorities to
reach out to all regions and population groups and to
ensure full protection of the rights of people belonging
to different ethnicities. The new Government should
be representative of all Ukrainian citizens and their
aspirations. We also encourage the Ukrainian authorities
to investigate all acts of violence. At the same time, we
encourage Russia to commit to a diplomatic solution
and contribute to the de-escalation of tensions.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on sub-item (b) of agenda item 33. We shall
now proceed to consider draft resolution A/68/L.39.
I now give the floor to those who have asked to
speak in explanation of vote before the voting. May I
remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): As a
small State with a tiny population, open borders and no
standing army, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines owes
its continued peaceful existence as an independent and
sovereign nation to a robust and universally accepted
body of international law, which includes the United
Nations Charter. As active members of the General
Assembly, we take seriously former Secretary-General
Kofi Annan’s 1998 assessment that the contributions
of small States “are the very glue of progressive
international cooperation for the common good”. We
also agree wholeheartedly with former United States
president John F. Kennedy’s 1963 assertion that “small
nations... can and must help build a world peace”.
One of the essential contributions to be made
by small States like ours is the tireless advocacy for
timeless principles enshrined in international law.
With no ideological or geostrategic axes to grind, we
consider it our solemn obligation to not only articulate
those principles, but to ensure that they are applied
consistently and upheld in the international community
as universal truths, rather than selective, uneven and
unpredictable tools to further hegemonic or great
Power ambition. Such a jaundiced view of international
law would weaken the integrity and legitimacy of the
General Assembly and, ultimately, the existential pillars
upon which small and militarily weak States rely.

A/68/PV.80

Accordingly, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
views the recent events in Crimea and Ukraine with great
concern. We reiterate the call made by the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM) in its 5 March statement
for the pacific settlement of disputes and respect for
Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Secessionist referendums and those on the
sovereignty of ethnically or historically distinct
inhabitants of a particular geographic area should
not be manipulated or selectively accepted by wouldbe imperial Powers. We note the sad irony that those
most supportive of Kosovo’s unilateral declaration of
independence now reject such a declaraion by Crimea,
while those with the strongest arguments against
the decision of the International Court of Justice on
the legality of the Kosovar unilateral declaration of
independence now cite it approvingly. We also note that
those who advised Argentina to take careful note of the
views of 99 per cent of the residents in the Falkland
Islands (Malvinas) are now branding the opinions of
97 per cent of the residents of Crimea as invalid.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines also recalls that
the principles put forward to justify intervention in
Ukraine are eerily similar to those posited 31 years ago
in the context of our CARICOM neighbour Grenada.
However, the legal defenders and dissenters have
switched places this time.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines has long advocated
and advanced the principle of territorial integrity, even
in the case of ongoing civil war and sectarian unrest.
Similarly, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines firmly
defends paragraph 4 of Article 2 of the Charter of
the United Nations, which prohibits the threat or use
of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State. We also view the principle
of self-determination for non-implanted populations,
particularly in the context of decolonization, to be
sacrosanct.
Unfortunately, the nature of today’s draft resolution
(A/68/L.39) and the arguments of its chief proponents
have called into question the universal and consistent
applicability of international law in such and similar
instances. Despite our real and continuing concerns
over the events that have taken place in Crimea and
Ukraine, we view today’s draft resolution as motivated
more by the principals than by principles. Many of the
major Powers on either side of that particular dispute
have reversed their long-standing positions on similar

14-2786815/27

A/68/PV.80

conflicts and are now on record as contradicting
themselves, notwithstanding their efforts to find legal
and factual distinctions. Also, it is regrettable that the
Assembly has failed to consider the historical context
of that particular geopolitical dispute and the nature of
the recent change of regime in Ukraine.
Such concerns compel Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines to abstain in the voting on the draft
resolution.
Mrs. Carrion (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay will abstain in the voting on draft resolution
A/68/L.39, even though we agree with many of the
concepts outlined in the draft text. On previous
occasions, our country has expressed its views on
conflicts or situations that threaten the main principles
of international law, such as the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States. Our country’s longstanding support for international law and the role of
multilateralism has always led us to act consistently in
upholding the law and the principle of the territorial
integrity of States. The most recent cases were
Kosovo’s unilateral declaration of independence and
the referendum of the people of the Falkland Islands
(Malvinas). In both cases, we rejected the possibility of
undermining such principles.
We believe that the territorial integrity of States
is a principle of the United Nations and a fundamental
standard of basic international law that all States should
respect as a fundamental element for the peaceful
coexistence and cooperation among members of the
international community. In the light of that longstanding position of our country, in the specific case
of the Crimean peninsula Uruguay believes that any
declaration that is not in line with the constitutional
principles of the Ukrainian State cannot alter the
internationally recognized borders and therefore
contravenes the principle of the territorial integrity of
States. International legality must prevail.
However, while consistent in that regard, the draft
resolution also contains other elements of a political
nature that our country believes to be inappropriate and
that significantly alter its scope, which, in our view,
should focus solely on applying the principle of the
territorial integrity of States.
The promotion of democratic principles is the
responsibility of all actors involved in the current events
in Ukraine. It is important that all such stakeholders
contribute to the country’s stability, the democratic

16/27

27/03/2014

legitimacy of its institutions and the peaceful resolution
of the various interests present in the Ukrainian society,
and prevent the heightening of tension at the national
and regional levels.
Finally, Uruguay hopes that the conflict of interests
that Ukraine is currently experiencing can be resolved
exclusively by peaceful means on the basis of dialogue
among the parties and in full respect for international
law and democratic values.
Mr. Escalante Hasbún (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): El Salvador reaffirms its commitment to peace
and the strict respect for human rights, international
law and the principles enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations. Likewise, we reiterate our total
commitment to the peaceful settlement of disputes and
to the primacy of multilateralism.
In analysing the situation under consideration, we
recall our history, in particular the invaluable backing
and support that we received from the international
community in resolving the internal conflict that
affected the country in the 1980s. We reaffirm our
commitment to peace and respect for human rights,
international law and the principles enshrined in the
Charter. We also note our overwhelming commitment
to the peaceful resolution of disputes and, again, to the
primacy of multilateral action.
El Salvador acknowledges the difficulties faced
by the Ukrainian people. However, we believe that the
complex situation faced by Ukraine and its neighbouring
areas is not fully reflected in draft resolution A/68/L.39.
The draft text does not promote areas of dialogue that
would make it possible to reach a solution on the basis
of the principles of international law and that primarily
seek to de-escalate the conflict and to ensure human
rights and the political, economic and social stability
of the region.
Similarly, El Salvador believes that the content
of the draft resolution will not help to resolve the
root causes of the crisis. It does not call for dialogue
among the actors and countries involved in the crisis
or set an appropriate precedent for dealing with various
points of inter- and intra-State tensions in the world on
geographical grounds. Our country supports the efforts
of the Secretary-General to promote a direct dialogue
between the parties. We reiterate the need to implement
of United Nations reform to enable the Organization
to better respond to the current complex international
reality. El Salvador appeals to all parties to continue to

14-27868

27/03/2014

seek peaceful and diplomatic solutions that favour the
people’s call for and right to their own development.
Given all those points, El Salvador has taken the
sovereign decision to abstain in the voting on the draft
resolution before us, contained in document A/68/L.39.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the vote.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/68/L.39, in addition to those delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Albania, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malta, the
Marshall Islands, Montenegro, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Portugal, Romania,
San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, Spain,
Sweden, Turkey, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and the United States of America.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/68/L.39, entitled
“Territorial integrity of Ukraine”. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados, Belgium, Benin,
Bhutan, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Cameroon,
Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Guinea, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Latvia, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Palau, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland,

A/68/PV.80

Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Against:
Armenia, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Nicaragua, Russian Federation, Sudan, Syrian
Arab Republic, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic
of), Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Bangladesh, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, China, Comoros, Djibouti, Dominica,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Guyana, India, Iraq, Jamaica,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Lesotho, Mali, Mauritania,
Mongolia, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, Pakistan, Paraguay, Rwanda, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal,
South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Suriname,
Swaziland, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Zambia
Draft resolution A/68/L.39 was adopted by 100
votes to 11, with 58 abstentions (resolution 68/262).
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of vote after the voting, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Ms. Rodríguez Pineda (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): Guatemala voted in favour of resolution
68/262, which was just adopted. We did so because we
cannot endorse the territorial dismemberment of any
State on the basis of unilateral arguments invoking
people’s right to self-determination. That violates both
the Charter of the United Nations and the international
order established over the past 69 years. That is why
we also cannot accept the unilateral decision of the
Autonomous Republic of Crimea, which is an integral
part of the sovereign territory of Ukraine, to convene

14-2786817/27

A/68/PV.80

27/03/2014

a referendum that would in effect justify its secession
from Ukraine. Nor can we accept the subsequent steps
aimed at the annexation of Crimea by the Russian
Federation.

on the basis of principle. We were guided by the same
consideration when we voted for draft resolution
S/2014/189, submitted to the Security Council on
15 March.

On the other hand, we have serious concerns about
the situation. Our concerns originated with the street
protests against the established Government in Ukraine,
which evolved from peaceful protests to situations of
violence and a breaking of the established constitutional
order, whose legitimacy could be questionable. We hope
that those doubts can be overcome through an open
and inclusive electoral process, which fully respects
the country’s ethnic, cultural and regional diversity,
opening the way to a plural Government which would
seek friendly relations with all its neighbours. It is
possible that a federal State could help in achieving
those objectives. But it is up to the peoples of Ukraine
to decide in a sovereign manner on their future.

We want it to be clearly understood that in voting
for those draft resolutions, Nigeria neither supports nor
opposes any particular country or group of countries.
Rather, Nigeria firmly upholds the sanctity of the
Charter of the United Nations and the principles of
international law, in accordance with the Declaration
on Rights and Duties of States of 1949, the Constitutive
Act of the African Union and other relevant instruments
that protect the sovereignty of States, the inviolability
of their borders and territorial integrity, as well as their
political independence.

We are also concerned about the present
international environment, which seems to be the
revival of a dividing fault line between East and
West, which we believed was part of the past. While
we understand that the present international context
makes it impossible to return to what we previously
called the “Cold War”, which caused so much harm to
the world and adversely affected my own country, that
atmosphere of tension, if not of confrontation, makes
us very uncomfortable and is eroding bit by bit the
multiple channels of cooperation that have been built up
between the Russian Federation and the main members
of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development. We believe that the events in Ukraine
that triggered those tensions also hold the potential
to make the country a place where the main external
actors in the international arena can come together, to
the benefit of the entire world.
In light of all this, we urgently call on all parties
to address the aforementioned conflict situation, which
would require above all a diplomatic solution to the
dispute between Ukraine and the Russian Federation.
Such an outcome must take into account the diversity of
the country and at the same time respect its territorial
integrity. In that regard, we support the good offices
that Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon offered, and we
trust that the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, together with the United Nations, can play a
relevant role in reaching the aforementioned objective.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): Nigeria voted in favour of
resolution 68/262, which was adopted today, solely
18/27

We did not take lightly the decision to vote in favour
of the two texts. We weighed the evidence of the case
on the scales of justice and the reality of the situation
in our own part of the world. We also considered the
universality of the application of the principles that we
pledged to uphold in our interaction with the rest of the
world. Both draft resolutions reaffirm the fundamental
principles of international law and the principles and
purposes of the Charter of the United Nations. We
believe that States must respect the rule of law at the
international level. They must demonstrate due regard
for the universal and self-evident truth that all States
are equal in the sight of the law, regardless of their size,
their wealth, their power or their influence.
Nigeria had hoped that, after the failure of the
Security Council to adopt the draft resolution before
it, alternative means of addressing the situation in
Ukraine would be found, such as resorting to regional
dispute resolution arrangements to which the concerned
parties belong. It is our firm conviction that peace can
be achieved only on the basis of mutual respect. Indeed,
respect is the foundation on which the rule of law is
anchored. In that regard, we believe that the protection
of ethnic minorities, the guarantee of their inviolable
rights and respect for their dignity, among others, are
the obligation of States. Therefore, no State should deny
the rights of entire nationalities or strip them of their
identities, including the use of their native languages.
The United Nations and its Member States must
view with concern and apprehension and condemn
without reservation all infringements of the Charter
and provisions of international law wherever they
occur and no matter who perpetrates them. Nigeria
will continue to abide by the rule of law and respect the
14-27868

27/03/2014

provisions of the Charter of the United Nations. Nigeria
takes this opportunity to reiterate its call that States
should, as much as possible, endeavour to seek peaceful
and amicable ways to settle their disputes, regardless of
the nature of the disputes. Those principles, which are
also enshrined in article 4 of the Constitutive Act of the
African Union, to which Nigeria solemnly subscribes,
stress the need for respect for the internationally
recognized borders of States.
Nigeria will continue to oppose the use and the
threat of use of force in settling international disputes.
We have consistently called for dialogue, mediation,
restraint and an end to hostile rhetoric. Nigeria has
advocated mediation and the pacific settlement of all
disputes, including territorial disputes. Our willing
submission to the ruling of the International Court of
Justice in our dispute with the Republic of Cameroon
should serve as a beacon and an inspiration to all lawabiding nations.
As a long-standing member of the Non-Aligned
Movement, Nigeria will not recognize power blocs or
spheres of influence aimed at creating some ephemeral
balance of power, which only serve to undermine rather
than uphold the universal principles of the United
Nations and supremacy of international law. Nigeria
is resolved to facilitate the peaceful resolution of the
situation in Ukraine and will, in that endeavour, be
guided and inspired by universally accepted principles,
as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
the Constitutive Act of the African Union and other
normative principles of international law.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
values the fact that the General Assembly, as the only
principal organ of the United Nations with universal
membership, has spoken on the situation in Ukraine,
because what is at stake are principles contemplated
in the Charter of the United Nations and international
law that affect the very coexistence of States, such as
the obligation to refrain from the use or threat of use
of force against the territorial integrity and political
independence of any State. Likewise, we support the
appeal to all of the parties to resolve the situation
peacefully through direct political dialogue, to refrain
from unilateral actions and to commit to international
mediation.
In the same vein, Chile reiterates its support for the
efforts being made by the Secretary-General to prevent
an escalation of the situation, to achieve a peaceful

A/68/PV.80

solution to the crisis, and for the due protection of the
human rights of all people, including all minorities.
Chile values the work that is being done in that area
by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and other regional organizations.
Mr. Neo Ek Beng Mark (Singapore): Singapore
opposes the annexation of any country or territory, as
it contravenes international law. We also object to any
unprovoked invasion of a sovereign country under any
pretext. Singapore affirms the principles of respect for
the territorial integrity of and non-interference in the
domestic affairs of a sovereign nation, and respect for
sovereignty and the rule of law.
Singapore therefore opposes the annexation of
Crimea to Russia. All parties should respect international
law and take steps to de-escalate tensions and resolve
the crisis peacefully. Accordingly, Singapore voted in
favour of resolution 68/262.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): On
15 March, the Security Council considered a draft
resolution at a time of extreme tension in Ukraine,
when there was a serious risk of the situation escalating
and leading to violence. At that time, Argentina voted
in favour of the aforementioned draft resolution, as we
understood that it clarified the international standards
and the fundamental principles that should guide the
international community, without any reference to
future acts or the hypothetical consequences of a
referendum that had not yet taken place.
In that vein, once again, a text has been proposed
based on a statement in line with an interpretation by
the international community of domestic Ukrainian
laws that is not coherent with the principle of
non-interference in the internal affairs of that country.
In that respect, we have noted a lack of coherency in
several statements.
The Charter of the United Nations is very clear
and leaves no room for interpretations based on the
circumstantial interests of each nation. My country
regrets the fact that the parties involved in the
situation under consideration today have not duly taken
into account repeated appeals by the international
community to respect the principles to which we have
all adhered as Member States to respect the primacy
of the principle of the territorial integrity, sovereignty
and political independence of all States; to abstain
from military, economic or political intervention in
the internal affairs of other States; and to strictly align

14-2786819/27

A/68/PV.80

their actions with international law and the Charter of
the United Nations.
Argentina will continue to comply with those
principles, and we regret the double standards employed
by various members of the international community,
who adapt their actions and statements to geopolitical
necessities in order to deal with specific situations.
Argentina does not believe in adopting a
confrontational stance that is a throwback to previous
eras in which the international community was divided
into separate and opposed blocs, thus preventing them
from building a common future. We intend for our
decisions not to fall back into the concept of a world
divided by ideological barriers, a world where the
principal victims were the peoples of Latin America,
Africa and Asia. We believe that those situations
cannot be resolved through unilateral acts of any kind,
especially by actors with great influence who should,
in fact, be relying on constructive diplomacy. We hope
that they will assume their responsibilities.
We are convinced that we must all strive to avoid
encouraging dissent and escalating tensions to promote
confrontation. We believe that the timing in bringing
the draft resolution before us for consideration does
not contribute to fulfilling the objective of the entire
international community to find a peaceful and political
solution to the crisis; it is only contributing to making
the situation even more complex.
Argentina will continue to promote a peaceful
resolution of the conflict. Accordingly, we reject
initiatives that seek to isolate one of the parties or
impose unilateral economic sanctions that undermine
the conditions that could lead to a dialogue that has
become very urgent. We reaffirm once again that the
international community should concentrate its efforts
on persuading the parties to the Ukrainian crisis to
start a constructive dialogue that will allow them find a
peaceful solution to the current situation, strictly uphold
human rights and international humanitarian law, and
respect the ethnic, linguistic, cultural and religious
rights of all minorities. At the same time, the efforts of
the international community should be strictly framed
within international law and the Charter of the United
Nations with the aim of bringing domestic peace to
that country and creating an atmosphere conducive to
international negotiations.
Our position on territorial integrity, non-interference
in the internal affairs of other countries, be it through

20/27

27/03/2014

political, economic or military means, is as clear as it
is consistent with our actions. However, in times like
these, resolution 68/262 goes in the direction of limiting
dialogue and the peaceful resolution of conflicts. We
therefore abstained in the voting. At the same time, we
emphatically support the steps taken by the SecretaryGeneral in this and in all conflicts that involve States
Members of the United Nations.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): We have
followed the situation in Ukraine very closely and we
would like a just solution to the crisis to be found in a
consensual manner, in accordance with the principles of
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
On the basis of our belief in peaceful and consensual
solution to the conflict, we encourage all the parties
to avoid any escalation of violence, seek compromise
and inclusive dialogue, and engage cooperatively and
constructively in the search for a solution acceptable
to all.
We were bound by the principles of international
law and the United Nations Charter when we voted
in favour of resolution 68/262. Those principles are
internationally accepted. They include, in particular,
the principles of the non-use of force, of settling
international conflicts peacefully, of respecting the
sovereignty, political independence and territorial
integrity of all States Members of the United Nations,
and of maintaining a comprehensive political dialogue.
From our examination of the draft resolution, we came
to understand that it sought to assert the aforementioned
principles of international law. On the basis of those
principles, we voted in favour of resolution 68/262.
Mr. Ja Song Nam (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): The delegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea voted against resolution 68/262,
entitled “Territorial integrity of Ukraine”. In that
regard, as a follow-up, I would like to clarify the
position of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
As far as the current crisis in Ukraine is concerned,
it has been unquestionably caused by the interference
of the United States and other Western countries in
the internal affairs of Ukraine and their instigation of
chaos and disorder. It is the principled position of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to formally
oppose and reject any attempt to overthrow legitimate
Governments and social systems through such forms
of conspiracy as interventions, pressure and the colour
revolutions. The Democratic People’s Republic of

14-27868

27/03/2014

Korea respects the rights of the people of Ukraine
and their choices based on respect for the principle
of equal rights and the self-determination of peoples,
as stipulated in the Charter of the United Nations and
other international laws and regulations.
The United States and other Western countries have
unlawfully interfered in the internal affairs of Ukraine
and instigated chaos and disorder, thereby bringing
instability, violence and strife between peoples in
Ukraine to extreme levels. That is the main cause of the
reunification of Ukraine with Russia.
It is a well-established practice of the United States
to intervene in the internal affairs of sovereign States
and provoke chaos and bloodshed for the purposes
of gaining hegemony over the world. In particular,
the United States is ruthlessly imposing sanctions,
blockades and isolation upon the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea while openly threatening it through
military exercises. In addition, the United States is
advancing its historical human rights conspiracy
against the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
by driving it to a dangerous degree and extreme ends.
All those acts serve the purposes of the United States
and the Western countries in stifling the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea for the simple reason that
we are not in complete agreement with them.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea notes
that the reunification of Ukraine with Russia has been
undertaken in a legitimate manner by means of a
referendum based on the voluntary wishes of the people
of Ukraine in line with the right to self-determination
set forth in the Charter of the United Nations. The
delegation of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
therefore voted against resolution 68/262. Further, we
intend to oppose all efforts aimed at overthrowing
legitimate Governments and social systems and at
undermining respect for the right and the choice of the
people of Ukraine, which is based on the principles of
equal rights and self-determination stipulated in the
United Nations Charter and other international laws
and regulations.
In conclusion, we hope that the current situation
in Ukraine will be resolved in a fair manner to bring
about peace and stability in accordance with the
wishes and interests of the people of Ukraine pursuant
to internationally recognized laws and principles, in
particular the principles of equal rights and the selfdetermination of peoples.

A/68/PV.80

Mr. Khalil (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): We are
meeting today in order to discuss a very important
matter having to do with the global international order.
We believe that this is the appropriate way to consider
the issue. We believe that the current global order has
not been able to absorb the changes the world has seen
over the past 25 years following the collapse of a global
order marked by bipolarity and the Cold War. As a
result, the current crisis in Ukraine is only a sign of the
aftermath of a former order that we wish had remained
in the past.
We believe, in accordance with the principles of
international law, that the best way to resolve crises in
the international community is to employ diplomacy
and avoid escalation. However, we are also convinced
that the world today needs reform and a total revamping
of international institutions in order to make them
better suited to the current situation and able to take
into account elements that the international community
should have been taking into consideration over the
past two decades.
We observe, in that respect, that in many cases
international law is not consistent when it comes to
the concerns of States, which may be better addressed
at the regional rather than the international level if
we are to guarantee peaceful coexistence and goodneighbourly relations among States. It is also true that
there is sometimes a contradiction between the will of
the people and the legal frameworks that govern them.
As a result, those elements must be reconciled.
If we do not deal with those phenomena actively
through the establishment of creative mechanisms
that are not selective and are able to strike a balance
between principles and interests, international and
regional crises will follow one upon another, and the
international order will not be able to contain them.
That is why Egypt abstained in the voting on resolution
68/262, just adopted.
Mr. Nguyen Trac Ba (Viet Nam): Viet Nam is
following the situation in Ukraine and Crimea closely
and attentively, and it is our wish that the parties
concerned exercise restraint and seek political solutions
to the current situation in order to resolve issues
through peaceful means on the basis of respect for the
fundamental principles of international law, the Charter
of the United Nations and the legitimate aspirations of
people for the early stabilization of the situation, for the
sake of peace and stability in the region and the world.

14-2786821/27

A/68/PV.80

Mr. Meza-Cuadra Velásquez (Peru) (spoke in
Spanish): Peru’s vote in favour of resolution 68/262,
entitled “Territorial integrity of Ukraine”, was another
statement of our consistent position advocating respect
and adherence to the principles of international law
and the Charter of the United Nations. In that regard,
Peru believes that the peaceful resolution of disputes
and respect for international treaties are essential to
guarantee international peace and security.
Peru recognizes the Secretary-General’s efforts
to promote mediation, and in that respect we appeal
for constructive and inclusive dialogue that takes
into account the legitimate interests of all the parties
involved, with which Peru maintains friendly and
cooperative relations. My country believes that, with
regard to international law, it is essential to avoid a
return to the dynamics of the past, which were fraught
with divisions and confrontation and thus undermined
our peoples’ progress and development.
Mr. Bamrungphong (Thailand): Thailand has
carefully considered resolution 68/262 and decided to
vote in favour of it because of the overriding importance
that Thailand attaches to the principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations and international law, in
particular respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States and the peaceful resolution of
conflict. Thailand recognizes that the current situation
is complex and delicate. It is our fervent hope that
all efforts will be made to bring about an immediate
de-escalation of tensions and that the door will be kept
open for dialogue that would lead to a political solution
and the restoration of peace as soon as possible based
on the legitimate interests of all parties concerned.
Mr. Lupan (Republic of Moldova): The Republic of
Moldova has followed with great concern the unfolding
of the situation in Ukraine and remains deeply worried
about the developments in that neighbouring and friendly
country. In that context, we have already stressed our
position in support of the principles of international law
applying to all Member States — in this particular case
to Ukraine — on their independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity within internationally recognized
borders, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, including Article 2. We also believe that
bilateral and multilateral agreements make up a body
of international law that must be observed, including in
the case of Ukraine.
While welcoming the commitment of the Ukrainian
authorities to respect and protect the rights of all persons
22/27

27/03/2014

in Ukraine, including minorities, we acknowledge that
the future of Ukraine can be considered and decided
upon only based on the free will and aspirations of all
Ukrainians themselves, without any outside influence.
We regret the conduct of the so-called referendum
in Crimea. The Government of the Republic of
Moldova expressed its position on 16 March and
reiterates that the so-called referendum on the status
of the Crimean peninsula cannot be legal, due to the
fact that it contravenes the Ukrainian Constitution
and international law. The conditions in which the
so-called referendum took place cannot be considered
representative of the free expression of the people’s
will and does not correspond to relevant international
standards and law. The Republic of Moldova stands
with the people of Ukraine and will provide all possible
support to efforts to overcome the current crisis in a
peaceful manner and in conformity with the principles
of international law.
We commend the ongoing United Nations efforts
with regard to the crisis and look forward to the
continued constructive role of Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon and the United Nations system as a whole in
that regard. We also welcome the 21 March decision of
the Permanent Council of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to deploy a special
OSCE monitoring mission to Ukraine, taken this time
by consensus, which is a good example for the United
Nations to follow.
The crisis in Ukraine presents difficulties for the
existing system of inter-State relations and the United
Nations. The implementation of international principles
on sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence
of States, the rule of law, including in the context of
multilateral and bilateral relations, respect for human
rights and free and fair expression of the popular will are
paramount to the well-functioning of this Organization
in particular and to the system of international security
and international relations as a whole.
As a country that has had an unresolved and
protracted separatist conflict on its territory for over
20 years, we look forward to the resolution of conflict
through peaceful means and dialogue. That is why
my delegation voted in favour of resolution 68/262, in
support of respect for the Charter of the United Nations
and its principles.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): The crisis
in Ukraine is particularly painful and sensitive for

14-27868

27/03/2014

Kazakhstan. For centuries, the Kazakh, Russian and
Ukrainian people have lived in friendship and accord.
Today, Kazakhstan is home to Kazakhs, Russians,
Ukrainians, Tatars, Germans, Poles, Koreans and many
others living in peace and harmony. Together we raise
our children, strengthen unity and friendship and create
a prosperous future for our common land, Kazakhstan.
In its statements, Kazakhstan has repeatedly
confirmed its adherence to the fundamental principles
of international law. We are interested in Ukraine
remaining a sovereign, stable and independent State.
The economic recovery of Ukraine is the main priority
and prerequisite for the full-fledged normalization of
the country’s situation.
Kazakhstan always follows an independent foreign
policy based on a balance of interests. Kazakhstan’s
position that conflicts should be resolved through
negotiations, under the auspices of the United Nations,
reflects the views and interests of the majority of
States of the world. In today’s critical circumstances,
we have to take into account the faits accomplis and
current realities. It is of crucial importance to heed the
voice of reason and search all possible ways to achieve
a peaceful settlement of the crisis through political
and diplomatic means and within the framework of
internationally agreed formats.
Kazakhstan calls upon all parties involved to leave
emotions, mutual accusations and finger-pointing
behind and reject the language of ultimatums and
sanctions. We should not allow a further escalation
of tensions and avoid making the situation more
complicated, which could have unpredictable
consequences on both the regional and global scales.
We stand ready to promote and support international
mediation efforts and facilitate the negotiation process
among all parties and their leaders with a view to the
earliest resolution of the situation in Ukraine.
In light of the all this, Kazakhstan abstained in the
voting.
Mr. Raja Zaib Shah (Malaysia): Respect for the
Charter of the United Nations is paramount to the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
Charter enshrines the principles of sovereign equality
among Member States and the non-interference in the
internal affairs of its Members. Malaysia has always
upheld those noble principles. We call upon all parties
to adhere to the principles embodied in the Charter of
the United Nations.

A/68/PV.80

Malaysia values its close relations with both Russia
and Ukraine. In that regard, we urge both countries to
engage in dialogue and explore all possible means of
finding a peaceful solution. We hope that both sides
will adopt a moderate approach and work towards
an amicable solution. Malaysia also supports every
peaceful effort, including the international diplomatic
initiative aimed at resolving the situation in Ukraine.
Malaysia hopes that all efforts will be exhausted
before other measures are considered. All parties
involved must respect the rule of law, act responsibly
and aim towards finding a peaceful settlement. We
believe that the exercise of moderation by all concerned
parties could contribute towards reaching a sustainable
solution. We would not like to see an escalation of the
situation and urge all parties to exercise restraint. The
interests, welfare and security of the people of Ukraine
must be given the top priority, while taking into account
the implications on the overall stability and peace in the
region.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): Azerbaijan voted
in favour of resolution 68/262 on the territorial
integrity of Ukraine. Our position is based on the
following understanding. The current situation in
Ukraine is a matter of serious concern requiring
continued international and regional efforts towards a
de-escalation of the crisis and finding a peaceful and
negotiated solution in accordance with international
law and the Constitution of Ukraine.
The Republic of Azerbaijan condemns extremism,
radicalism and separatism in all their forms and
manifestations and reiterates is unequivocal adherence
to the fundamental principles of sovereignty, territorial
integrity and the inviolability of the internationally
recognized borders of States, which constitute
the basic foundation of international relations and
the international legal order. We strongly support
the resolution of all conflicts between Member
States through political dialogue on the basis of the
aforementioned principles.
In situations of armed conflict or political crisis
involving inter-State relations, no solution can be
reached which is inconsistent with international law,
particularly where fundamental norms are concerned,
such as the obligation to respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States. We believe that the strict
observance of those norms concerning friendly relations
and cooperation among States and the fulfilment in

14-2786823/27

A/68/PV.80

good faith of the obligations assumed by States are
of the greatest importance for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Ms. Richards (Jamaica): Jamaica is firmly
committed to the principles and purposes of the United
Nations Charter, including respect for the territorial
integrity of sovereign States, as well as the resolution
of disputes through peaceful means. In that connection,
we remain concerned about the situation in Ukraine and
consider that the complexities of the situation require
the international community to act in a determined,
but balanced, manner. That is based on our view that
the rule of law and the principles and purposes of the
United Nations Charter have to be respected by all
States, whether large or small. That protects the weak
from the strong and ensures that the use or threat of
use of force is avoided. It is also important that the
application by the international community of the
principles underpinning the Charter be undertaken in
an even-handed manner, thereby avoiding unnecessary
tension for partial political gain.
It was after weighing such considerations that
Jamaica took the decision to abstain in the voting
on resolution 68/262, as in our view it makes some
presumptions that could in effect result in more
tensions in the region, delaying the search for a
peaceful solution. In keeping with the statement of the
Caribbean Community on 5 March, Jamaica continues
to support the call for the use of international mediation
and/or negotiations to address security and human
rights concerns in Ukraine, under the auspices of the
United Nations. We further reiterate the call made by
the Caribbean Community for all parties involved to
act with self-restraint and responsibility in order to
reduce tensions and avoid destabilization in that region.
Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): The delegation of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela voted against resolution 68/262
on the situation in Ukraine since we believe that the
resolution does not give the attention necessary to
the delicate political situation that resulted from the
interruption of the democratic constitutional fabric in
that European State, which led to the establishment of a
developmente facto Government.
Venezuela reiterated its commitment to promoting,
protecting and upholding international order,
international law and its institutions, human rights and
fundamental freedoms. Our national position, which

24/27

27/03/2014

is based on constitutional premises, is consistent with
the doctrine that has been developed in the Union of
South American Nations, in which its members have
categorically opposed changes in the democratic
constitutional order of the States of the region.
Our country reiterates its rejection of the overthrow
of the democratically elected Government of Ukraine by
extremist groups, whose activity, which is encouraged
by external Powers connected to opposition groups
in the de facto Ukrainian Government, led to very
unfortunate events and undermined democracy and the
rule of law in the country. Given the negative impact on
the peace and stability of that region, such a situation
cannot be disregarded since it threatens the security of
major parts of the Ukrainian population, who believe
their human rights, including their right to life, to be
at risk.
Furthermore, we are concerned about the increasing
trend of democratically elected Governments being
overthrown by groups with extremist ideologies
inherited from those that in the past were responsible
for the outbreak of the Second World War and the
systematic extermination of millions of human
beings and that now, in Ukraine, with the complicity
and indifference of certain States, reappear stirring
up violence in order to incite hatred, intolerance,
anti-Semitism, xenophobia and racism, fuelling the risk
of a conflict with unpredictable repercussions.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reiterates its
call for dialogue and negotiations between the parties
in order to overcome the political crisis in Ukraine. We
are convinced that it is up to the Ukrainian people to
resolve their differences peacefully through an inclusive
and democratic dialogue with a view to re-establishing
the constitutional order that has been undermined. The
international community should support direct dialogue
between the parties so as to contribute to the validity
of the democratic rule of law, taking into account the
legitimate interests of all members of Ukraine’s various
communities and regions.
Mr. Lasso Mendoza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
My country has closely followed the serious events in
Ukraine since last year, when the demonstrations began
in the city of Kyiv, The protests intensified throughout
the month of December 2013 and then in January and
February of this year and degenerated into street battles
provoked by violent agents on both sides, which caused
human and material losses and were aggravated by

14-27868

27/03/2014

the irresponsible presence of foreign politicians, who
encouraged the protesters to reject the Government of
Ukraine. That spiral of violence created the conditions
for the establishment of an irregular Government in
Ukraine without to date having clarified the procedures
used to remove a democratically elected President.
Those very serious events are the precedents for
the referendum that took place on 16 March in the
Autonomous Republic of Crimea and in the city of
Sevastopol. Such precedents are of crucial importance
in considering the agenda item before us because
foreign interference in the internal affairs of Ukraine
began long before 16 March. Regrettably, that was not
mentioned in resolution 68/262.
In that regard, my delegation would like to say the
following. First, my country supports the principles
of territorial integrity and of the self-determination of
peoples. Secondly, for my country a local referendum
is not sufficient to justify a change in the territorial
integrity of a State. Thirdly, Ecuador condemns any
interference in the internal affairs of other States and
any form of intervention, whether it be armed incursion,
aggression, occupation or an economic or military
blockade. Fourthly, we reject foreign interference in
the affairs of Ukraine, which have caused the political
destabilization of that country since last year. Fifthly,
my country, Ecuador, does not recognize Governments
established following the collapse of a democratic
order. We oppose the propensity of certain Powers to
provoke regime change through the use or threat of use
of force. Sixthly, my country does not acknowledge
the validity of any unilateral sanctions that a State or
a group of States seek to impose on another outside the
Charter of the United Nations.
For all those reasons, my country abstained in the
voting on the resolution.
Mr. Lazarev (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): Belarus
welcomes all efforts to find a peaceful resolution of the
conflict in Ukraine and to de-escalate the situation in
the region. Belarus supports first and foremost resort
to mechanisms that are less representative than the
General Assembly but that may now be more successful
in bringing about a peaceful resolution of the situation.
We note the important work in Ukraine of the United
Nations human rights monitoring mission and the
assessment mission of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe.

A/68/PV.80

Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): Algeria, along with
several other countries, abstained in the voting on the
resolution submitted for our consideration today. Despite
our abstention, we would like to reiterate our strict
adherence to the principles and objectives enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations, specifically
those stated in Articles 1 and 2 that refer to territorial
integrity, political independence and sovereignty,
as well as equal rights and self-determination. We
consider those principles as the main cornerstones of
international relations and the basis of international
law.
Algeria takes pride in its close and friendly
relationship both with the Russian Federation and
with Ukraine, and cannot but join the calls for the
continuation and strengthening of the dialogue to
avoid escalation so as to solve the differences and to
quell unwanted consequences. We are encouraged
by all efforts aimed at calming the current tensions,
including those of the Secretary-General, whose
personal endeavours we support in that regard. Algeria
will obviously continue to contribute to that end, both
directly or within the regional and political groups to
which we belong, in order to ease the tensions.
Ms. Flores (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish): The
Republic of Honduras voted in favour of resolution
68/262 on the basis of its full respect for the principles
of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States,
which inspire the international community and are the
foundation of the Charter of the United Nations. Those
principles contribute to and should continue to be the
basis for a constructive dialogue towards the peaceful
resolution of conflicts between the political actors.
Honduras trusts that the resolution not only strengthens
the principles that gave rise to the United Nations but
also is a means for maintaining peace, security and
the international order. Finally, we call on the rest of
the international community to continue to respect the
principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of
States.
Mr. Ferreira (Cabo Verde) (spoke in French): Cabo
Verde understands that relations among States must
be guided and supported by the universally accepted
principles of international law. The Republic of Cabo
Verde voted in favour of resolution 68/262 because, as
a State Member of the United Nations, we believe that
the solution to a dispute can be achieved only through
respect for principles, including those enshrined in the

14-2786825/27

A/68/PV.80

Charter of the Organization, that seek to promote and
preserve peace in the world.
On behalf of the Government, I would also like to
note and underscore that Cabo Verde’s vote is first and
foremost in favour of world and regional peace, and that
it was exercised in the conviction that political dialogue
and the pursuit of peaceful and negotiated solutions
remain the path to follow in settling disputes such as
the one we are currently considering.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): Libya
voted in favour of resolution 68/262 on the basis of our
commitment to defending the principles of international
law and the Charter of the United Nations.
We in Libya are fully aware of the historical
background of the problems on the Crimean peninsula.
We are fully aware of the Russian Federation’s interest
in Ukraine. Nevertheless, we also cannot ignore the
principle of respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States. Those principles are entrenched in
the Charter of the United Nations and in international
law. Furthermore, the Constitutive Act of the African
Union, of which Libya is a member, clearly states the
need to respect the post-independence boundaries of
States. Therefore, any changes in the borders of any
State must be undertaken within the constitutional
order of that country and in accordance with the
relevant national laws.
Libya stresses the importance of dialogue and
diplomatic efforts in resolving inter- and intra-State
disputes. We believe that all States are duty-bound
to not exploit difficult internal conditions in other
States in order to interfere in their internal affairs and
undermine their territorial integrity and independence.
Libya hopes that the parties concerned will exercise
self-restraint, not escalate the situation and endeavour
to find a peaceful solution that respects the rights of all.
Ukraine and Russia are neighbours. They must be
able to co-exist, and they should draw on their historical
relations and the interests of their peoples to find a
solution that will normalize relations between them as
soon as possible. The international community ought to
be encouraging them in that direction.
Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): I thank you, Mr. President,
for affording me the opportunity to explain Botswana’s
position on resolution 68/262 on the territorial integrity
of Ukraine, which the Assembly has just adopted.

26/27

27/03/2014

Botswana has been following the unfolding events
in Ukraine closely and with deep concern. We are
profoundly disturbed by the conflict and escalating
tension between two sovereign, neighbouring States
that share very deep historical ties. We continue to
hope for a diplomatic and amicable solution to the crisis
based on the ideals of the Charter of the United Nations
and international law.
In that context, Botswana would like to reaffirm
its strong faith in the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations and the Constitutive Act of the African
Union, specifically in relation to the respect for the
sovereign equality, unity and territorial integrity of
States. We believe those, among other principles of
international law, to be essential for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Botswana therefore does not support the
dismemberment of sovereign nations, either through
unilateral declarations of independence or through
coercion by external forces. As the Assembly may be
aware, Botswana has consistently acted in accordance
with those principles in the past, as we believe they are
paramount to the maintenance of international peace
and stability.
Botswana fully recognizes that the political crisis
in Ukraine was precipitated by, among others, the
unconstitutional removal of a democratically elected
President. We therefore believe that it is critical, at
this juncture, for sufficient space to be allowed for
the diplomatic efforts that are currently under way at
the bilateral level between Ukraine and Russia and at
the international level to be pursued to their logical
conclusion. Our continued hope is that those processes
will deliver a positive and amicable outcome that not
only serves to end the hostility between Ukraine and
Russia, but also facilitates improved relations between
those two sovereign States. Botswana feels very strongly
that it is essential for the international community to
have a balanced and impartial approach to the conflict.
Because of those considerations,
abstained in the voting on the resolution.

Botswana

Mr. Scappini Ricciardi (Paraguay) (spoke in
Spanish): With regard to resolution 68/262, entitled
“Territorial integrity of Ukraine”, the delegation of
Paraguay would like to make the following explanation
of its abstention in the voting.
The Government of Paraguay has followed closely
the events that have occurred on the Crimean peninsula.
14-27868

27/03/2014

It is of interest to us because we consider the Russian
Federation and Ukraine to be fraternal countries with
which we have enjoy cooperation in various areas.
People of Russian and Ukrainian origin in our country
have assisted us in the development of various areas of
our country. That closeness means that we wish all the
best for those two countries.
Paraguay reiterates its adherence to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, as
they are the essential guiding concepts of our foreign
policy. The Government of Paraguay therefore believes
that the best way to resolve the current situation is
through direct and open dialogue leading to a peaceful
and political solution of the dispute.
Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): We would also like to
speak in explanation of position on resolution 68/262,
which was just adopted by the Assembly.
Armenia has consistently, over the years, taken
a principled position on the promotion of democracy,
freedom and rights, including and in particular the equal
rights and self-determination of peoples, as universal

A/68/PV.80

values and principles embraced by the Assembly and
based on the Charter of the United Nations.
The key to resolving any crisis is to act within the
framework of international law and seek an early solution
to the differences through dialogue and cooperation.
The current situation in Ukraine is a sensitive matter,
and we strongly believe that an enduring solution can
only be realized between the parties concerned through
dialogue in a peaceful and negotiated manner.
Peaceful dialogue is also a responsible process.
We support the view, expressed in this Hall earlier on
numerous occasions, that solutions cannot be achieved
as a result of statements made or resolutions adopted
by the Assembly. On that basis, my delegation voted
against the resolution just adopted.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote. The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 33.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

14-2786827/27
