220

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

Committee on Enhancing the Effectiveness of the Principle of Non-Use of Force in International Relations,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee,16
Noting that the Special Committee has commenced
work to accomplish the tasks assigned to it,
Taking into account that the Special Committee has
not completed the mandate entrusted to it,
Reaffirming the need for universal and effective application of the principle of the non-use of force in
international relations and for assistance by the United
Nations in this endeavour,
1. Takes note of the report of the Special Committee on Enhancing the Effectiveness of the Principle
of Non-Use of Force in International Relations;
2. Decides that the Special Committee shall continue its work with the goal of drafting, at the earliest
possible date, a world treaty on the non-use of force
in international relations as well as the peaceful settlement of disputes or such other recommendations as
the Committee deems appropriate;
3. Invites the Goverments which have not yet done
so to communicate their comments or suggestions or
to bring them up to date, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 31 /9;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Special Committee with the necessary facilities and
services, including the preparation of summary records
of its meetings;
5. Invites the Special Committee to submit a report on its work to the General Assembly at its thirtyfourth session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its thirty-fourth session the item entitled "Report
of the Special Committee on Enhancing the Effectiveness of the Principle of Non-Use of Force in International Relations".
86th plenary meeting
16 December 1978

33/97.

Draft Code of Offences against the Peace
and Security of Mankind

The General Assembly,
Recalling that the International Law Commission
submitted a draft Code of Offences against the Peace
and Security of Mankind in 1954, 17
Recalling further that the General Assembly decided,
by its resolutions 897 (IX) of 4 December 1954 and
1186 (XII) of 11 December 1957, to postpone the
consideration of the item entitled "Draft Code of Offences against the Peace and Security of Mankind"
until a definition of aggression had been adopted by
the Assembly,
Bearing in mind that on 14 December 1974 the
General Assembly adopted resolution 3314 (XXIX)
entitled "Definition of Aggression",
Having considered the statements made during the
debates on this item,
16 Ibid.,

Supplement No. 41 (A/33/41 and Corr.1).

17 Ibid., Ninth Session, Supplement No. 9 (A/2693), para. 54.

1. Requests the Secretary-General to invite Member States and relevant international intergovernmental
organizations to submit their comments and observations on the draft Code of Offences against the Peace
and Security of Mankind, including comments on the
procedure to be adopted, not later than 31 December 1979, and to prepare a report to be submitted to
the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session;
2. Also reque~ts the Secretary-General to circulate
to Member States and relevant international intergovernmental organizations reports prepared for and
by the International Law Commission, the summary
records of the relevant debates in the General Assembly and all other relevant official documentation
on the item;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fifth session the item entitled "Draft Code of
Offences against the Peace and Security of Mankind"
and to accord it priority and the fullest possible consideration.
86th plenary meeting
16 December 1978
33/139.

Report of the International Law Commission

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International
Law Commission on the work of its thirtieth session, 18
Emphasizing the need for the progressive development of international law and its codification in order
to make it a more effective means of implementing
the purposes and principles set forth in the Charter of
the United Nations and in the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States, 19 and to give
increased importance to its role in relations among
States,
Noting with appreciation that at its thirtieth session
the International Law Commission, pursuant to General Assembly resolution 32/151 of 19 December 1977, completed, in the light of the observations
and comments of Member States, of organs of the
United Nations, of the specialized agencies and of
interested intergovernmental organizations, the second
reading of its draft articles on most-favoured-nation
clauses,
Noting further with appreciation the work done by
the International Law Commission on State responsibility, succession of States in respect of matters other
than treaties, treaties concluded between States and
international organizations, as well as the status of
the diplomatic courier and the diplomatic bag not accompanied by diplomatic courier,
Taking note of the preliminary work done by the
International Law Commission regarding the study of
the law of the non-navigational uses of international
watercourses, the second part of the topic "Relations
between States and international organizations", international liability for injurious consequences arising out
of acts not prohibited by international law and jurisdictional immunities of States and their property,
18 Ibid.,

Thirty-third Session, Supplement No. JO (A/33/10).
2625 (XXV), annex.

19 Resolution

IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Welcoming the considerations and recommendations
contained in the report of the International Law Commission regarding the programme and methods of
work of the Commission with a view to the timely and
effective fulfilment of the tasks entrusted to it,

I
I. Takes note of the report of the International
Law Commission on the work of its thirtieth sesson;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the International
Law Commission for the work accomplished at that
session;
3. Approves the programme of work planned by
the International Law Commission for 1979;
4. Recommends that the International Law Commission should:
(a) Continue its work on state responsibility with
the aim of completing at least the first reading of the
set of articles constituting part I of the draft on responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts,
within the present term of office of the members of
the International Law Commission, taking into account
the views expressed in debates in the General Assembly and the observations of Governments;
( b) Continue its work on succession of States in
respect of matters other than treaties with the aim of
completing, at its thirty-first session, the first reading
of the draft articles on succession of States in respect
of State property and State debts;
( c) Proceed with the preparation of draft articles
on treaties concluded between States and international
organizations or between international organizations
with the aim of completing, as soon as possible, the
first reading of these draft articles;
( d) Continue its work on the law of the nonnavigational uses of international watercourses;
5. Also recommends that the International Law
Commission should continue the study, including those
issues it has already identified, concerning the status
of the diplomatic courier and the diplomatic bag not
accompanied by diplomatic courier, in the light of
comments made during the debate on this item in the
Sixth Committee at the thirty-third session of the General Assembly and comments to be submitted by Member States, with a view to the possible elaboration of
an appropriate legal instrument, and invites all States
to submit their written comments o.n the preliminary
study carried out by the Commission concerning the
status of the diplomatic courier and the diplomatic bag
not accompanied by diplomatic courier for their inclusion in the report of the Commission on the work
of its thirty-first session;
6. Further recommends that the International Law
Commission should continue its work on the remaining
topics in its current programme;
7. Expresses confidence that the International Law
Commission will continue to keep the progress of its
work under review and to adopt the methods of work
best suited to the speedy completion of the tasks entrusted to it;
8. Endorses the decision of the International Law
Commission to request Governments to transmit their
observations and comments on the provisions of chapters I, II and III of part I of the draft articles on
State responsibility for internationally wrongful acts;

221

9. Expresses its concern over the necessity of
strengthening the Codification Division of the Office
of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat and, therefore,
strongly reiterates the recommendation made in General Assembly resolution 32/151;
10. Expresses the wish that seminars continue to
be held in conjunction with sessions of the International Law Commission and that :an increasing number
of participants from developing countries be given the
opportunity to attend these seminars;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to
the International Law Commission for its attention the
records of the discussion on the report of the Commission at the thirty-third session of the General
Assembly;
II
1. Expresses its appreciation to the International
Law Commission for its valuable work on the mostfavoured-nation clause and to the Special Rapporteurs
on the topic for their contribution to this work;
2. Invites all States, organs of the United Nations
which have competence in the subject-matter and interested intergovernmental organizations to submit, not
later than 31 December 1979, their written comments
and observations on chapter II of the report of the
International Law Commission on the work of its
thirtieth session and, in particular, on:
(a) The draft articles on most-favoured-nation
clauses adopted by the International Law Commission;
( b) Those provisions relating to such clauses on
which the International Law Commission was unable
to take decisions;
and requests States to comment on the recommendation of the International Law Commission that those
draft articles should be recommended to Member
States with a view to the conclusion of a convention
on the subject;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate,
before the thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly,
the comments and observations submitted in accordance with paragraph 2 above;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fifth session an item entitled "Consideration
of the draft articles on most-favoured-nation clauses".
89th plenary meeting
19 December 1978
33/140.

Implementation by States of the provisions of the Vienna Convention on
Diplomatic Relations of 1961

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General20
on the implementation by States of the provisions of
the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of
1961, 21
Recalling its resolutions 3501 (XXX) of 15 December 1975 and 31/76 of 13 December 1976,
Noting with satisfaction that the number of States
parties to the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Rela20 A/33/224.
21 United

Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 500, No. 7310, p. 95.
