UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

th

MEETING:

18 JANUARY

1983

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/241 I). . . . . . . . , , . . , . , , . . . . . . . , . . , , , . . . , . . . . .

1

Opening statement by the President..

..... . ,, ....,, ,....... .,,. .,,.. .....

I

Adoption of the agenda.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . #. . . . , . . . . . . .

2

The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-Genera6 on the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (915557) . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . ,. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .‘. ,. . . . . . . . , . . .

2

SlPV.2411

,

)’

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements
of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement
in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council.
The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

f

2411th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 18 January
President:

Mr. Atsu-Koffi AMEGA (Togo),

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Zaire, Zimbabwe.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2411)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (S/15557)
The meeting

was called to order at 5.20 p.m.

Opening statement by the President

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): It
is not without a measure of apprehension that as the
gavel, the symbol of the Council’s authority, is passed
to us so that we may preside over the work of this
Council for the month of January, I accept the honour
bestowed upon me and open the first meeting of the
Council at the beginning of the year. In doing so I wish
first to perform the pleasant duty that tradition
imposes on me to express in my own name and on
behalf of my delegation the best of wishes for the new
year, and welcome.
2. To all of you, representatives of Member States,
to the Secretary-General and to all officials of the
United Nations Secretariat, I express the hope that the
year that has just begun will be one of eternal spring,
of success, of personal satisfaction and hope in the
difficult work of the common quest for solutions to the
problems that beset the world. I hope that this
chamber will inspire members and alleviate fears of
local or generalized conflagrations, because the world
has its eyes turned upon them and their presence here
alone suffices to give renewed life and hope to
suffering mankind. Members will thus appreciate the
role of the Security Council as that of a driving force at
the “centre”, as referred to in the Charter of the
United Nations, “for harmonizing the actions of
nations in the attainment of these common ends”, a
driving force that also bears the main respbnsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.

1983, at 5 p.m.

3. It is with great pleasure that I bid a most warm
welcome to the newly admitted members: Malta, the
Netherlands, Nicaragua, Pakistan and Zimbabwe.
I am convinced that they will make invaluable contributions to our common task and with their ideas and
their experience enrich the Council as it discharges its
responsibilities.
4. On behalf of my delegation I wish to pay the sister
Republic of Zimbabwe the particular tribute it deserves for having broken from the chains of enslavement at the cost of bitter sacrifice, constructing a
multiracial society and thus supporting the sacred
principles of the United Nations. It is fitting that we
should feel joy in welcoming it among us. It has gone
through so much since the illegal regime of Southern
Rhodesia. The independence of Zimbabwe, its admission to the United Nations, and, today, its entry into
the Security Council are undeniably outstanding victories for the struggling peoples fighting for their
national liberation, and for all peoples that cherish
freedom, justice and peace. It is another reason for us
to hope that in the near future other peoples still under
colonial domination-the Namibian people comes to
mind-will attain sovereignty and occupy their rightful
places in the community of nations. I am convinced
that the presence of Zimbabwe in the Council is
another proof of its international credibility.
5. I welcome Nicaragua, a country striving to
achieve its own particular identity-an aspiration of all
developing countries. I am certain I can rely on its
co-operation to help the Council settle, in a just and
balanced manner, the problems it will face.
6. I also welcome Pakistan, a country whose dedication to the cause of the United Nations is well known,
as is the important role it has played for peace in
Asia. Its presence among us will indeed make a
contribution.
-__-. _ _
7. Finally I wish to bid a cordial welcome to the two
new non-permanent members from Western Europe
-Malta, a European country that, like Togo, is a
member of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries,
and the Netherlands, a State with which my country
has sincere relations of friendship and co-operation
under the ACP-EEC Lomd Conventions of 1975’ and
1979.2
8. The present would be blind were it not lit by lights
from the past. That is why, looking around me, I must

cherish the hope that co-operation among all the
members of the Council and the President will be as
efficient as it has been in the past and that the Council
will, if necessary, adopt the appropriate measures to
settle the problems that will come before it.

think of Ireland, Japan, Panama, SPait and Ugantay
countries which have just left the Council, each having
left its personal mark on it. I must here exPr:ss our
heartfelt gratitude for their valuable contrlbutlons to
the work of the Council, and I very sincerely pay a tribute to the climate of understanding which the representatives of those States brought to their efforts to
find positive solutions to the complex problems before
the Council. I wish to express our appreciation to the
delegations of those countries, and especially to thF$
representatives, Messrs. Noel Dorr, Masahiro NISIbo;i, Carlos &ores Typaldos, Jaime de Pinids and
Olara Otunnu. I wish them every success in their
future activities, and I hope that the Council will
continue to rely on them when necessary.

Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General
on the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (S/15557)
1.5. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation porn French):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received a letter from the representative of
Lebanon in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda.
In accordance with the usual practice I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite that representative to participate in the discussion without the right
to vote, in conformity with the relevant provisions
of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

9. To Mr. Otunnu, my brother and friend, whose two
years had a great impact on the life of the Council and
the United Nations as a whole, and during which he
showed his unquestionable talents in the performance
of the highest responsibilities, I wish to express our
warm appreciation-on behalf of my delegation, in my
own
name and in the name of all the African member
States of the Council and the non-aligned caucus,
10. Speaking of that group in the Council leads me to
think of another brother and friend, Mr. Kamanda wa
Kamanda, who is no longer among us. His presence in
the Council was a source of inspiration for us, but his
talents and his competence led him to higher functions. We wish him every success in his capacity as
head of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of his country.

At the invitation
of the President, Mr.
(Lebanon) took a place at the Council table.

Labaki

16. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
for the period
18 October 1982 to 13 January 1983 [S/15557]. Members of the Council also have before them document
S/15564, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Jordan.

11 q I wish to conclude by paying a well deserved
tribute to my predecessor, Mr. Natorf, the representative Of Poland, for the outstanding contribution he
made to the Council last month.

17. 1 call on the representative

12. Finally, addressing the entire Council, I wish to
express my admiration for the good humour that
characterizes our work, the spirit of tolerance and
compromise that each of us has shown despite our
ideological differences and our different interests. This
augurs well for the work of the Council on the
problems of the world. As a proverb of my country
says. “If you see the notables speaking under the tree,
the serenity of the village is assured”.

of Lebanon.

18. Mr, LABAKI
(Lebanon) (interpretation
j?om
French): For its first meeting this year, the Council has
given to Lebanon the awesome honour of once more
being the focus of its attention. Before turning to the
subject on the agenda, however, may I be allowed
to extend to you, Sir, my best wishes upon you]
assuming the presidency of the Council and as the
representative of a country that has opened its doors
to Lebanese emigration and to the economic development of which the Lebanese have been making their
contribution, one appreciated by that country,

13. In conclusion, I would recall what I said last year
at a similar time. Speaking at the beginning of the
Council’s work for the year 1982, 1 expressed, on
behalf of the President of the Togolese Republic,
General Gnassingbe EyadCma, Togo’s resolve to abide
by the rules that govern the Council’s work and my
own resolve to do everything within my means for the
maintenance of international peace and security. I
wish to reaffirm that resolve and I am now more than
ever alive t0 it as my country accedes to the presidency of the Council.

19. 1 also wish to pay a tribute to the representative
of Poland, who presided over the Security Council
during the month of December, and, at the same time,
to the members of the Council, both permanent and
non-permanent, who took part in its deliberations last
year. I congratulate the representatives of Malta, the
Netherlands,
Nicaragua,
Pakistan and Zimbabwe,
whose countries are seated on the Council for the first
time. 1 thank the representatives of Ireland, Japan,
Panama, Spain and Uganda who, during the past two
years, often showed active sympathy for my country.

14. 1 would wish to rely on all of you in the effective
discharge of my functions as President. I therefore
2

20. 1 thank the Secretary-General,
whose report on
UNIFIL
has been submitted to the Council, and his
colleagues, without whom our task would obviously
have been more difficult. I am also mindful in these
circumstances of the Governments of all the troopcontributing countries, of General Callaghan and of
the forces under his command. I express my Government’s gratitude to Nepal and Nigeria, which have
withdrawn their troops from southern Lebanon after
having fulfilled the mandate with which they had been
entrusted for over four years. Lastly, I welcome the
Finnish contingent that has just joined UNIFIL.

Lebanese Government
United Nations.

and the Secretariat

of the

25. It is well understood that UNIFIL
will not have
to intervene in cases of confrontation between armed
Lebanese elements and, therefore, in no case will be
involved in such confrontations. It is for the Lebanese
security forces-and
them alone-to
act in those
specific cases and go between factions of irregular
combatants. I am recalling this in order to meet the
concerns of the contributing States. For the rest, there
will be co-ordination between UNIFIL and the Army.
This co-ordination
will be done by the Army with all
the goodwill that UNIFIL
has found on their part in
the past. There will not be any problem in this regard.
And I take this opportunity
to draw the Council’s
attention to the important fact that there are never
insoluble problems in places where the Lebanese State
is exercising its sovereignty.

21. The President of the Lebanese Republic himself,
in his statement here three months ago, asked the
Council to extend the mandate of UNIFIL.
At that
time he said that: “The Council has neither deceived
nor disappointed us. . . [and] vicissitudes. . . have
prevented the Council’s resolutions from taking on
their
historical
dimensions”
[2400th
meeting,
pcrra. 181. We consider that today the Council will be
able to adopt a resolution that will enable UNIFIL
to
play, on Lebanese territory, a large role in the
sageguarding of international peace and security-first
of all, of course, the sageguarding of international
peace and security in Lebanon and then, consequently, in the entire region and even beyond its
geographic and historical limits.

26. We are not asking for an increase in UNIFIL
troop strength. However. in the light of future developments and the evolution of the situation, we may be
called upon to make such a request, especially because
many friendly countries have informed us that they are
prepared to contribute to the international force.
27. We are convinced that our request will be
favourably received by all States which desire stability
in Lebanon and peace in the Middle East. To facilitate
the Council’s decision, moreover, we believe it our
duty to call to its attention that our request concerning
UNIFIL
has been raised in the context of all the
ongoing negotiations-as
is known, there are more
than one-which
deal with the evacuation of nonLebanese forces.

22. The Lebanese Government is today asking the
Council to extend the mandate of UNIFIL
for a period
of six months. Why six months? Because on the one
hand we believe that six months will give UNIFIL,
which is still a provisional force, a stability it could not
enjoy in a shorter period of time and, also, that the
tasks which await UNIFIL
cannot perhaps be carried
out in only one or two months and therefore require a
longer period of time.

28. Lebanon must become tomorrow what it was
yesterday and what it has managed to remain in the
eight years of successive and often simultaneous wars
which have been imposed upon it. It is a symbol and
an example for all the moral and spiritual values which
have honoured mankind and of which the Council is
the guardian and guarantor. If we are asking the
Council to help Lebanon, it is because Lebanon has
proved, mainly in 1982 and especially perhaps between 23 August and 23 September of that historic
year, that it was more viable and more solid than larger
and apparently stronger entities-because
crushing
events did not crush us, because we have sustained
blows that would have destroyed any artificial State,
and because we have managed to stay on our feet.

23. In the letter dated 13 January which I addressed
both to you, Mr. President, and to the SecretaryGeneral and which has been brought to the attention of
members of the Council [S/15.557, annex I], 1 also
asked, upon the orders of my Government,
that the
zone of operation of UNIFIL
be extended to the whole
of Lebanese territory in order that UNIFIL
could help
the State to re-establish its authority in the north, as
well as in the east and in the south, in cities, in urban
areas, over international
lines of communication,
principally
the land routes, and anywhere else it
might lend its assistance to the Lebanese army, which
must, in any event, quite obviously assume its own
responsibilities.
If we go along with the text that has
been submitted to the Council and thus relinquish our
initial request, we do so because, in the light of the
existing situation, we wish to facilitate the task of the
Council and enable it to vote unanimously to extend
the mandate for six months.

29. In 1978 UNlFIL
inaugurated its mandate in a
climate of enthusiasm, Today its mandate must not be
interrupted or even renewed in a spirit of resignation.
Lebanon is not dead, waiting to be buried; it is not
dying and does not need the assistance of some
aberrant euthanasia to die. Our right to peace, security
and life stems from our will to have these things: it is
inalienable. We are not asking the Council to recon-

24. UNIFIL’s
mandate as the Council has already
defined it will continue in any case within the
framework of permanent joint efforts between the
3

all its forms, as well as in confronting all those who
may dare to use force to dominate others and impose
their will on them.

firm this to us. But, as a founding Member of the
Organization,
it is up to us to call upon the Council to
assist us in this phase which is, to say the least, a very
delicate one in our own existence. We do so today in
words which the speedy turn of events makes even
more insistent and solemn. We are awaiting the
Council’s reaction with confidence.

35. I wish whole-heartedly
to welcome and congratulate the new members. I also wish them all
success and I assure them of full and sincere cooperation in our common efforts within the framework
of affirming the purposes and principles of the United
Nations.

30. Mr. BATAINAH
(Jordan) (interpretation
from
Arabic): Allow me at the outset to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency for this
month. Your well-known broad experience and diplomatic skill will enable the Council to attain the best
results. We are happy to see the presidency occupied
by a skilled and highly qualified diplomat. This is for
us a source of gratification
and confidence.

36. UNIFIL
was formed and its mandate defined, in
accordance with resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 ( l978),
in order to ensure the withdrawal of the invading
Israeli forces and enable the Lebanese Government to
exercise full sovereignty over its whole territory. As
we can see now, nearly five years after the adoption of
these two resolutions, the Israeli occupation in Lebanon has expanded. Furthermore,
there are still
practices that are incompatible
with the principle of
preserving the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Lebanon, especially on the part of
Israel. It has hegemonistic and expansionist ambitions
and seeks, through Lebanon, to attain strategic gains
in the area to the detriment of that country. But,
despite all these adverse developments, the role of
UNIFIL
remains essential in the implementation
of
the two main purposes for which the Force was
formed. UNIFIL
must be enabled to assume its
reponsibility fully and effectively.

31. May I also express the warm thanks of my
delegation to Mr, Natorf of Poland. His presidency
will always be remembered by my delegation, as well
as all the other Arab delegations, as a symbol of the
introduction last month of the Arabic language in the
Security Council as an official language and a working
language.
32. In this context I wish to express, on behalf of my
delegation and the Group of Arab States in the United
Nations, great thanks and gratitude to all the members
of the Council for the sincere co-operation
and
welcome response which have enabled the Arabicspeaking representatives to use their mother tongue in
the Council’s deliberations.

37. It is clear from the Secretary-General’s
report
contained in document S/15557 of 13 January 1983,
especiahy in paragraphs 8, 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14, that
Israel is by various means preventing the international
Force from discharging its responsibilities.
Moreover, it restricts the movements of elements and units
of UNIFIL.
The Israeli forces occupying parts of
Lebanon stormed the headquarters of the Senegalese
troops. They also fired on soldiers of the Senegalese
contingent and detained them. Moreover, Israel, in
collaboration
with some of the de fncto forces in
southern Lebanon, obstructed the work of the international Force and prevented it from discharging its
responsibilities
to protect the civilians in the area,
responsibilities
which the Council had entrusted it
with by its resolution 523 (1982).

33. On this occasion 1 also wish to express to all
colleagues who were here last year and left us this
year, best wishes and sincere regards. We appreciate
all the efforts they made in order to consolidate the
purposes and principles of the United Nations and
ensure the triumph of the principles of right, justice
and peace. Their principled commitment to the Charter and their whole-hearted and clear support of just
causes have deepened the prestige and credibility of
the Council and contributed to enhancing the dwindling confidence in the United Nations, That accomplishment has endowed them and their countries with
the quality of continued
presence and perpetuity
within the framework of the activity and work of the
Council and made their absence from the Council just
a mere formality.

38. The Secretary-General’s
report clearly states
which is the party mainly responsible for obstructing
the implementation
of resolutions 425 (1978) and 426
(1978), and which is the party that is seeking to prolong
the Lebanese ordeal and contribute to depriving it. of
its sovereignty and independence.

34. This continuous
presence of our former colleagues will be supported by the admission of new
representatives who will perform the task at the same
level of awareness and sense of responsibility towards
safeguarding the principle of collective security, the
settlement of disputes by peaceful means and respect
for international
instruments and norms, as well as
towards support for the principles of justice, right,
peace and stability and the promotion of trust in the
United Nations, thus reinforcing its effectiveness in
the work of curbing the dangers facing mankind in.all
fields, especially the threat of war and domination in

39. In the circumstances,
it is necessary for the
Council fully to meet its responsibilities and denounce
the Israeli practices and adopt all measures to implement the purposes and principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations in order to deter the
aggressor and preserve international peace and security.
4

L

40. In this framework the recommendation
contained
in paragraph 23 of the report of the Secretary-General
becomes a practical step, rather than a necessary step,
given the Council’s commitment to assume its responsibility with regard to the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Lebanon and the preservation of international peace and security.
4f. On the basis of the foregoing, I hope that the
Council will be able to adopt the draft resolution
before the Council in document S/15564 containing
Lebanon’s request at this stage.
42. In conclusion, I take this opportunity to reaffirm
my Government’s
unswerving support for Lebanon
based on its absolute commitment
to Lebanon’s
territorial integrity, independence and sovereignty, as
well as its ability to exercise full and complete
sovereignty over its whole territory.
43. Mr. SCHELTEMA
(Netherlands): Sir, since this
is the first time that I have spoken in the Council,
1 should like to begin by congratulating you on your
assumption of the presidency. We are confident that,
under your expert guidance and with your skill and
well-known diplomatic experience, the Council is in
the best of hands and we wish you good luck during
the period of your presidency.
44. Although last month my country was, of course,
not yet a member of the Council, I wish also to take
this opportunity
to congratulate and pay my compliments to my colleague from Poland on the way he
conducted the business of the Council during the
previous month.
45. Mr. President, I want in particular to thank you
for your warm words of welcome to my country as a
new member of the Council. It is a great honour for my
Government and, indeed, for my mission and delegation, to serve in the Security Council for the coming
two years. I can assure you and the other members of
the Council that we take our membership
very
seriously and that we shall endeavour to discharge our
duties as a member of the Council to the best of our
abilities. We shall heavily depend on the friendship
and co-operation of all our colleagues in the Council.
I am happy to be here as the representative of my
country among so many familiar faces and I thank you,
Sir, for your kind words.
46. Finally, I take this opportunity to reciprocate and
offer our best wishes for this year to you and to the
members of the Council.
47. I now turn to the Force. UNIFIL
has been and
still is a stabilizing element in southern Lebanon. The
withdrawal of UNIFIL
at the present time could have
grave destabilizing consequences for the area where it
is now operating and constitute a setback for the
Government of Lebanon in its efforts to restore peace
and reassert its authority throughout the country. In

our view, UNIFIL
should remain in the area so as to
be available to play a role in any future security
arrangements.
48. Although UNIFIL
has been able to play a very
useful role in the area, the Force, for well-known
reasons, has been prevented from the beginning from
fully deploying itself in its intended area of operaiion.
The latest report of the Secretary-General
again
confirms the difficult
circumstances under which
LJNIFIL
is now obliged to operate because of the
continued presence and activities of the Israel Defence
Forces and the de fucro forces within the area. In
paragraph 11 of his report the Secretary-General
recalls the serious incidents which took place following the take-over by the Norwegian battalion of the
area formerly controlled by the Nepalese battalion.
These incidents and other acts of harassment, as well
as the ongoing practice of limiting the freedom of
movement of UNIFIL
personnel, are clearly intolerable. They obviously undermine UNIFIL’s
ability to
carry out its mandate. We therefore urgently call on
the Government of Israel to respect UNIFlL’s
mandate and stop hindering the Force from performing its
duties.
49. As far as the Netherlands
participation
in
UNIFIL
is concerned, I should like to point also to
the increasing financial burden on my country. Members of the Council are aware of the shortfall of some
$152 millions in the UNIFIL
Special Account. In his
latest report, the Secretary-General
has pointed out
that this situation in placing an unfair and increasing
burden on the troop-contributing
countries. We very
much hope that Member States will heed his urgent
call to pay their assessed contributions.
SO. As regards the future of the Force, the Netherlands Government will view any continued participation in UNIFIL
in the light of new developments in
Lebanon, having in mind in particular the negotiations
between Lebanon and Israel and contacts with other
parties concerned on the withdrawal of foreign forces
from Lebanon. It may be that the outcome will lead to
a reaffirmation of the mandate contained in resolution
425 (1978). In that case, my Government will view its
future participation in the peace-keeping Force in the
light of the following three general objectives: first,
some noticeable progress should be made in the efforts
of the Government
of Lebanon to establish and
increase its authority in the country, since UNIFIL’s
role in assisting the Government of Lebanon in this
process of regaining strength and authority can only be
temporary; secondly, there should be improvement in
the prospect of withdrawal of foreign troops from
Lebanon, since it is clear that without this prospect the
first objective cannot be met; and, thirdly, a future role
for UNIFIL
in any future security arrangement in
southern Lebanon is feasible only if the Force will be
able to operate effectively in an area that forms one
uninterrupted
whole up to the Lebanese-Israeli border. This leaves no room for the presence of any

.

unauthorized foreign troops or de Jbcro forces in the
area. Only then will UNIFIL
be able to carry out its
original mandate effectively.

the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

51. The Netherlands very much welcomes the fact
that negotiations are now in progress on the withdrawal issue. A speedy outcome of these talks
ensuring the withdrawal of al1 foreign forces or armed
elements from Lebanon is of course highly desirable.

Ai the invitation of the President, Mr. Blurn (I.w~el)
and Mr. El-Fattal (Syrian Arab Republic)
took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Comcil
chanlber.

52, In connection with these negotiations, the Government of Lebanon has requested an extension of
the UNiFlL
area of operations to cover the whole
country for the purpose of confirming the withdrawal
of all non-Lebanese forces and armed elements from
Lebanon, restoring international
peace and security
and assisting the Government of Lebanon in ensuring
the return of its effective authority. The Netherlands
will take this request into careful consideration.

58. The PRESIDENT
(interpretalion
from French):
The next speaker is the representative
of Israel.
1 invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
59. Mr. BLUM (Israel): Mr. President, permit me at
the outset to congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for the current month.
We are delighted to see a diplomat of such outstanding
qualities and high calibre in the Council’s Chair and we
are fully confident that you, Sir, will discharge your
onerous duties and responsibilities
with your customary skill and aplomb.

53. However, as has been pointed out by the Secretary-General himself, it is evident that only when the
current negotiations are completed will it be possible
to define in detail the future role of UNIFIL
as
envisaged by the Government of Lebanon. The Netherlands cannot accept any new UNLFLL mandate in
which the peace-keeping operations of the Force are
not clearly defined. Moreover, my Government is of
the opinion that any new mandate for UNIFIL
should
be based on the objective of restoring the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Lebanon,

60. May 1 also take this opportunity
to congratulate
the new members of the Council who have joined it
at the beginning of this month, while at the same
time placing on record our appreciation
to the five
non-permanent members who concluded their terms
last month.
41. Israel’s position regarding the situation
in Lebanon in general, and in the southern part of that
country in particular, is well known and has been
stated on numerous occasions in the course of the
deliberations of the Council. That position remains
uric hanged.

54. According to the original terms of reference of
the mandate, as contained in Council resolution 425
(I978), the Force was established “for the purpose of
confirming the withdrawal of Israeli forces, restoring
international
peace and security and assisting the
Government of Lebanon in ensuring the return of its
effective authority in the area”. Although the circumstances have changed, these terms of reference
now seem to be more relevant today than ever.

62. I also wish to place on record my Government’s
position that the draft resolution about to be adopted
by the Council today does not change in any manner
UNIFIL’s
existing mandate, subject, of course. to the
observation made by the Secretary-General
in paragraph 17 of his report dated 14 October 1982 lSlf.5&‘51,
in which he rightly stated that recent events in
Lebanon had “radically altered the circumstances
in
which UNIFlL was established and under which it had
functioned since March 1978”.

55. For its part, the Netherlands will continue to do
its utmost to assist the Government
of Lebanon in
restoring peace and security in this war-torn country.
We believe that a Lebanon once again restored to
prosperity and living in peace with all its neighbours
will also advance the wider goal of peace and
international
security in the Middle East.

63. Over the past months the Government
of Israel
has repeatedly stated that, in the new circumstances
surrounding the situation of Lebanon,
UNIFIL,
as
established in 1978, has outlived its usefulness and its
presence is no longer called for in southern Lebanon.

56. The Netherlands
will therefore cast a positive
vote on the draft resolution now before the Council
and my country will continue its participation
in
UNIFIL.

64. My Government believes that the security arrangements deemed necessary by Israel and Lebanon can
and should be arrived at through negotiations
between
the Governments of the two countries. As members of
the Council are well aware, negotiations
are now in
Progress on a variety of topics. and they have been
referred to also by the Secretary-General
in paragraph 19 of his report of 13 January 1983, Those

57. The PRESIDENT
(interpretaCiot? fiow French):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have just received letters from the representatives of
Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion
of the item on the Council’s agenda. In accordance
with the usual practice 1 propose, with the consent of
6

negotiations are aimed, inter alia, at ensuring that
Lebanon’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity be
restored within that country’s internationally
recognized boundaries, while at the same time providing for
the necessary arrangements that would permanently
and reliably preclude the possibility of hostile action
against Israel and its citizens from Lebanese soil.

the strength of 7,000 authorized for it..1 propose to
study this problem carefully with the Commander of
UNJFIL in order to determine what measures should
be taken to maintain
the Force at an adequate
strength, I shall be reporting to the Council on this
matter in due course for whatever action we may
consider necessary.

65. In this connection may I draw the attention of the
Council to paragraph 20 of the Secretary-General’s
report, in which he states that “only when the current
negotiations are completed will it be possible to define
in detail the future role of UNIFIL”.

70. 1 shall, of course, remain in close touch with the
Government of Lebanon and all those concerned in
the Lebanese situation with a view to keeping the
Council informed of developments affecting UNIFIL.
71. Mr. LICHENSTEIN
(United States of America):
Mr. President, 1 shall not attempt to match the eloquence of your opening remarks at today’s meeting.
I shall simply extend to you the congratulations
and the warm welcome of my delegation and of the
Government of the United States as you assume the
presidency of the Council for this month. The warmth
of friendship and the respect that we feel for you, Sir,
both reflect and are reflected in the warmth of our
friendship and respect for the country, the Government and the people you represent so ably.

66. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
It is’my understanding that the Council is now ready to
vote on the draft resolution proposed by Jordan,
contained in document S/15564. If I hear no objection,
1 will put the draft resolution to the vote,
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In .fovo1lr: China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta,
Netherlands,
Nicaragua,
Pakistan, Togo, United
Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland,
United States of America, Zaire, Zimbabwe.

72. 1 wish to take this occasion also to pay a
deserved tribute to your predecessor, the representative of Poland, for the excellence and judiciousness
of his leadership in the month of December last.

Against: None.
Abstaining:
publics.

Poland,

Union of Soviet Socialist

Re-

73. In my country we often speak of the dear
departed. I hasten to say that we usually do so in
circumstances
somewhat more dramatic and somewhat more terminal than the present ones. Surely our
five dear departed colleagues have not departed all
that far. It was a pleasure and a personal and official
privilege for me, for Mrs. Kirkpatrick and for the
entire United States delegation to work with the five
colleagues who have now left this Council. We extend
the hand of collegiality to their five replacements. We
trust that all of them will tackle the arduous tasks of
the Council with seriousness and with dedication to
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.

The draft resolution WCIS adopted by 13 votes to
none, with 2 abstentions (resolution 529 (1983)).
67. The PRESIDENT
The Secretary-General
I call on him.

(interpretation from French):
wishes to make a statement.

68. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I have taken full
note of the resolution just adopted by the Council. In
implementing
this resolution, the Council may be
assured that I and my colleagues will do our utmost to
make UNIFIL’s
presence as effective as possible in
the present circumstances in carrying out the tasks
assigned to it by the Council, I realize that the present
situation is of an interim nature. For the time being,
therefore, UNIFIL
will continue to perform the
interim tasks endorsed by the Council after the June
events. In particular, it will assist the Government of
Lebanon in assuring the security of all the inhabitants
of its area without any discrimination.
In this connection UNIFIL
will endeavour to the extent possible to
prevent local armed and uniformed groups from
operating in its area unless they are authorized by the
central Government.
I hope that all the parties
concerned will co-operate fully with UNIFIL
in the
performance of these tasks.

74. The United States joined enthusiastically in the
action of the Council today in extending, at the request
of the Government
of Lebanon, the mandate of
UNIFIL
for another six months. The United States
strongly supports the objectives of the Government of
Lebanon to restore its sovereignty throughout its
territory and to secure the withdrawal of all external
forces from Lebanon. Renewal of UNIFIL’s mandate
tends, in our judgement,
to reaffirm international
support for these goals. The United States believes,
moreover, that renewal of UNIFIL’s
mandate can be a
positive element in the negotiations between the
Government
of Lebanon and other parties in the
Middle East. These negotiations, in which the United
States in playing an active part, are designed precisely
to restore Lebanon’s full sovereignty and territorial
integrity and to prevent any repetition of the recent
tragic conflict in a way that will ensure peace and
security for Lebanon and for all of its neighbours,

49. In this context I wish to point out to the Council
that, with the departure of the Nigerian contingent and
the detailing of 482 men of the French infantry
battalion to another task, the Force is well below
7

are certain that your well-known diplomatic
experience and skill will promote the effective implementation by the Council of its obligations. The delegation
of the Soviet Union notes with satisfaction the fruitful
co-operation we have enjoyed with you in the Council,
and we will continue to be prepared to join in the j
closest and most business-like
co-operation
in all ;
questions involving the activities of the Council and of :
other United Nations bodies.

75. It is not yet possible to define with precision the
nature of the role UNIFIL
may be called upon to play
in the arrangements under negotiation. However, by
acting to extend UNIFIL’s
mandate for six months,
the Council has wisely ensured that UNIFIL
will be
available to assist in the peace process.
76. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): Since this is
the first meeting of the Council in the new year,
I should like first of all to take this opportunity,
on
behalf of the Soviet delegation, to extend a hearty
welcome to the Council table to the representatives of
States that have been elected as new non-permanent
members of the Council, the representatives of Malta,
the Netherlands, Nicaragua, Pakistan’ and Zimbabwe.
In welcoming the new non-permanent members to the
Council, we are fully secure in our expectation that
their membership in the Council will bring much that is
of use and value to our work. 1 am happy to note that
the ranks of the members of the Council have been
swelled by four States members of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries. This is especially important in
the light of the growing contribution
made by the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries to improving the
international
situation and to eliminating
and preventing crisis situations. The practical steps taken by
the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries along those
lines deserve acknowledgement
and support by all
States. It is clear, moreover, that the membership in’
the Council of eight States representing the Movement
of Non-Aligned
Countries lays upon them a special
responsibility and makes it possible for them to play an
important role in the Council’s activities in realizing
the goals and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.

80. Still availing myself of this opportunity,
I should
like to reaffirm the Soviet Union’s firm support for the
efforts of the United Nations in the main area of its
activity, namely, the maintenance and strengthening
of peace and international security, the prevention of
nuclear war, halting the arms race, continuing and
deepening detente and developing comprehensive cooperation between States in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter.
81. Today the Council has before it once again the
question of extending the mandate of UNIFIL.
This is
of course linked to the fact that the problem of
Lebanon, which arose as a result of massive Israeli
aggression against that country, remains unsettled,
and a significant part of Lebanese territory is still
under Israeli occupation.
82. It is well known that the Force was established
after the Israeli invasion of the southern region of that
country in March 1978. It was precisely for purposes
of eliminating the consequences of that aggression by
Israel that the Council felt it was possible to meet
Lebanon’s request and send UNIFIL
forces there.
The mandate of those forces, defined in resolution 425
(1978), provides that their functions include “confirming the withdrawal of Israeli forces, restoring
international
peace and security and assisting the
Government of Lebanon in ensuring the return of its
effective authority in the area”-that
is, the region
under Israeli occupation,

77. The Soviet delegation would also like to pay a
tribute to those countries whose membership in the
Council came to an end this past December. We feel
that it is fitting to note, in this connection, the fact that
Ireland, Japan, Panama, Spain and Uganda, as nonpermanent members of the Council, did a great deal to
achieve mutual understanding and to find constructive
ways for solving the multifaceted and acute problems
with which the Council had to deal during the past two
years. We would wish the delegations
of those
countries, and particularly the heads of those delegations, success in their further work in the United
Nations and at other diplomatic postings in the future.

83. No less known is the fact that, as a result of the
flagrant scorn shown by Israel for the provisions Of
that and other relevant Council resolutions,
those
resolutions have not been implemented.
84. Last June, under conditions where the consequences of the Israeli invasion of 1978 had not yet
been eliminated, Tel Aviv carried out a new massive
aggression against Lebanon, occupying more than
40 per cent of its territory,

78. We would like to express our gratitude to the
representative
of the fraternal Polish People’s Republic, Comrade Wlodzimierz
Natorf, for his skilful
guidance of the Council’s work during the month of
December last year. In that lofty post, Mr. Natorf
showed extraordinary
diplomatic
qualities that significantly contributed to ensuring the successful solution of a number of important questions that came
before the Council at the end of last year.

85. Everyone still has fresh in mind the crimes of the
Israeli occupiers on Lebanese soil, the vicious acts
committed by them against a defenceless Lebanese
and Palestinian civilian population,
the unheard-of
cynicism with which the Israeli forces treated some
UNIFIL
forces and some United
Nations
truce
observers. It is a secret to no one that all that became possible thanks only to the comprehensive
support and assistance given to Israel by its ‘“strate-

79. Allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
assuming your lofty post for the month of January. We
8

:
;
:

j

gic partner” and protector, the United States, which
has generously provided the aggressor, Israel, with
weapons and political and diplomatic protection.

90. On the basis of all that 1 have said, the Soviet
delegation felt that it was possible not to object to the
extension of UNIFIL’s
mandate for the next period,
since the goals and tasks of the Force continue to be
defined by the mandate which was established for
UNIFIL
in the Council’s relevant resolution, namely
resolution 425 (1978), and subsequent decisions of the
Council on this question.

86, With the direct support and co-participation of its
overseas “strategic ally” and protector, Israel has
used crude pressure and military blackmail in an
attempt now to impose on Lebanon conditions of a
separate peace that would in fact reinforce the results
of the criminal attack by Tel Aviv on that Arab State.
In other words, what we are taking about is an
undisguised-one
might say, classic-attempt
by the
aggressor to enjoy the fruits of its aggression and to
legalize the use of military force for purposes of
achieving far-reaching expansionist goals. Once again
we see evidence of that in today’s statement by the
representative of Israel.

91. In connection with some statements which have
been made in the Council, especially those of the
United States and Israel, we should like particularly to
emphasize that it would be inadmissible
for the
Council to depart from its previous decisions on the
necessity of the unconditional
withdrawaf of Israeli
forces from Lebanon. One cannot equate the forces of
the Israeli aggressors in Lebanon with the presence
there of Arab forces, which are in that country under
an agreement with the Government of Lebanon and in
keeping with decisions taken at pan-Arab meetings. It
would be completely illegal to give United Nations
forces unaccustomed functions which might lead to
interference by armed forces of the United Nations in
the internal affairs of Lebanon in contravention of the
Charter of the United Nations.

87. The Council, from the very outset of the New
Israeli aggression in Lebanon, has taken a clear and
precise position on this matter. In its fundamental
resolutions 508 (1982) and 509 (1982), as well as in
subsequent decisions, the Council unambiguously
demanded an end to all military actions in Lebanon
and the immediate and unconditional
withdrawal of
Israeti forces from Lebanese territory. References to
those resolutions are contained in all decisions of the
Council adopted since last June on the question of
extending UNIFIL’s
mandate. And that is not at all an
accident, since the implementation
of those resolutions is the key to a solution of the problems in
Lebanon. Any attempt to lessen, or in general to
nullify, the significance of resolutions 508 (1982) and
509 (1982) would essentially amount to a revision and
an undermining of the entire basis for settling the
Lebanese question as contained in the decisions of the
Council.

92.

Mr.

FONSECA
(Nicaragua) (interSir, 1 congratulate you on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
the month of January. Under your able leadership, we
shall no doubt attain the goals which our lofty mission
calls for. I also wish to thank you for the kind words
you addressed in your introductory statement to the
people of Nicaragua.

pretation

TLNOCO

from

Spanish):

93. I wish to congratulate also the representative of
Poland on the excellent work he did last month as
President.

88. It would be appropriate in this connection to
mention another no less substantive side of this issue.
As has been justly pointed out in the report of the
Secretary-General on the work of the Organization in
1982:

94, At this time I wish to convey a friendly greeting
to our dear friend, the Secretary-General,
with whose
performance we have always stood in solidarity and
whose many concerns we share about the international
situation in which we live and about the need to
strengthen the role of the United Nations and of the
Security Council in order to attain international peace
and security.

6, . I . resolutions, particularly
those unanimously
adopted by the Security Council, should serve as a
springboard for governmental support and determination and should motivate their policies outside the
United Nations. . , the best resolution in the world
will have little practical effect unless Governments
of Member States follow it up with the appropriate
support and action.“”

95. I also wish to congratulate those countries which
have left the Council and, at the same time, extend our
congratulations
to those countries which, together
with Nicaragua, have been elected to take their place:
Malta, the Netherlands, Pakistan and Zimbabwe.

89. Clearly, there is no need to talk about the fact
that it is the direct duty of the Council to strive for the
unswerving implementation
of the decisions it has
taken, especially when we talk about unanimously
adopted resolutions, as is the case with resolutions 508
(1982) and 509 (1982). That is precisely how the Soviet
delegation views the question of the presence of the
Force in Lebanon.

96. A special greeting is also extended to those nonpermanent members that are entering the second year
of their membership in the Council, as well as to the
permanent members of the Council. We have already
had occasion to co-operate with many of them at other
levels and on various occasions in the search for
solutions and initiatives with which to meet various
problems-a
co-operation
which we now hope to
9

country’s traditional policy of solidarity with the just
cause of the Arab people. We witnessed with horror
and outrage the act of aggression committed against
Lebanon last year by Israeli forces, an act which led
our country to take diplomatic measures.

deepen. We express our readiness to act in like
manner with those countries which share our responsibilities and with which we will be working for the
first time.
97. To ail of them 1 wish to express our appreciation
for their support and trust with regard to our candidacy and for their congratulations
on our having
been elected members of the Council. We truly realize
the magnitude of this responsibility
and we shall
endeavour to fulfil our share of it.

102. We have also read the Secretary-General’s
report on UNIFIL and held consultations with various
members of the Force.
103. It is the hope of our delegation
that the
resolution the Council has just adopted will be a
positive element in consolidating the role of the United
Nations with regard to the Middle East question and
that this will lead to the alleviation or halting of the
suffering of the peoples of Palestine and Lebanon.

98. Nicaragua occupies a seat in the Council for the
second time. While the historicat circumstances and
the philosophy which inspires free Nicaragua are
today very different from those at the beginning of the
1970’s, when our country was resisting the odious
Somoza dictatorship, as a free and sovereign country
we now come to this supreme organ in our two-fold
condition as a Latin American
country and as a
member of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.
We wish to remain faithful to what both groups
represent: to be spokesmen and to represent the views
and interests of the Movement to which we belong in
every situation or dispute which may come before the
Council and, at the same time, to defend the interests
of Latin America and the Caribbean,
where the
principles of non-alignment
have a natural raison
d’&re and where serious problems are shared by the
vast majority of the members of the Movement.

104. Mr. SHAH NAWAZ (Pakistan): Mr. President,
I feel greatly privileged to be participating in the first
formal meeting of the Council this year after Pakistan’s election as a member of the Council.
105. First of all I should like to convey to you, Sir,
our sincere congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency for the month of January. With your
country’s participation in last year’s work, the Council
greatly benefited from your wide experience and
knowledge of political affairs. We feel confident
therefore that you will guide the work of the Council
this month with great distinction and success.

99. This has been clearly shown by the fact that
Managua, the capital of Nicaragua, was chosen as the
seat of the Special Ministerial
Meeting of the Coordinating l3ureau of the Non-Aligned
Countries devoted to the consideration
of the situation in Latin
America and the Caribbean, which was held recently,

106. At the same time I should like to pay a tribute to
your predecessor, Mr. Natorf of Poland. for the
excellent manner in which he conducted the work of
the Council last month.
107. I am deeply touched by the welcome which you
have extended to Pakistan on the assumption of its
membership in the Council and wish to thank you for
the kind words with which you have greeted us. 1 also
wish to convey our sincere thanks to the other
representatives who have expressed similar sentiments in welcoming us to the Council.

100. I must also refer to the means available to us in
order to realize these purposes~ and wishes. 1 am
referring to the very problem of the role aqd effectiveness of the United Nations and the Security Council, It
is the political role of the States Members of the
Organization which imbues its organs with life. in this
regard we share the concerns expressed in the latest
report of the Secretary-General
on the work of the
Organization,
in which the Secretary-General
notes
the dangers found in the repeated non-compliance
or
lack of support for resolutions and decisions of United
Nations bodies on the part of some of its Member
States and, in like manner, the trend to escape the
competence of the Council on matters of vast importance IJ~S-ri-vis the objectives of the Charter of the
United Nations. We believe that the ideas expressed
therein are based on a realistic assessment of the
international situationand
contain a noble concern for
returning to this body the role for which it was created
at the San Francisco Conference, that is, the attainment of peace and stability for mankind,

108. Pakistan is not new to the Council,
having
served on it on three previous occasions. 1 assure you,
Sir, that as in the past our participation in the Council
will demonstrate our dedication to the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. Not only in the United
Nations but also in other international forums, such as
the Organization of the Islamic Conference and the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, to which Pakistan belongs, we have consistently pursued the cause of
freedom, peace and progress. We have judged each
issue independently on the basis of the universally
accepted principles enshrined in the Charter and have
firmly opposed the contravention of those principles
wherever it has occurred. We are happy to have the
opportunity to serve on the Security Council once
again and are thankful to the States Members of the
United Nations that expressed their confidence and
trust in Pakistan by electing it to the Council. We

101. With regard to the particular problem which we
are considering at this meeting, 1 wish to reiterate my
10

,

greatly look forward to working in close co-operation
and harmony with our colleagues on the Council in the
advancement of our common objectives and endeavours for the maintenance of international
peace and
security. We shall also exert ourselves fully towards
strengthening the hands df the Secretary-General
in
enhancing the effectiveness of the United Nations,

relations through the United Nations
through the Security Council.

and principally

113. In ancient times Malta was the peak of a landbridge joining Europe to Africa. Today it is our openly
declared foreign policy to serve as a bridge between
the civilizations
that forged our present national
consciousness-the
ancient civilizations of the Middle
East, Europe and Africa. We are at the geographic
centre of these great continents and out outlook is
further mellowed by the gentle waves and the balmy
winds of the Mediterranean
Sea.

109. Turning to the subject of our meeting today, we
are gratified at the adoption of resolution 529 (1983)
extending the mandate of UNIFIL.
We wish to
express our gratitude to the countries that have
contributed contingents to form UNIFIL.
a force
which, in addition to the original mandate. is discharging a vital responsibility in emergency relief and
construction in Lebanon with the consent of the
Lebanese Government. This role has assumed even
greater significance following the ravages of lsraeli
aggression against that country. The presence of
UNIFIL
is undoubtedly a critical factor in the realization of our hope for the restoration of conditions of
peace and tranquillity
in Lebanon. The Force is
carrying out its mandate in an admirable manner under
extremely difficult circumstances; for this it deserves
our deep appreciation and full support.

114. It therefore augurs well for Malta that you, Sir,
a son of Africa, should happen to preside over the
Council in the first month of our membership. It is also
a happy coincidence that your immediate predecessor
was a son of Europe, the representative of Poland,
whose history has been at the centre of European
affairs for so much of its time.
11.5. I feel especially encouraged that our very first
day in the deliberations of the Council coincides with
your presidency, Sir, and I congratulate you on your
assumption
of office. A relatively small country,
peaceful, friendly and non-aligned, Togo has done
much to promote good-neighbourliness
in its own
region. This noble dedication finds due expression in
your national anthem in the stirring opening words:
“La pciix, la paix, In pah, 6 togdais”.

110. Mr. GAUCI (Malta): As you may imagine. Mr.
President, today is a memorable one for my country,
for me personally and for all Maltese people throughout the world. For the first time we assume an elected
seat on the Council, nearly 20 years after our admission to the United Nations and almost 40 years after
the birth of the Organization. My only regret is that for
us to join, others had to join the ranks of-in the
English phrase used by our United States colleaguethe dear departed. We compliment them on their work
and wish them continued success. We in Malta look on
this occasion with awe tinged with realistic expectations of and respect for the Council.

11.6. Your gracious words of welcome and greetings,
which we warmly reciprocate, and your generously
friendly disposition,
are a source of great encouragement to me which I shall carry in my mind tind in
my heart in the course of the strenuous 24 months
ahead. It is a tangible tribute to your efforts that
today’s resolution was adopted by consensus, and it is
an inspiration for us to work for consensus in the
future.

I I I. WC know that the search for true peace is the
greatest challenge of our time. Malta is a small
country, but we are firmly committed to rendering our
fair contribution.
We are the first to recognize our
modest means, but we are prepared to go beyond the
normal call of duty in discharging the responsibility
which we have sought and which has been granted us.
We shall consider all matters before us with the sole
and objective concern of solving problems peacefully
and justly, We shall be principled in stating without
fear or favour, honestly and in full, the truth as we see
it and what we feel should be done for progress.

117. As I look around this table, I realize with a keen
degree of pleasurable anticipation that in the heavy
burden that lies ahead I shall benefit from the advice
and the generous disposition of friends and colleagues
whom I have had the privilege of knowing for several
years and whose experience, wisdom and dedication
I have already had many occasions to encounter, to
admire and to cherish.
118. Mr. President, Mr. Secretary-General, distinguished colleagues, in deepest appreciation of the
kind sentiments expressed about my country today,
1 would assure you that I will be your dedicated and
indefatigable
collaborator
as collectively we try to
improve the prospects for universal peace and security
in the months ahead and as we grapple with the known
and unknown challenges before us.

112. We recognize that national independence remains the most powerful force of our times and that it
cannot be infringed without serious consequences. But
we believe equally firmly that international organization is necessary and requires constant strengthening.
We sense more and more the revulsion of people
throughout the world with respect to the misery of
war: we seek to respond to the universal yearning for
the methods of .justice and peace in international

119. On the particular question before us today,
I wish to express appreciation for the analytical report
of the Secretary-General
and for the cloqucnt stateII

wishes fully to associate itself with the many others
who have already congratulated you on your assumption of the presidency for the month of January. Your
wide diplomatic experience, skill and wisdom, which
are well known, give us a great deal of confidence that
under your direction this meeting of the Council will
come to a fruitful conclusion.

ment by the representative of Lebanon. We found
them extremely helpful for our consideration.
120. My Government and people are at one with the
people of Lebanon and its Government.
We fully
sympathize with their preoccupations.
121. The words of the President of Lebanon, describing his country, in his statement before the Council
of 18 October last still ring in our ears: “Lebanon,
never committing aggression but, alas, all too often the
victim of aggression”* [240&h meeting, para. 171. The
Council will wish to respond to that appeal in a timely
and appropriate manner.

127. Secondly, we wish to pay a tribute to your ;
predecessor as President, Mr. Natorf, representative
of the Polish People’s Republic, for the highly commendable manner in which he directed the deliberations of the Council.

122. But it is first and foremost from Israel that a
constructive
and imaginative
response should be
forthcoming. Israel has unfortunately created havoc in
Lebanon. The action it took in the past was completely
illegal. The continuation of the presence of its troops
in Lebanon is in itself an act of aggression and
coercion which the Council cannot condone.

128. Our last tribute goes to our own predecessors,
the outgoing non-permanent members of the Council,
for their respective contributions to the noble efforts
of the Council in ensuring peace and security for
mankind. As we assume our own new and challenging
responsibilities
as members of the Council, we feel
very inspired by the exemplary manner in which they
discharged their responsibilities in the Council.

123. An imaginative and positive response by Israel
on the question of the withdrawal of its troops from
Lebanon, although only a small step, will pay rich
dividends, just as its present and past policies have on
so many occasions severely set back the prospects of
peace. My own country is working and will continue to
work for that peace, through a just resolution of the
plight of the Palestinian people. That is the heart of the
matter. That is where consistent and concentrated
action is necessary.

129. Mr. President, I wish to acknowledge with ’
gratitude your very warm words of welcome to our
delegation this afternoon and those of the other
members of the Council. We should like to assure you
and all those who elected us to the Council of our
determination
to do our utmost to justify this cop
fidence in us.
130. This meeting of the Council has been occasioned by the need to consider, as a matter of extreme
urgency, the question regarding the renewal or extek
sion of the mandate of UNIFIL,
which is due to expire
on 19 January. A request to this effect was addressed
to you, Mr. President, on 13 January by the Lebanese
Government through the representative of Lebanon
[S/15557, annex 4. The case for the renewal of the
mandate of UNIFIL
has also been clearly stated by
the Secretary-General
in his report of 13 January
[S/25557]. Those two documents, for which we are
extremely grateful, furnish very useful details about
the situation in the UNIFIL
area as well as information concerning the activities of the Force during the
period covered by the Secretary-General’s
report.

124. I therefore express the hope that the current
negotiations will reap rapid and positive results and
that Israel will commence its long overdue withdrawal
of troops, so that the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Lebanon will now be restored and will be
respected in the future, as it should have been in the
past.
125. I will end my first statement here by quoting a
few verses from Malta’s national poet, .Dun Karm.
I believe his words admirably reflect., simply but
serenely, the purpose and the duty of tihe Council
-so much so that if ever the Council were to have its
own anthem these same words could adequately
_ apply:

131. It is very clear from the statement of the
representative of Lebanon, the Secretary-General’s
report and other reliable sources, as well as from
newspaper accounts, that the situation in Lebanon in
general, and in southern Lebanon in particular, is still
very far from safe. The violation of that unhappy
country’s territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence and the grave threat to regional and international peace and security, both of which prompted
the adoption by the Council of its resolutions 425
(1978) and 426 (1978), still continue unabated. The
invasion of Lebanon by Israel in 1978 has since become a permanent phenomenon, as southern Lebanon
still remains under Israeli occupation. In the areas
under Israeli occupation the repression and, often, the

“I love peace, whose smile fills heaven and earth
with joy:
I do not love war because sadness, fear and death
are its aftermath.
I love unity which knows no anger, I love justice and
truth, I love the strength that works for all. But
I do not love war.“**
I26. Mr. MASHINGAIDZE
(Zimbabwe): Mr. President, the delegation of the Republic of Zimbabwe
*Quoted in French by the speaker.
** Quoted in Maltese by the speaker.

12

killing of Lebanese
continue.

and Palestinian

civilians

also

East improve the Soviet Union is worried. Judging
from the tone and tenor of the Soviet statement,
I believe I am entitled to conclude that prospects for
peace in our region have improved, and I find that
conclusion most gratifying.

132. It is also clear that, for all its earnest efforts and
endeavours to assume full control of the security
situation in its country through its own army, the
Government
of Lebanon has not yet realized its
objectives. In this regard it is being frustrated by
Israel’s refusal to pull out its occupying forces.

138. To sum up, the Soviet statement was nothing
but an act of provocation.
I wish to assure the
representative of the Soviet Union and members of the
Council that we shall not faI1 into this trap of
provocation and we shall not be provoked.

133. What is even more disturbing, as the SecretaryGeneral’s report makes clear, is the fact that Israel has
no intention to respect the resolutions and decisions of
the Council. Its defence forces not only continue to
occupy Lebanon in defiance of the Council. they are
also harassing and obstructing UNIFIL
units which
are carrying out the mandate of the Council. The
presence and activities of the Israeli created, trained
and equipped armed groups euphemistically
called
village militias are also a source of danger in that area.

139, The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrorn
French):
The representative of the Soviet Union has asked to
speak in exercise of his right of reply, and I now call
upon him.
140. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation
from Russian): The argument of the representative of Israel as to who supports
and who does not support which resolutions of the
Council has led me to a very interesting thought.

134. For all these reasons, we feel that Lebanon’s
request for the extension of UNIFIL’s
mandate and
the Secretary-General’s
recommendations
along the
same lines merit this Council’s positive response.
Accordingly, we support the extension of the mandate
for six months.

141. As is known, the representatives of Israel and
also the representatives of the United States like to
refer to resolution 242 (1967) of the Council, thereby
implying that they support that resolution. In this
connection, I have three specific questions to put to
the representative of Israel.

135. Finally, we should like to pay a richly deserved
tribute to all the men and women serving in UNIFIL
for their dedication to peace and for the commendable
manner in which they have carried out their dangerous
tasks. We salute them and wish them well in their
mission of peace.

142. First of all, it is known that Israel illegally
occupied East Jerusalem. Is that in keeping with
resolution 242 (1967) or is it a crude violation of that
resolution? Secondly, it is known that Israel illegally
occupied the Syrian Golan Heights. Is that in keeping
with resolution 242 (1967) or is that a flagrant violation
of that resolution? Thirdly, it is known that Israel is
carrying out a creeping annexation of the West Bank
of the Jordan and the Gaza Strip. Is that in keeping
with resolution 242 (1967) or is that a violation of that
resolution?

136. The PRESIDENT
(irzterpretationfrom
French):
The representative of Israel has asked to speak in
exercise of his right of reply. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
137. Mr. BLUM (Israel): We have listened with great
interest to the statement of the representative of the
Soviet Union. We found his statement most revealing
on several counts. First of all, we were gratified to
hear in his statement a reference to Council resolution
425 (1978), bearing in mind the fact that his country
did not support that resolution, nor did it support
any subsequent resolution extending the mandate of
UNIFIL.
What is more, the Soviet Union has not
contributed one single penny to UNIFIL’s
operation.
Secondly, there was a reference in the Soviet statement to what the Soviet representative called “military blackmail”.
We have taken due note of that
phrase, coming as it did from the lips of an expert. For,
after all, the representative
of the Soviet Union
represents here the valiant peace-keepers of Prague,
Budapest, Warsaw and Kabul. Thirdly, the Soviet
statement was also most revealing because it demonstrated once again to the Council the Soviet Union’s
real role in the Middle East. We in the Middle East
have been aware of that role all along, and we know
that whenever the prospects for peace in the Middle

143. Those are my three specific questions on a
specific resolution which the representatives of lsrael
and the United States refer to. I would be grateful to
the representative
of Israel if he were prepared to
answer those questions. If he is not prepared to do
that, I would welcome a relevant clarification from his
blood brother, the representative of the United States
Unfortunately,
I cannot refer to a blood sister o 4
Mr. Blum, who is not present in this room today.
144. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom
French):
The representative
of Israel has asked to speak in
exercise of his right of reply, and I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
145. Mr. BLUM (Israel): The diversionary tactics of
the Soviet representative are well known to all of us.
As I assured him and members of the Council, we shall
not,fall into the trap of provocation which he has set
here.
I3

146. The questions that he has raised are not on the
agenda of the Council here tonight. I want to assure
him that I am fully prepared to answer each and every
one of those questions at the appropriate time. By the
same token, the questions relating to resolution 425
(1978) and UNIFIL
are on our agenda, and the Soviet
representative
has studiously avoided any reference to
those questions. Me has not responded to my queries
with regard to his position on resolution 425 (1978),
past and present, as welI as to the questions of military
bl?ckmail-and
that was his language.

to reply to all three of my questions when that item
was on the Council’s agenda. I should like to draw his
attention to the fact that the agenda for today’s
meeting is entitled “The situation in the Middle East”;
therefore, he could ask to be allowed to speak aeain
and answer the substantive question.
150. The PRESIDENT
(interg~etation~f~om ~~r?ch):
The Council has concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting

rose at 7.20 p.m.

147. So I would leave it at that, assuring the Soviet
representative
that the questions that he has raised will
be atvwered
at the proper time and place.
148. The PRESIDENT
(in~pretafionfrom
French):
The representative
of the Soviet Union has asked to be
allowed to speak again in exercise of the’right of reply,
and 1 call on him.
149. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics)
(interpretation
from Russian):
The representative
of Israel said that he would be prepared

NOTES

’ Convention on trade and aid between the European Community
and the African, Caribbean and Pacific countries, signed at LomO on
28 February 1975. For the text, see A/AC.176/7.
’ Signed on 31 October 1979. For the text, see T/W C’orrrirr. ACPEEC, No. 58, November 1979.
’ C@kia/
Records
Session. Supplement

o.f the
No.

I

General

Assembly.

(A/37/1 1, p. 3.

T/rir./!‘-.vc’,‘p/llIr
