S/PV.9002

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9002nd meeting

Wednesday, 23 March 2022, 5 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Nusseibeh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Gallagher
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Letter dated 13 April 2014 from the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2014/264)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-29734 (E)
*2229734*

Ukraine

S/PV.9002

Mexican draft text, that is not politicized in any way.
It is analogous to other humanitarian draft resolutions
adopted by the Security Council. United Nations
humanitarian representatives working on the ground
would be very interested in such a document, because
any General Assembly humanitarian resolution would
make little difference for them.

The meeting was called to order at 5.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 13 April 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2014/264)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Belarus, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2022/231, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Belarus, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, the Russian Federation and
the Syrian Arab Republic.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it.
I now give the floor to those members of the Council
who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to begin by noting that we were
encouraged by the initiative proposed by our Mexican
and French colleagues, who put forward a draft
resolution on the humanitarian situation in Ukraine
in early March. However, that draft was immediately
torpedoed by our United States and British colleagues,
who asserted that it was unnecessary unless it
condemned Russia. Other members of the Western
camp were forced to follow suit.
As a result, instead of addressing humanitarian
issues, we engaged in politics and mutual accusations.
Instead of discussing and drafting a text, the
representatives of Western countries stated, without
proof, that the Security Council cannot endorse a draft
humanitarian resolution on Ukraine submitted by the
Russian Federation.
We categorically reject the assertion that the
Council cannot adopt a resolution on the Ukrainian
humanitarian dossier. Today, we are submitting
for a vote a draft resolution, based on the French2/10

23/03/2022

The choice is now up to my colleagues on the
Security Council. Should we continue to build
cynical speculations around the issue of humanitarian
assistance to Ukraine or adopt a draft resolution in the
Security Council that will be an important practical
step and an important framework for the efforts of
humanitarian workers?
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Once again, Russia is attempting to use
the Council to provide cover for its brutal actions. It
really is unconscionable that Russia would have the
audacity to put forward a draft resolution asking the
international community to solve a humanitarian crisis
that Russia alone created.
The United States intends to abstain in the voting
on the text because, to state the obvious, Russia does not
care about the deteriorating humanitarian conditions or
the millions of lives and dreams the war has shattered.
If it cared, it would stop the fighting. Russia is the
aggressor, the attacker, the invader — the sole party
in Ukraine, engaged in a campaign of brutality against
the people of Ukraine — and it wants us to adopt a
resolution that does not acknowledge its culpability.
We have all seen the pervasive videos of millions of
Ukrainian women and children fleeing for their lives.
We have seen the images of bloody pregnant women
being carried out of the rubble, including a mother
and her baby, who died tragically two weeks ago. We
have seen the shelling of kindergartens, orphanages
and humanitarian quarters; attacks hitting apartment
buildings, gas and water pipelines and a nuclear power
plant, and shootings of people waiting in breadlines.
We have seen cities under siege, corpses in the streets
and journalists killed in the crossfire. We have seen
shelling by Putin’s forces kill a 96-year-old Holocaust
survivor in Kharkiv. If we are to believe Russia’s
disinformation, those are all movie sets with actors. We
remain deeply concerned, as we warned for the third
time here yesterday (see S/PV.8999), that Russia may
be planning to use chemical or biological agents.
22-29734

23/03/2022

Ukraine

Russia alone is to blame for the war in Ukraine.
Mark my words — Russia will continue to be held
accountable for what it is doing to the people in
Ukraine. Russia is trying to make the Council complicit
in its flimsy fabrications by putting forward a draft
resolution that makes no mention of its role as the sole
cause of this crisis. Our vote will show that we will play
no part in that.
Russia continues to block the Council from
carrying out its mandate. The United States stands with
the people of Ukraine. The overwhelming majority of
the States Members of the United Nations stand with
Ukraine. Our chorus of voices is why Russia’s cynical
effort to use this institution to spread disinformation
and propaganda will not work. As the vote today will
show, Russia’s disingenuous efforts to deny the truth of
its actions will continue to fail.
I would like to thank you, Madam President, for
offering a moment of silence for the amazing Madeleine
Albright. I will end with a quote from Ms. Albright.
Secretary Albright once warned, “Take it from someone
who fled the Iron Curtain. I know what happens when
you give the Russians a green light”. That is what we
will do today if we adopt draft resolution S/2022/231.
The President: I shall put the draft resolution to
the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
China, Russian Federation
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Albania, Brazil, France, Gabon, Ghana, India,
Ireland, Kenya, Mexico, Norway, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
The President: The draft resolution received
2 votes in favour, none against and 13 abstentions. The
draft resolution has not been adopted, having failed to
obtain the required number of votes.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): France
did not vote in favour of draft resolution S/2022/231,
submitted by the Russian Federation, as the text

S/PV.9002

is a tactic by Moscow to legitimate its aggression
against Ukraine.
Russia claims to be concerned about the
humanitarian situation in Ukraine, but each day it
tramples underfoot the Geneva Conventions and
international humanitarian law. Not satisfied with
dragging its people — and the Russian economy — into
a war they did not want, Russia seeks to impose an
alternative reality and instrumentalize the Council.
Let us be clear. If Russia is so concerned about the
civilian population, all it has to do is stop its offensive
and withdraw its troops from Ukraine. Instead, Russia
hopes to obtain carte blanche from the Security Council
permission to pursue its war. That manoeuvre is fooling
no one. The result of the vote indicates very clearly that
the members of the Security Council will not tolerate
Russia’s attempt to instrumentalize the United Nations
and international humanitarian law.
France and Mexico negotiated, in good faith,
a draft resolution in the Security Council with the
objective of obtaining an immediate cessation of
hostilities and to provide a concrete response to the
humanitarian catastrophe unfolding in Ukraine. Given
the reality of Russian obstruction, together we decided
to take that initiative to the General Assembly, where
a transregional group has developed a draft resolution.
The General Assembly must play its role and call
for an immediate cessation of hostilities, which is
vital in order to protect the civilian population. It must
call for an end to the war and demand full respect for
international humanitarian law.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
Since Russia invaded Ukraine 27 days ago, 3.5 million
refugees have fled the country and another 6.5 million
people have fled their homes within Ukraine. Twelve
million Ukrainian people now need humanitarian aid.
In Mariupol, Russia first bombed the maternity
hospital. Then Russia bombed a theatre where children
were sheltering from attack. Over 100,000 people in
Mariupol are now under medieval siege. There is no
drinking water or food for those trapped in the city.
The United Kingdom is in no doubt that there is
a humanitarian crisis in Ukraine. As the SecretaryGeneral said yesterday, the Ukrainian people are
enduring a living hell. The United Kingdom’s offer of
emergency and humanitarian aid to support Ukraine

22-297343/10

S/PV.9002

Ukraine

now totals around £400 million to help deal with the
immediate need.
The United Kingdom is in no doubt that Russia’s
invasion is triggering a wider humanitarian crisis.
Worldwide, food, energy and fertilizer prices are
skyrocketing, threatening — as the Secretary-General
said — to spiral into a global hunger crisis.
As Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn reminded us, it is
high time to remember that our first allegiance is to
the human race. The United Kingdom will not vote
in favour of any draft resolution, whether here or in
the General Assembly, that does not recognize that
Russia is the sole cause of the unfolding humanitarian
catastrophe and is therefore key to ending it.
Russia’s draft resolution (S/2022/231) calls for all
parties to respect international humanitarian law. It
ignores the fact that Russia is committing war crimes.
Russia’s draft calls for the protection of civilians,
including women and children, but it omits the fact
that Russia is bombing maternity hospitals, schools
and homes. If Russia cared about the humanitarian
situation, it would stop bombing children and end its
siege tactics — but it has not.
The General Assembly will soon vote on a draft
resolution that makes clear that the only way to end the
humanitarian crisis is for Russia to end its war. That
draft resolution has been submitted not by the aggressor,
as has the one we have here, but by the victim. It is high
time indeed to remember that our first allegiance is to
the human race.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Tomorrow will mark one
month since the start of Russia’s war against Ukraine.
Since the very first day, that war has been senseless,
unjustified, unprovoked and illegal. It must stop.
Every second it lasts is one too many, but instead it is
becoming deadlier every day. Mariupol, mercilessly
pummelled block by block, has become the true face
that Russia is presenting to the world — a world that is
rejecting it, isolating it and holding it responsible.
We know the cause of the devastating military
situation in Ukraine. We know who is responsible.
Therefore, we did not believe that Russia needed to
propose a draft resolution to the Security Council
to call for a ceasefire in an aggression that it itself
initiated for no reason and to oblige itself not to bomb
civilians, homes, schools and hospitals, as it is doing
every hour, not to kill mothers and their babies and
4/10

23/03/2022

not to force children, girls and women to dramatically
leave their homes. We did not fall for such a trap. We
did not accept such a mockery. The result of the voting
just showed that.
If Russia is worried about protecting civilians
in Ukraine — as international humanitarian law
firmly obliges it to — it has to abide by the Geneva
Conventions. If Russia is the slightest bit concerned by
the responsibility to protect, it has to come to its senses,
stop its aggression, withdraw its troops, pack up and
go home. Instead, the longer it stalls there, the more
aggressive it becomes and the deadlier the outcome.
Russia is the sole and unique cause of the terrible
humanitarian situation it has created out of its own
obsession. It cannot share that responsibility with the
victim, Ukraine, or with anyone else. Therefore, because
the text, despite its misleading title, is a mountain of
hypocrisy and because we consider it spineless and
useless, Albanian did not vote in favour of it.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): Ghana continues to be
deeply concerned by the humanitarian situation in
Ukraine following the Russian Federation’s invasion of
the country on 24 February. Accordingly, we remain
committed to supporting all genuine efforts to address
the suffering of the Ukrainian people throughout the
country’s entire territory within its internationally
recognized borders.
We had to abstain from voting on draft resolution
S/2022/231 on the humanitarian situation in Ukraine,
submitted by the Russian Federation, because we did not
believe that it spoke to the position of the international
community on the course of the humanitarian
catastrophe. Nor did it address the requirement for an
immediate and unconditional cessation of hostilities,
which are necessary building blocks to establish a
credible framework for humanitarian efforts that can
be considered neutral, impartial and independent.
Building consensus on how to tackle the worrying
consequences of the war in Ukraine has, unfortunately,
eluded the Council, but, as the Secretary-General
recently suggested, the United Nations is more than
the work done within the Council. Accordingly, we
salute the bravery of the gallant men and women of
the United Nations and other humanitarian agencies
who continue to work in the dangerous environment
in Ukraine to bring hope to the many victims of the
war. We encourage efforts in these trying times for the
evacuation and safe passage of civilians, as well as the
22-29734

23/03/2022

Ukraine

delivery of food, medicine and other essential services
to those in critical need who have been caught up in
cities under siege.
In conclusion, we urge the parties to return to
the path of diplomacy and dialogue to resolve their
concerns and emphasize that the interests and safety
of the Ukrainian people should be prioritized and must
be at the forefront of the actions of the Council and all
other international actors.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I shall proceed to explain Mexico’s abstention
in the voting on draft resolution S/2022/231, submitted
by the Russian Federation.
I shall begin by referring to the process itself.
For several weeks, France and Mexico conducted
consultations in good faith, in a constructive spirit
and a transparent manner, on a humanitarian draft
resolution that would allow the Council to express
its views and assume its responsibility to address the
conflict in Ukraine. That process allowed for a frank
exchange of positions with the majority of the members
of the Security Council, with the aim of arriving at a
balanced text that had the necessary support in order
for it to be adopted. After those consultations, it was
clear to us that we did not have the conditions in place
to achieve such agreement.
Interestingly, following the announcement that
Mexico and France made on 14 March that we were
going to take this initiative to the General Assembly,
which had the item under consideration on its agenda
pursuant to its resolution 377 (V), which we invoked
here in the Council on 27 February (see S/PV.8980), it
was then that the Russian Federation decided, without
prior warning, to submit an alternative draft text to be
voted upon the following day. Such conduct stands in
contradiction to the willingness to engage in dialogue
with which we led the process from the start.
While the Russian delegation postponed the vote
on the draft text — and it postponed and rescheduled
on several occasions — the draft text does not take into
account any of the positions put forward by Mexico or,
in practice, by anyone else. The supposedly revised
draft resolution, put in blue on 16 March, changes only
the order of two words if one compares it with the
original version.
Specifically, with regard to the substantive content
of the draft resolution, I would like to clarify that,

S/PV.9002

although it would seem that it contains some elements
of the original draft resolution developed by France
and Mexico, it is an edited version that distorts the
meaning of several paragraphs. The balance that we
were beginning to strike after more than two weeks
of negotiations, and which served as a basis for the
draft text to be considered by the General Assembly,
was excluded.
The draft text in question makes no reference to
Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter of the United
Nations, on the prohibition of the threat or the use
of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of States. Nor does it make any reference
to an unequivocal cessation of hostilities. We feel that
both of those are fundamental premises in order to stop
the humanitarian crisis that we are seeing in Ukraine. A
draft text that is lacking in that regard does not respond
to the reality on the ground or the evolving pressing
needs of the civilian population.
I conclude by reiterating the willingness of my
delegation to maintain our complete readiness for a
frank and constructive dialogue with all delegations
and in all relevant United Nations forums, with the sole
aim of ensuring that the conditions on the ground exist
to enable humanitarian assistance to rapidly and safely
reach those in need in an unrestricted manner. In full
exercise of our sovereignty, the priority for Mexico in
this dreadful conflict has been, and will continue to
be, humanitarian action, the protection of civilians and
respect for international humanitarian law.
Mr. Gallagher (Ireland): Ireland abstained in this
afternoon’s voting for a clear and simple reason.
Draft resolution S/2022/231, submitted by
the Russian Federation, does nothing to ease the
humanitarian suffering of the Ukrainian people.
Indeed, the draft resolution before us today failed to call
for the very thing that would end civilian deaths, stop
the destruction of Ukrainian cities and would facilitate
the safe and unhindered evacuation of civilians and
humanitarian access — that is this draft resolution
failed to call for an immediate end to hostilities. It was
simply a cynical abuse of the multilateral system by the
aggressor in this war.
If the Russian Federation wishes to take action to
relieve the humanitarian suffering of the Ukrainian
people, it should end this war now.

22-297345/10

S/PV.9002

Ukraine

Ireland could not vote in favour of a draft resolution
that purported to address the humanitarian situation, but
which did not recognize the cause of the humanitarian
crisis that is engulfing Ukraine — a humanitarian
crisis, with global consequences, that is causing food
insecurity on other continents.
We remain horrified by the humanitarian suffering
being endured by millions of people in Ukraine and the
plight of those forced to leave their families and their
country. Ireland’s priority is to address and alleviate
the deteriorating humanitarian situation in Ukraine,
and we are committed to working constructively with
all those who share that goal.
Finally, it is a matter of deep regret that we,
members of the Council, have not been able to act
collectively to address the suffering of the Ukrainian
people. We have been prevented from doing so by the
actions of the Russian Federation, the aggressor in this
war. It is shameful that a permanent member of the
Security Council has acted in this way.
Ms. Juul (Norway): Let me start by restating a
fundamental principle. A party to a conflict cannot
expect to be perceived as neutral. In the spirit of the
Charter of the United Nations, it should neither be the
author of Council draft resolutions, nor should it take
part in voting on the very same conflict to which it
is a party. No one can be in doubt as to the Russian
Federation’s status as a party.
Yet, in meeting after meeting and in numerous
letters, Russia expects us to accept its accounts, reports
and views as if it were coming from a neutral stance.
For nearly a month now, Russia has continued its
reprehensible invasion of Ukraine. Civilians are being
attacked, injured and killed, even as they try to flee to
safety. Homes, schools and hospitals are being bombed
by Russia as we speak. What we have before us today is
not a neutral and balanced humanitarian draft resolution
S/2022/231. It is a distraction.
Russia’s war against a fellow State Member of the
United Nations is a clear violation of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Ukraine, international law
the very principles of the United Nations Charter.
If the Russian Federation cares about the protection
of civilians in Ukraine, it can stop this senseless war.
That is the way to bring an end to the humanitarian
catastrophe in Ukraine. Russia can end this war, and it
should do so now.
6/10

23/03/2022

Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Brazil remains
gravely concerned about the humanitarian situation
arising from the ongoing conflict in Ukraine. Increased
reports of civilian casualties, including children, as
well as the growing number of refugees and internally
displaced people, reveal that the situation continues
to deteriorate.
As the main organ for the maintenance of
international peace and security, the Security Council
should be able to address the humanitarian situation in
Ukraine despite different political views. Nonetheless,
any humanitarian action taken by the Council must
be meaningful and should not reflect partial views of
the conflict.
A truly consequential resolution on a humanitarian
issue should be able to bring about real impacts on the
ground, helping to facilitate agreements, strengthening
adherence to international humanitarian law, setting
the conditions for the safe passage of civilians and
the rapid, safe and unhindered access of humanitarian
assistance to those in need, among other elements.
A call for the cessation of hostilities is an integral
part of such a humanitarian effort. Equally important,
any Council resolution on this matter should be open
to an inclusive discussion among its 15 members
following a constructive process in which all efforts are
made to accommodate the views of Member States in
good faith, with true intention to contribute to a lasting
solution for the protection of civilians.
The draft resolution proposed today by Russia
(S/2022/231) presents many important elements for the
protection of civilians. However, it lacks a reference to
the cessation of hostilities, which was one of the reasons
why Brazil abstained in the voting today. It also fails
to recall the principles of distinction, proportionality,
necessity and humanity, as well as the general obligation
to take all feasible precautions to avoid and minimize
injury to civilians and damage to civilian objects.
Brazil will continue to engage constructively in any
process towards a humanitarian resolution on Ukraine,
as long as the initiative proves to be meaningful,
inclusive and transparent. Members of the Security
Council, no matter how distant their views, have an
obligation to negotiate in good faith with each other
towards a cessation of hostilities and a durable solution.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): Since
the outbreak of the Ukraine crisis, the continued
22-29734

23/03/2022

Ukraine

deterioration of the humanitarian situation and their
increasing spillover effects have triggered widespread
concern in the international community. The
Security Council has held multiple discussions on the
humanitarian issue in Ukraine and it is heart-wrenching
to see the reports of increased civilian casualties,
rising numbers of refugees and serious shortfalls in
humanitarian relief.
Like many other members, China, from the
beginning, has been calling for avoiding civilian
casualties to the greatest extent and making every
effort to ensure basic humanitarian needs. At the same
time, we advocate that the Council should fulfil its
primary responsibility to maintain international peace
and security and play its due role in the humanitarian
issue of Ukraine.
China has put forward a six-point initiative on the
humanitarian situation in Ukraine and has provided
several consignments of humanitarian relief supplies
to the Ukrainian Red Cross Society. We welcome all
initiatives that could help alleviate and resolve the
humanitarian crisis in Ukraine.
Over the past few weeks, the Council has had
repeated consultations on the draft resolutions proposed,
respectively, by France and Mexico and the Russian
Federation. China has been actively involved and has
been calling on all parties to focus their attention on the
humanitarian issue, transcend their political differences
and to do their best to seek consensus in addressing the
humanitarian crisis. It is regrettable that the Council
was unable to reach the broadest possible agreement in
the end.
It is the shared wish of the international community
to reach an immediate ceasefire. That is also China’s
strong expectation. We believe that, in addition to
promoting a ceasefire and stopping the fighting, the
Council should also respond to the humanitarian crisis
in a positive, pragmatic and constructive manner.
China’s vote in favour of draft resolution S/2022/231
was based on our call for the international community
to attach high importance to the humanitarian
issue in Ukraine and for the parties concerned to
strengthen coordination on humanitarian issues so as
to effectively protect the safety of civilians, especially
women, children and other vulnerable groups and to
facilitate the evacuation of personnel and humanitarian
relief operations.

S/PV.9002

We welcome the coordinating role of the United
Nations in humanitarian assistance and support the work
of the Crisis Coordinator for Ukraine. We encourage the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and other agencies to actively take measures to mobilize
the international community to provide humanitarian
relief to all those in need, without discrimination,
and to help resettle refugees and displaced persons
in and around Ukraine. The principles of humanity,
neutrality and impartiality, established by General
Assembly resolution 46/182, must be strictly observed
in humanitarian relief operations.
China adheres to an independent foreign policy and
has always determined our position on relevant issues in
a responsible manner, based on the merits of the matter
itself. On Ukraine, China has always insisted that the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries
should be respected, the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations upheld, the legitimate
security concerns of all countries be taken seriously
and all efforts conducive to the peaceful resolution of
the crisis supported.
The Ukraine crisis poses a serious challenge to the
world. The key right now is for the parties concerned to
show political will and find a proper solution through
negotiations as soon as possible. The international
community should create space for peace and leave
room for a political settlement. The top priority now
is to call on all parties to exercise maximum restraint,
avoid civilian casualties and prevent an even largerscale humanitarian crisis.
The long-term solution, however, lies in
abandoning the Cold War mentality, refraining from
the bloc confrontations and gradually putting in place a
balanced, effective and sustainable global and regional
security architecture. China will continue to promote
talks for peace, speak out for peace and do its best to
bring about peace.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): We took
the floor this afternoon in the General Assembly
(see A/ES-11/PV.8). We take it again now to make
clear and underline our principled position on the
humanitarian issue. It will not change because we
believe in the values underlying humanitarian issues.
We believe that the Geneva Conventions of 1949
and their additional protocols are the framework for

22-297347/10

S/PV.9002

Ukraine

humanitarian issues must not be combined with any
political posturing — tactical or strategic.
We abstained in the voting on draft resolution
S/2022/231 and will always do so when humanitarian
issues are dividing humankind. We will abstain in the
voting every time we believe that humanitarian issues
are being instrumentalized for hidden purposes. We
believe that humanitarian issues should be the permanent
consensus of the social compact of humankind.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, I wish to thank the countries that
supported and co-sponsored draft resolution S/2022/231.
The vote that took place has exposed all those
for whom politicizing the humanitarian file is more
important than helping the United Nations to provide
humanitarian aid to Ukrainians in need. We heard today
from some delegations, specifically the United States
delegation, that they do not wish to engage in any way
with the resolution proposed by the Russian Federation.
If that is true, why did it abstain in the voting, when it
could have voted against it. We all understand perfectly
well the true motivations behind the abstention of the
United States and its decision to not exercise the veto
right, even though it could have done so.
It is interesting that there was an excursus into
history as to how the situation developed. We heard
from the Mexican representatives, who made it seem
as if we suddenly, unexpectedly, put it to a vote,
whereas the initial sponsors of the draft — which
we supported, on the whole, with the exception of
the politicized passages — unexpectedly, without
exhaustive consultations with members of the Council
and specifically with us, advanced and submitted it to
the General Assembly, after which we proposed our
draft for the Council’s consideration.
Let us look again at what actions and measures
prevented our Western colleagues on the Security
Council from agreeing to this for political reasons.
Our draft resolution contains such key elements
as a call for establishing a ceasefire and humanitarian
pauses for the purposes of conducting safe and
unhindered evacuation from Ukraine of civilian
populations and all those who express a desire to do
so, without discrimination on any grounds, a call not to
attack any critical infrastructure objects and a call not to
place heavy military equipment in residential areas and
densely populated areas so as to ensure the protection
8/10

23/03/2022

of humanitarian medical personnel, due protection for
the wounded and the ill, humane treatment of detainees
and the protection of civilians, particularly women
and children.
For this reason, in this Chamber or at the General
Assembly, when my colleagues lament that those
provisions are not being implemented, we will remind
them that they were before them but they refused to
vote in favour of them for political reasons. They had a
choice, and they made their choice.
Today once again we heard accusations levelled at
the Russian Federation by a number of delegations that
we are preparing for the use of chemical and biological
weapons in Ukraine. We again heard fake information,
which we have repeatedly repudiated, and these were
edifying vis-à-vis what transpired in Mariupol with
respect to the shelling that took place there, with respect
to the murder of people waiting in queue — I will not
list all of that. We have repeatedly spoken about this
and at length, but unfortunately people choose not to
listen to or hear this.
Turning into biological and chemical weapons, I
take this opportunity to reiterate the following. This
is an unimaginable accusation leveled at the Russian
Federation. My colleagues should believe us when we
say that we have other means of warfare. We have no
use for chemical or biological weapons. Accusing the
Russian Federation in this way is simply unworthy of
members of the Security Council, especially given the
fact that such weapons were destroyed by us long ago.
The absence of a Security Council humanitarian
resolution without a doubt significantly complicates the
lives of humanitarian representatives on the ground.
It will allow the Ukrainian side to continue to ignore
demands for the establishment of a ceasefire for the
evacuation of people through humanitarian corridors.
Kyiv will continue to use civilians as human shields,
and, contrary to international humanitarian law, Kyiv
will continue to deploy heavy weaponry near hospitals
and kindergartens.
Turning to the delivery of humanitarian assistance,
we shall endeavour to resolve this issue, as we have
done over the past eight years for the people of Donbas,
whose suffering the Council prefers to forget. Today
we heard the way the United Kingdom representative
reminded us that we are all one human race. I agree
with that. Unfortunately, many countries, including the
United Kingdom, fail to remember other episodes — and
22-29734

23/03/2022

Ukraine

I will not list them; it seems that today is not the
appropriate time to single anyone out. All human lives
are invaluable. I could have reminded the Council — but
today I will not do so — of what the representatives of
that country, including those sitting at the table, said
vis-à-vis the deaths of civilians, including children, and
mass casualties, in the context of other conflicts.
In all territories under the control of Russian
military personnel, residents are already receiving
basic necessities and food, and we believe fully that as
the special military operation’s objectives are met, the
situation will continue to improve there. We call upon
the Security Council not to politicize the humanitarian
issue. We regret the fact that the Council was not in
a position to adopt the draft resolution contained in
document S/2022/231, which would have facilitated the
settlement of these issues. Nonetheless, we trust that we
and those members of the international community that
are genuinely interested in this effort will do everything
possible to alleviate the humanitarian situation in
Ukraine and ease the plight of civilians.
The President: I shall now make a statement
in my capacity as the representative of the United
Arab Emirates.
All of us in this Chamber acknowledge the
necessity of addressing the humanitarian crisis in
Ukraine. In less than a month, more than 3.5 million
people fled to such neighbouring countries as Moldova,
Romania and Poland, and we must recognize and
express appreciation for their generosity. Furthermore,
amid the continued fighting within Ukraine’s borders,
6.5 million people have been displaced, often without
access to basic necessities.
We also recognize the donor community’s robust
response to the humanitarian appeal by the United
Nations, and we were encouraged by the dialogue
between the United Nations, Ukraine and the Russian
Federation that led to the first humanitarian convoy
reaching Sumy in eastern Ukraine on 18 March. It is
precisely this kind of coordination that we hope to
encourage and see formalized soon so as to help those
most in need in a safe manner and in accordance with
international humanitarian law.
Nevertheless, we believe there is a crucial role for
the Security Council to play in line with its responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security and to
tangibly respond to the crisis. We therefore carefully
studied all the products brought to the Security Council

S/PV.9002

by members, including the draft resolution submitted
by the Russian Federation (S/2022/231), which includes
substantive responses to the humanitarian needs
in the country. We endorse its calls to allow safe
passage without discrimination, unhindered access to
humanitarian aid, and the demand that international
humanitarian law be protected. Ultimately, however, we
abstained in the voting because we would have liked to
see, one month into this conflict, a call for a nationwide
cessation of hostilities and a text that garnered the full
support of Council members.
The continued fighting precludes the robust aid
operations all of us hope to see in Ukraine, not least
of which because it risks the safety of humanitarian
workers. We also would have preferred greater clarity
on the full application of international humanitarian law
and with regard to elements that may be misconstrued
to imply a political position that falls outside the scope
of a humanitarian resolution.
But meanwhile, building on the dialogue that led
to the Sumy convoy, we must encourage agreement
on other technical steps to alleviate human suffering,
for example, on civilian evacuation, access to aid and
windows of silence. Such measures will provide muchneeded respite after four weeks of fighting and may
also lay the groundwork for a more comprehensive
humanitarian response as part of a negotiated settlement.
We believe the Security Council needs to rise to the
occasion by adopting a dedicated compromise product
that contains elements we can agree on, including a call
on the parties to comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law, including in relation
to the wounded and the sick, missing persons and the
protection of combatants and non-combatants.
While agreement was not possible today, the
Council cannot abrogate its responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security. We must
work in good faith and try our utmost to help all those
in need on the ground today. The United Arab Emirates
stands ready to aid those efforts with the full urgency
that this work deserves.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of the United States has asked to
take the floor to make a further statement.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): The Russian Permanent Representative asks

22-297349/10

S/PV.9002

Ukraine

why we decided to abstain and not veto. To be honest, it
was not necessary to veto, and I do not think the draft
resolution put before us (S/2022/231) was worthy of the
United States using its precious veto power. Thirteen
members of the Security Council abstained, and that
was all that was required to defeat this draft resolution.
In addition, I want to add that we do not need
this farcical draft resolution to provide humanitarian
assistance. The United States has provided more
than $600 million in humanitarian assistance to the
Ukrainian people, and we will continue to provide as
much assistance as is required both to Ukraine and
to the neighbouring countries, which are generously
hosting and supporting the Ukrainian people.

10/10

23/03/2022

The President: The representative of Mexico has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): As the Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation made a direct reference to my
delegation, I reiterate that we are open to a constructive
and frank dialogue that will enable us to find common
solutions and the best way for the Security Council
to support the protection of civilians and to ensure
humanitarian assistance for those who need it most.
The meeting rose at 6 p.m.

22-29734
