S/2019/508

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 June 2019
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393
(2017), 2401 (2018) and 2449 (2018)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the sixty-first submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of
Security Council resolution 2139 (2014), paragraph 10 of resolution 2165 (2014),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2191 (2014), paragraph 5 of resolution 2258 (2015),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2332 (2016), paragraph 6 of resolution 2393 (2017),
paragraph 12 of resolution 2401 (2018) and paragraph 6 of resolution 2449 (2018), in
the last of which the Council requested the Secretary-General to provide a report at
least every 60 days, on the implementation of the resolutions by all parties to the
conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.
2.
The information contained herein is based on data available to agencies of the
United Nations system and obtained from the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic and other relevant sources. Data from agencies of the United Nations system
on their humanitarian deliveries have been reported for April and May 2019.

II. Major developments
Box 1
Key points: April and May 2019
1.
Despite the memorandum on the stabilization of the situation in the Idlib
de-escalation area signed by the Russian Federation and Turkey on 17 September
2018, the number of civilian casualties, including civilian deaths, increased, more
than 300,000 people were displaced and significant damage was caused to civilian
infrastructure during the reporting period.
2.
Health-care and education services continued to be attacked, with 26 incidents
affecting health-care facilities and assets confirmed by the World Health Organization
and 32 incidents affecting education facilities verified by the United Nations
Children’s Fund. The incidents all occurred in the north-west of the country and
resulted in the killing and injuring of children, sick people and humanitarian workers.

19-10124 (E)

240619

*1910124*

S/2019/508

3.
Humanitarian conditions in Rukban, on the Syrian-Jordanian border, remain
dire, and access for a third humanitarian convoy is still pending. Movement out of
Rukban continued throughout the reporting period, and 13,364 people had departed
by 31 May.
4.
In the north-east of the county, the Hawl camp in Hasakah Governorate now
hosts about 72,000 people, 91 per cent of whom are women and children. During the
reporting period, approximately 1,000 Syrian internally displaced persons departed
the camp to their areas of origin in Tabaqah, while a further 500 foreign nationals also
left. Humanitarian access to the annex hosting other foreign nationals (non -Syrian and
non-Iraqi) continued to be restricted by camp authorities.
5.
In April and May 2019, United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners
continued to reach millions of people in need across the Syrian Arab Republic.
Humanitarian assistance provided by United Nations agencies included food for an
average of 3.24 million people in need each month and more than 3.18 million health
and medical treatments to people throughout the country. Cross -border assistance,
authorized under Security Council resolutions 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258
(2015), 2393 (2017) and 2449 (2018), remained a vital part of the humanitarian
response. During the reporting period, 1,157 trucks (34 consignments) delivered life saving assistance to more than 1 million people through cross -border deliveries,
including food assistance for some 738,000 people in April and in May (monthly
average).
6.
Humanitarian access from within the Syrian Arab Republic continued to be
challenging in some parts of the country and for some humanitarian actors, including
the United Nations. During the reporting period, a number of access constraints were
reported in parts of Idlib, owing mostly to heightened hostilities. Access was also
limited in Raqqah city and east of the Euphrates River in Dayr al -Zawr, including the
Hajin enclave, owing mostly to widespread explosive hazard contamination. Some
areas in the south of the country and in parts of eastern Ghutah were also not
accessible in a sustainable manner to some humanitarian actors owing to
administrative regulations.

Escalation of hostilities in the de-escalation area in the north-western part of
the Syrian Arab Republic
3.
The escalation of hostilities in the north-western part of the Syrian Arab
Republic in February and March dramatically increased in late April, wi th air strikes,
artillery shelling and clashes between Syrian government forces, the United Nations listed terrorist group the Levant Liberation Organization and non -State armed
opposition groups reported in and around the Idlib de-escalation area. Despite the
memorandum on the stabilization of the situation in the Idlib de -escalation area signed
by the Russian Federation and Turkey on 17 September 2018, the number of civilian
casualties increased during the reporting period, with more than 160 civilians ki lled
between 28 April and the end of May and many more injured. More than 300,000
people were displaced during the reporting period, with most moving closer to the
Turkish border in Idlib Governorate and smaller numbers moving to western or
northern Aleppo. Many of those displaced moved to overcrowded displacement sites
or were entirely without shelter. On 29 May, the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic announced its intention to open two border crossings, Morek and Abu
al-Zuhur, for the evacuation of civilians from Idlib. As the month ended, the border
crossings were still not opened. Fighting and insecurity caused significant damage to
civilian infrastructure (see paras. 5 and 6 for incidents affecting health -care facilities
and assets and education facilities).
2/22

19-10124

S/2019/508

4.
Hostilities and other forms of violence continued to severely affect civilians in
various parts of the Syrian Arab Republic, in particular in the north -west of the
country. During the reporting period, the significant increase in hostilities and
violence severely affected civilians, including many women and children, as well as
civilian objects and infrastructure, in particular in southern Idlib and areas of northern
Hama. Large numbers of civilian deaths and injuries were reported in that con text
owing to air and ground-based strikes by government and pro-government forces (see
annex for examples of such incidents), as well as significant damage to educational
and medical facilities, local markets, homes, settlements for internally displaced
persons and other civilian infrastructure. Many civilians were also killed and injured
as a result of sporadic ground-based strikes by various non-State armed groups and/or
United Nations-listed terrorist groups in parts of Hama, Idlib and Aleppo
Governorates. This included an attack on the Neirab camp for Palestine refugees in
Aleppo, killing at least 10 civilians and wounding more than 30. Damage was also
inflicted on two power stations.
5.
Attacks affecting educational facilities continued to be reported by humanitarian
organizations. A total of 32 incidents were verified by the United Nations Children ’s
Fund during the reporting period, 1 including the following:
(a) On 4 April, in Nayrab village, Idlib city centre, Mus‘ab Bin Umayr
primary school was hit by a rocket during school hours while students were attending
classes, resulting in deaths and injuries;
(b) In the afternoon of 8 April, multiple rockets landed in Jisr al -Shughur in
western rural Idlib, affecting two adjacent schools;
(c) On 11 April, in Jisr al-Shughur, Idlib Governorate, Rab‘at al-Adawiyah
school was hit by a rocket, resulting in the partial destruction of the school building;
(d) On 14 April, shelling on Khan Shaykhun city, Idlib Governorate, hit the
Bayan educational institute in the Gharbi neighbourhood, partially damaging the
building;
(e) On 17 April, Abu Habbah primary school in Abu Habbah village, Khan
Shaykhun, Idlib Governorate, was partially destroyed as a result of shelling;
(f) On 25 April, Khalid al-Najim primary school, in Khan Shaykhun, Idlib
Governorate, was hit by a rocket, causing partial damage to the facility. This was the
second time that the school was hit in April;
(g) On 28 April, in Hama Governorate, warplanes conducted a number of
attacks and launched several rockets targeting the Shamali neighbourhood, in Qalʻat
al-Madiq, resulting in the massive destruction of some facilities and infrastructure,
including the building of the education directorate (heavily affected) and three
schools in a complex (partially damaged): Fawaz Haj Hussein primary school, Akram
Ali secondary school and Akram Ali high school;
(h) On 28 April, three schools (Huwayz primary school, Huwayz secondary
school and Huwayz high school) in the eastern part of Huwayz village, Qalʻa t
al-Madiq district, Hama Governorate, were hit by rockets, causing massive damage.
The same complex was also hit earlier this year. The schools went out of service as a
result of the attack;
__________________
1

19-10124

These attacks have been confirmed using tried and tested systems, whereby the United Nations
receives reports from partners on the ground and reviews them against at least two other
independent sources. Only attacks that are fully vetted and confirmed by a ll independent sources
are included in the list of confirmed attacks. These systems are used worldwide and are widely
respected.
3/22

S/2019/508

(i) On 30 April, Qasabiyah school in Qasabiyah village, Khan Shaykhun,
Idlib Governorate, was partially destroyed as a result of an air strike;
(j) On 2 May, Rakaya primary school in Rakaya village, Hish, Idlib
Governorate, was damaged by an air strike. This was the last functional school in the
village;
(k) On 3 May, three schools (Martyr Khaled al-Musa high school, Khawla
primary school and Qadisiyah school) in Habit village, in Ma ‘arrah, Idlib
Governorate, were affected by an air strike. The attack resulted in partial damage to
the school buildings;
(l) On 4 May, Habit village, in Khan Shaykhun subdistrict, Ma ‘arrah, Idlib
Governorate, was intensively targeted by air strikes that resulted in civilian casualties
and damage to different facilities. In one attack, a 9 -year-old girl was killed together
with her mother when a rocket landed close to their house. In the same incident, a
nearby school (Martyr Khaled al-Bakkour primary school) was also affected;
(m) On 4 May, Ali Bin Abi Talib high school was severely damaged as a result
of barrel bombs that landed in Safuhun village, Ma‘arrah, Idlib;
(n) On 4 May, in Lajj village, Ariha district, Idlib, Lajj primary school was
severely affected by an air strike;
(o) On 4 May, Dayr Sunbul primary school in Dayr Sunbul village, Ariha,
Idlib, was heavily damaged by an air strike. A rocket landed on the school, causing
partial destruction. Classes had been suspended three days before the incident, and no
casualties therefore resulted from the attack;
(p) On 7 May, Kansafrah primary school in Kansafrah village, Ariha, Idlib,
was heavily damaged by an air strike. A rocket landed on the school and caused partial
destruction, shutting down the school;
(q) On 7 May, Kafr Sajnah high school in Kafr Sajnah village, Ma‘arrah, Idlib,
was heavily damaged by an air strike. According to the source, a rocket landed on the
school, causing partial destruction. The incident was part of a series of attacks that
took place in the village that day;
(r) On 7 May, the agricultural school in Kansafrah village, Ariha, Idlib, was
damaged by an air strike. A rocket landed on the school, causing partial destruction;
(s) On 13 May, Shaykh Mustafa school in Shaykh Mustafa village, Kafr Nubl,
Idlib, was affected by a barrel bomb released about 150 m from the school. The
facility sustained damage such as broken windows, doors and furniture. The village
witnessed multiple attacks, mainly aerial, that day;
(t) On 14 May, the city of Khan Shaykhun was affected by intensive air
strikes, one of which targeted an area in the city centre where Abdul Rahman al -Nassir
school is located. One of the rockets landed inside the school, ca using massive
damage to the facility and killing the school’s headmaster;
(u) On 15 May, Ibn Al Qayyem secondary school in Hish, Hish, Idlib, was
completely destroyed and put out of service as a result of an air strike;
(v) On 23 May, at 2.30 p.m., the Ma‘arrat al-Nu‘man district and the
surrounding neighbourhoods were shelled and bombarded. The shelling hit the Iqraa
Kafr Uwayd formal school in Kafr Uwayd town, causing partial damage;
(w) Yarmouk primary school was heavily damaged by an air strike in Kafr
Nubl, Ma‘arrah, Idlib, on 28 May. The incident took place in the early morning, before
the arrival of students. In the light of the incident, the education directorate decided
to cancel the final exams for all schools in the town and in other cities in Ma‘arrah.
4/22

19-10124

S/2019/508

6.
During the reporting period, the Surveillance System for Attacks on Health Care
of the World Health Organization reported 26 incidents affecting health -care facilities
and assets. 1 The attacks resulted in the killing of 6 health workers and patients and
the injuring of 11, and affected the following facilities and assets:
• Massyaf public hospital, Hama Governorate, on 4 April
• Lataminah hospital, Hama Governorate, on 28 April
• Qalʻat al-Madiq hospital, Hama Governorate, on 28 April
• Habit primary health-care centre, Idlib Governorate, on 30 April
• Qastun primary health-care centre, Hama Governorate, on 1 May
• Surgical unit in the Kafr Nabudah area, Hama (supported by the World Health
Organization), on 1 May
• Madiq primary health-care centre, Hama Governorate, on 2 May
• Primary health-care centre in Rakaya Sajnah, Idlib Governorate, on 3 May
• Has hospital, Hama Governorate, on 5 May
• Magharah hospital, Hama Governorate, on 5 May
• Kafr Nubl hospital, Idlib Governorate, on 5 May
• Amal orthopaedic hospital, Idlib Governorate, on 6 May
• Zarbah primary health-care centre, Aleppo Governorate, on 6 May
• Kafr Nabudah primary health-care centre, Hama Governorate, on 7 May
• Ghab primary health-care centre, Hama Governorate, on 7 May
• Kafr Zayta primary health-care centre, Hama Governorate, on 8 May
• Ma‘arrat Hurmah primary health-care centre, Idlib Governorate, on 8 May
• An ambulance driver, killed in Idlib Governorate on 8 May
• Kafr Nubl hospital, Idlib Governorate (hit for the second time), on 9 May
• Alsham central hospital, Idlib Governorate, on 11 May
• Ghab primary health-care centre, Hama Governorate (hit for the second time),
on 11 May
• Hawash women and paediatrics hospital, Hama Governorate, on 11 May
• Tarmala dialysis unit, Idlib Governorate, on 15 May
• Tramla hospital, Idlib Governorate, on 15 May
• Suqaylibiyah public hospital, Hama Governorate, on 26 May
• Aqra‘a private hospital in Kafr Nubl, Idlib Governorate, on 28 May
7.
The latest bout of violence in the north-west has affected agricultural activities
in northern Hama and southern Idlib Governorates, where shelling and air strikes have
led to the destruction of crops and damage to farming equipment. Agricultural areas
in Idlib are known to be among the most fertile in the country, but a number of fields
were fully or partially destroyed by fires, and many farmers faced difficulties in
controlling the flames. In addition to triggering further population displacement, the
recent bombardments are bound to affect food security in the affected areas during
the harvest season, running until mid-June, as farmers are no longer able to access
their fields. Insecurity has also made it difficult for farmers to tend to their crops.
19-10124

5/22

S/2019/508

Other fires were reported in the Governorates of Raqqah, Homs, Aleppo, Hasakah and
Dayr al-Zawr as a result of high temperatures and unexploded ordnance, with smallerscale fires reported in Ladhiqiyah, Tartus, Rif Dimashq, Qunaytirah, Dar ‘a and
Suwayda’. These fires will significantly affect the population, in particular in the
north-east of the country, where about 80 per cent of people ’s income is generated
from seasonal crop production. In addition, material damage to farm equipment will
hamper the ability of farmers to cultivate their lands.
8.
The escalation of hostilities in the north-west, combined with high levels of need
and vulnerability, has had catastrophic humanitarian consequences for the estimated
3 million people living in the Idlib area. The humanitaria n community is responding
in accordance with the readiness plan that was prepared in late 2018 and updated in
May 2019. The United Nations is responding to the needs of the affected population
with emergency food assistance through ready-to-eat rations, with more than 18,000
people reached in April and more than 190,000 in May. In addition to the emergency
food assistance, the United Nations and its implementing partners are covering nearly
700,000 people each month with general food assistance in the form of food rations
across the north-west and plan to extend this to 835,000 people by June. Many
humanitarian responders and service providers are, however, part of the affected
population. As a result, in many areas of active hostilities, humanitarian operat ions
have been suspended. This includes the suspension of health, nutrition and protection
services previously supporting some 600,000 people, including 21 immunization
centres and at least 49 health facilities. Even with preparedness efforts, the response
is stretched, and a further increase in need brought on by additional fighting could
risk overwhelming it.
Update on overall developments
9.
The Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria continued his diplomatic
efforts, meeting with the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, the opposition
Syrian Negotiations Committee and key regional and international actors.
Discussions focused on advancing five priorities in accordance with Security Council
resolution 2254 (2015), namely, building trust between the parties, making progress
on detainees and missing persons, engaging a wide spectrum of Syrian society,
finalizing the composition and terms of reference of a credible, balanced, inclusive
and viable constitutional committee and deepening international dialogue on the
Syrian Arab Republic through the creation of a common forum in sup port of United
Nations efforts in Geneva. As part of these efforts, the Special Envoy and the Deputy
Special Envoy also met with communities of refugees and internally displaced
persons, members of Syrian civil society and the Syrian Women ’s Advisory Board.
10. The Special Envoy attended the meeting of the Astana guarantors (the Islamic
Republic of Iran, the Russian Federation and Turkey) in Nur-Sultan on 26 April. The
guarantors reaffirmed their determination to implement fully the agreements on
stabilization in the Idlib de-escalation area. They reiterated their determination to
advance further efforts of the Working Group on the release of detainees/abductees
and the handover of bodies as well as the identification of missing persons, of which
the United Nations is a member.
11. The Special Envoy met with the Syria Small Group, namely, Egypt, France,
Germany, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the United States of America, which convened in Geneva on 3 May.
Protection
12. Hostilities and other forms of violence continued to severely affect civilians in
various parts of the Syrian Arab Republic. Civilians continued to be killed and injured
6/22

19-10124

S/2019/508

and vital infrastructure destroyed and damaged, including as a res ult of ground-based
and air strikes. Thousands of communities have been left in areas littered with
explosive hazards that continue to kill and injure civilians and block humanitarian
access even long after hostilities have ended. The use of improvised exp losive devices
in certain areas adds to the complexity of the explosive hazard threat.
13. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) recorded several incidents in which civilians in Dar ‘a Governorate who
had assumed positions within the Government-run local councils and other
institutions were killed by unidentified perpetrators in what appeared to be targeted
killings.
14. OHCHR continued to receive reports of the arrest and detention of civilians,
including women and children, by Government-affiliated forces. In some incidents,
such cases appeared to amount to arbitrary arrest and detention. During the reporting
period, OHCHR documented at least seven cases that may amount to arbitrary
detention and/or enforced disappearance, including the arrest of two boys in Dar‘a
Governorate. The reasons for their arrest remain unknown to their families, who have
been denied information about their detention by the authorities.
15. Civilians living in areas under the control of the Leva nt Liberation Organization
and other non-State armed groups in Idlib and Aleppo Governorates continued to be
abducted, deprived of their liberty and subjected to targeted killings, beatings and
other forms of cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment by such groups. Civilians,
including humanitarian service providers and media activists, were targeted and
threatened with death, mainly for being critical of the Levant Liberation Organization,
or at times to extort money or ransom from them, while the reasons be hind many of
the incidents often remain unknown.
16. Other civilians, including women and children in Hawl camp, controlled by
non-State armed groups in Hasakah Governorate, continued to suffer the
consequences of family separation, restricted access to humanitarian assistance and
restrictions on their freedom of movement that, in some cases, may amount to
deprivation of liberty. OHCHR confirmed reports that children over the age of
12 years born to persons allegedly or actually associated with Islamic Sta te in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) have been separated from their mothers and are being “held”
in separate and unidentified places, with no information provided to their families
about their status or location.
Humanitarian update
17. Humanitarian conditions in Rukban remain dire, with the most recent
deployment of a humanitarian convoy having taken place in early February. People
began to leave Rukban with their personal belongings in late March and continued to
do so in April and May. People make their own arrangements to leave the 55-km
perimeter and then have their movement facilitated to five shelters in and around
Homs city, where they typically stay for 24 hours. They then move on to a destination
of their choice, or to temporary locations in cases in which people are not yet able to
return to their areas of origin or choice for security reasons. The United Nations
assessed the five shelters twice, on 24 April and on 13 May, and has received approval
for regular visits, although further authorizations are still pending. On those visits,
the conditions were assessed as adequate, with new arrivals receiving assistance from
the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, with support from the United Nations, including
vaccinations for children and medical assistance. As at 31 May, a total of 13,364
people, or approximately 32 per cent of the estimated 41,700 people previously
residing in Rukban, had departed. The number of people leaving Rukban had
decreased by the end of May owing to the lack of vehicles and the high cost of
19-10124

7/22

S/2019/508

transport to the 55-km perimeter. Humanitarian actors remain concerned about the
inability of women of reproductive age and adolescent girls to obtain access to life saving reproductive health and sexual and gender-based violence services.
18. The United Nations continues to strongly advocate and reiterate its readiness to
support efforts to pursue durable solutions for the people in Rukban in a
comprehensive manner, from point of departure to areas of destination, and in
accordance with humanitarian principles. The deployment of a third humanitarian
convoy to Rukban was formally requested twice during the reporting period, on
14 April and on 9 May, to allow essential needs to be met. Neither request was
approved by the Syrian authorities. The United Nations requested access again on
30 May to assess the situation in order to facilitate transport for those expressing a
voluntary and informed desire to leave and at the same time to deliver critical needs based humanitarian assistance. The United Nations continues to reiterate the
importance of a carefully planned, principled approach to the situation in Rukban that
ensures respect for core protection standards and does not expose vulnerable and, in
many cases, traumatized displaced men, women and children to additional harm. All
movement must be voluntary, safe, well-informed and dignified, with humanitarian
access assured throughout.
19. In the north-east of the country, the Hawl camp in Hasakah Governorate
currently hosts about 72,000 people, 91 per cent of whom are women and children.
About 67 per cent of the camp population are under the age of 18 years. The
breakdown of the camp population is as follows: 43 per cent Iraqi, 42 per cent Syrian
and 15 per cent other foreign nationals. Arrival rates have stabilized, with no recent
influxes to the camp. During the reporting period, approximately 1,000 Syrian
internally displaced persons departed the camp to their areas of origin in Tabaqah,
while a further 500 foreign nationals also left. T he humanitarian situation remains
challenging. Several incidents have occurred during the reporting period, including
the expression of support for radical ideologies. The main drivers of tensions in the
camp appear to be the absence of information on the whereabouts and welfare of male
family members, including children, who are presumably detained, grievances due to
living conditions and limited access to services, restricted freedom of movement and
a lack of clarity with regard to procedures on returns a nd future departure options. To
reduce tensions within the camp, residential areas are currently being reorganized by
population profile, with Iraqis, Syrians and other foreign nationals separated into
different parts of the camp.
20. Access to the annex hosting foreign families and individuals (non-Syrian and
non-Iraqi), including more than 9,000 children of approximately 60 different
nationalities, continued to be restricted by camp authorities and was under enhanced
security measures. Dialogue continued between service providers and the camp
administration to improve access for humanitarian organizations with specific
mandates and expertise to provide support and pathways towards possible solutions
for the foreign nationals in the camp, a number of whom are now obtaining access to
work.
21. Approximately 2,000 Iraqi households have registered for repatriation, directly
organized by the Iraqi authorities and the camp administration. However, a lack of
valid identification documents may constitute an obsta cle. There are also significant
concerns related to the conditions of return to Iraq. Clarity on the process and
conditions of return is necessary to support informed and voluntary returns in safety.
22. Tension also increased during the reporting period in the south-west of the
country, mainly in Dar‘a Governorate, following an arrest campaign by government
forces on 15 May against former non-State armed group leaders in several towns. As
a result, clashes took place in Sanamayn town, resulting in casualti es on both sides.
8/22

19-10124

S/2019/508

Government forces imposed a strict military encirclement on Sanamayn town, and
additional military enforcements were deployed, preventing civilians and commercial
movement for a few days. On 23 May, the Government of the Syrian Arab Repub lic
released a number of detainees in order to ease tensions. Following this incident,
former non-State armed groups attacked checkpoints of the Government in four
locations in the Yarmouk basin. As a result of these developments, humanitarian
access to the area has been affected, although assistance efforts and missions by many
humanitarian actors continued.
Humanitarian response
23. During the reporting period, United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners
continued to reach millions of people in need, including children, adolescent girls and
women of reproductive age, throughout the Syrian Arab Republic. Humanitarian
assistance provided by United Nations agencies included food for an average of
3.24 million people in need each month and more than 3.18 million health and
medical treatments to people throughout the country (see table 1).
Table 1
Average number of people reached each month by the United Nations and other
organizations through all modalities throughout the Syrian Arab Republic:
April and May 2019

Organization

Average number
of people
reached monthly

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations

21 000

International Organization for Migration

45 000

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

670 000

United Nations Children’s Fund

3 380 000

United Nations Development Programme

118 000

United Nations Population Fund

530 000

United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East

155 000

World Food Programme

3 240 000

World Health Organization

3 180 000

24. From inside the Syrian Arab Republic, humanitarian assistance provided by
United Nations agencies included food for a monthly average of 2.55 million people
in Government-controlled areas and in the north-east. Almost 2 million people
received water, sanitation and hygiene services and supplies. More than 1 million
children and mothers were reached with primary health-care, maternal, reproductive
health and immunization services. Moreover, approximately 540,000 people
benefited from gender-based violence prevention, protection and psychosocial
support services and child protection services. United Nations operations from within
the Syrian Arab Republic also included more than 3.18 million health and medical
treatments to people throughout the country.
25. As part of its country-wide humanitarian response, the United Nations and
humanitarian partners continued to deliver life-saving assistance to more than
700,000 people each month in the three Governorates of the north -eastern part of the
Syrian Arab Republic. This included supporting some of the most vulnerable people
in camps for internally displaced persons, such as those who had been displaced
owing to intense fighting in what were then the last ISIL-held areas in Hajin and
Baghuz, in south-eastern Dayr al-Zawr Governorate. At the Hawl camp, the United
19-10124

9/22

S/2019/508

Nations and its humanitarian partners rapidly mobilized a major relief operation, in
some cases redirecting capacities and stocks from other parts of the country to scale
up the response. In total, some 35 humanitarian partners are providing more than
50 activities and services to camp residents. During the reporting period, three new
field hospitals were established, as well as a safe space for women and girls, while
vaccination campaigns are ongoing across the camp, with 12,000 children immunized
to date. Other humanitarian indicators, including crude mortality and global acute
malnutrition rates, have also been kept within emergency thresholds. All camp
residents receive monthly food rations with a 30-day feeding period, and bread is
provided daily. For example, in April, 73,478 individuals received monthly food
rations and 681,088 kg of bread was provided to 73,478 individuals per day.
26. In May, the Syrian authorities approved a United Nations technical surge
mission to Hasakah, which will take place immediately after Eid al -Fitr. Following
the launch of two Syria Humanitarian Fund reserve allocations worth $14.4 million
to meet the growing needs in the north-east of the country, the Fund has disbursed
almost $9.8 million to support the response in the Hawl camp. However, the funding
gap for camps in the north-east stands at $24.5 million, of which $20.8 million is
required to continue to provide humanitarian life-saving assistance and services in
the Hawl camp until the end of 2019.
27. As mentioned earlier, 13,364 people had left Rukban as at the end of the
reporting period. The United Nations is providing assistance through the Syrian Arab
Red Crescent to people departing Rukban and transiting through the shelters, as well
as in areas of destination. However, sustained assistance for some 28,000 people who
remain in Rukban is equally critical. Food, basic medicines and other life -saving
supplies delivered in February have run out inside Rukban. Fuel is scarce and prices
for basic goods have sharply increased. The request for the deployment of a
humanitarian convoy to Rukban was reiterated during the reporting period, but no
approval was received by the Syrian authorities. Discussions on a way forward are
planned in mid-June. The United Nations continues to reiterate its readiness to
support efforts to pursue durable solutions for the people of Rukban in a
comprehensive manner.
28. Humanitarian mine-action partners continued to implement programmes across
the country, which included the delivery of risk education and victim assistance to
vulnerable populations. In Damascus, the second Mine Action Service risk education
teams completed their training and are expected to deploy in the coming period to
affected communities in Rif Dimashq, Dar‘a, Qunaytirah and Suwayda’
Governorates. The third risk education teams have begun training in Homs to cover
Hama Governorate. Moreover, during the month of April, the Mine Action Service
conducted a risk awareness campaign that reached millions of people across the
Syrian Arab Republic, with messaging shared through newspapers, text messaging,
social media and other outlets. The United Nations Children’s Fund and its partners
also continued to carry out mine risk education activities on a daily basis in ma ny
parts of the country.
29. Cross-border deliveries continued under the terms of Security Council
resolutions 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017) and
2449 (2018) (see table 2). In line with those resolutions, the United Nations notified
the Syrian authorities in advance of each shipment, including its contents, its
destination and the number of beneficiaries expected to be reached. In April and May,
1,157 trucks (34 consignments) delivered life-saving assistance for more than
1 million people through cross-border deliveries (see figure I).

10/22

19-10124

S/2019/508

Figure I
Number of beneficiaries assisted by the United Nations and its partners
through cross-border humanitarian deliveries, by cluster: April and May 2019
(monthly average)
(Thousands)

915
642

5

Education

102

51
Nutrition

149

Non-food
Water,
items/shelter sanitation
and hygiene

Health

Food

Table 2
Number of beneficiaries targeted through cross-border deliveries, by sector and
by district: April and May 2019 (monthly average)

Education

Food

Health

Non-food
items/
shelter

Water,
sanitation
Nutrition and hygiene

Governorate

District

Aleppo

Bab

–

–

2,090

–

–

–

Aleppo

I'zaz

–

119 008

208 442

11 647

–

50 464

Aleppo

Jarabulus

Aleppo

Jabal Sim‘an

Hasakah

–

–

1 000

2 999

–

–

1 662

513 845

17 860

5 350

–

5 696

Qamishli

–

–

193 575

–

–

–

Raqqah

Tall Abyad

–

–

–

–

–

15 000

Idlib

Ma‘arrah

–

118 010

2 135

4 213

–

6 075

Idlib

Ariha

–

148 383

2 095

–

–

–

Idlib

Harim

2 928

–

194 479

75 792

50 871

58 585

Idlib

Idlib

–

15 955

18 440

1 875

–

12 500

Idlib

Jisr al-Shughur

–

–

2 020

–

–

–

30. During the reporting period, the Russian Federation sent informational bulletins
to the United Nations from the Centre for Reconciliation of Opposing Sides and
Refugee Migration Monitoring, which outlined the provision of bilateral relief
assistance. Other Member States also continued to provide bilateral and other forms
of humanitarian assistance.
Humanitarian access
31. The provision of humanitarian assistance requires timely, safe, sustained and
unimpeded access by the United Nations and all humanitarian partners to people in
need across the Syrian Arab Republic. The access landscape in the country is
complex, with different areas serviced differently and different types of services
requiring different operating modalities. Access is critical for principled humanitarian
action, which depends notably on an ability to assess needs and deliver assistance and

19-10124

11/22

S/2019/508

to monitor and evaluate impact independently, including by regularly engaging
directly with affected people.
32. During the reporting period, the United Nations continued to provide assistance
from within the Syrian Arab Republic to millions of people in need in thousands of
locations throughout the country. In recent months, the focus of access monitoring
and reporting from Damascus has moved from a model of tracking the number of
convoys to also looking at access of staff and the ability to deliver assistance as well
as carry out assessments and monitoring and provide protection services. More than
1,700 United Nations staff members are present in the Syrian Arab Republic, with
more than 500 deployed in nine hubs outside Damascus (Aleppo, Dar ‘a, Dayr
al-Zawr, Hama, Homs, Ladhiqiyah, Qamishli, Suwayda’ and Tartus). A further
3,860 staff members of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) are deployed across the country.
33. Many of the aid deliveries are implemented through national partners, in
particular national non-governmental organizations and the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent. The United Nations is regularly deployed alongside the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent, including to undertake assessments, accompany deliveries and follow up
with monitoring and evaluation missions. In April and May, the United Nations
undertook hundreds of missions throughout the Syrian Arab Republic (see table 3).
Some of those missions, in particular those for staff based in Damascus, required
formal approval from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (see table 4), while others, in
particular those for field-based staff, were deployed in accordance with agreements
at the local level with governors and other relevant parties.
Table 3
Total number of missions conducted from within the Syrian Arab Republic by
United Nations agencies, by type: April and May 2019
Type of mission

Blanket
approval

Governorate
approval

Total
number

Assessment missions

9

22

–

31

Missions accompanying aid deliveries

6

193

–

199

Monitoring missions

48

245

2

295

Security, logistics and administrative support
missions

14

20

–

34

77

480

2

559

Total

12/22

Note
verbale

19-10124

S/2019/508

Figure II
Total number of missions conducted from within the Syrian Arab Republic by
United Nations agencies, by Governorate: April and May 2019
180
160

7

140
120
100
80

9
152

60
40

90

20

10

17

46

44

5

2

34

33

3

0

20

0
14

Blanket and Governorate approvals

4

5

4

5

13

12

10

7

4
4

2
3

Note verbale

Table 4
Requests for United Nations access for single-agency missions: April and
May 2019
Number
requested

Number
approved

Percentage
approved

Assessment
Assessment missions
missions

13

10

77

Missions accompanying aid deliveries

10

5

50

Monitoring missions

83

46

55

Security, logistics and administrative support missions

17

13

76

123

74

60

Type of request

Total

34. Improvements in access from within the Syrian Arab Republic have been made
over the past year, in particular in Tartus, Ladhiqiyah, Hasakah, Homs, Aleppo and
Hama Governorates. Nevertheless, humanitarian access from within the country
continued to be challenging in some parts and for certain actors, including the United
Nations. During the reporting period, a number of access constraints were reported in
Sinjar, Tamani‘ah and Abu al-Zuhur in Idlib, owing mostly to the high intensity of
hostilities. Access was also limited in Raqqah city and east of the Euphrates River in
Dayr al-Zawr, including the Hajin enclave, owing mostly to widespread explosive
hazard contamination that remains after violence has ended and until clearance
operations have taken place. Some areas in the south of the country and in eastern
Ghutah were also not accessible in a sustainable manner owing to administrative
regulations. Limitations on the ability of certain sectors to carry out structured needs
assessments across the country remained.
35. During the reporting period, while the overall number of missions decreased
owing to the fuel crisis and the observation of the holy month of Ramadan, missions
to many areas across the country nevertheless increased, including areas less
frequently accessible in the past. The United Nations and its partners continued to
deliver assistance to an average of 3 million people on a monthly basis. The United
19-10124

13/22

S/2019/508

Nations received approval from the Syrian authorities to conduct 559 missions, of
which 482 were approved at the local level and 77 at the national level. Of the
missions approved at the national level, 48 were intended for the monitoring of
programmes. Of the 559 missions conducted, 77 required approval from the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs, most of which were missions to Hasakah Governorate. Of the
requests submitted to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 60 per cent were approved,
none were denied and 40 per cent remain unanswered.
36. The United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republ ic
continued its operations as authorized under Security Council resolutions 2165
(2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017) and 2449 (2018). During
the reporting period, the Mechanism monitored the delivery of 34 consignments by
six United Nations agencies, consisting of 1,157 trucks, from three border crossings:
17 from Bab al-Hawa (999 trucks); 15 from Bab al-Salam (146 trucks); and 2 from
Ya‘rubiyah (12 trucks). There were no concerns or questions about the humanitarian
nature of the consignments sent. The United Nations provided 48 -hour notice to the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic regarding all shipments. The Mechanism
continued to benefit from the excellent cooperation of the Governments of Iraq,
Jordan and Turkey.
Visas and registrations
37. The United Nations continued to work with the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic to allow for the timely provision of visas to staff. However, an increased
number of visas for United Nations staff have been rejected, with 17 rejected during
the reporting period as compared with 10 in February and March (see table 5).
Table 5
Requests for United Nations visas: April and May 2019
Number
requested

Number
approved

Number
rejected

Number
pending

Visas requested during reporting period

148

88

17

41

Renewals requested during reporting period

142

93

0

49

Visas pending from before reporting period

42

20

4

18

Renewals pending from before reporting period

41

39

0

2

Type of request

Note: During the reporting period, the United Nations withdrew two visa requests.

38. A total of 26 international non-governmental organizations are registered with
the Government to operate in the country.
Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and premises
39. The United Nations and non-governmental organizations continued to
implement programmes in areas affected by frequent clashes among parties to the
conflict, by air strikes and by the regular exchange of indirect artillery fire and other
attacks. Humanitarian relief personnel also operate in areas highly contaminated with
unexploded ordnance, explosive remnants of war and landmines.
40. Since the beginning of the conflict, hundreds of humanitarian workers have
reportedly been killed, including 22 staff memb ers of the United Nations and
organizations of the United Nations system, 18 of whom were staff members of
UNRWA; 66 staff members and volunteers of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent; and
8 staff members and volunteers of the Palestine Red Crescent Society. Man y staff

14/22

19-10124

S/2019/508

members of international and national non-governmental organizations have also
been killed.
41. A total of 28 staff members of agencies and programmes of the United Nations
system (1 staff member of the United Nations Development Programme and 27 staff
members of UNRWA) were detained or missing at the end of the reporting period.

III. Observations
42. The past few weeks have seen a deadly escalation of the conflict in the north western part of the Syrian Arab Republic. I have consistently warn ed against a
full-scale battle in Idlib, stressing that this could risk unleashing a spiral of human
suffering unlike any we have seen in the conflict so far. Despite my warnings,
hostilities have intensified in the north-west of the country, involving government and
pro-government forces, armed opposition forces and the United Nations -listed
terrorist organization the Levant Liberation Organization. Over the past five weeks,
air strikes, shelling and ground fighting, including the reported use of barrel bo mbs
and incendiary weapons, have resulted in at least 160 civilian deaths, with hundreds
more injured, and have pushed hundreds of thousands of people to flee to safer areas.
Hospitals, schools and markets have been destroyed. Crops have been burned.
Children are out of school. We are faced with a horrendous disaster in the making.
43. I am acutely alarmed by the scale of intolerable incidents affecting health -care
and education facilities. Since 1 April, 26 attacks on health-care facilities in the northwest of the country have been confirmed by the World Health Organization through
its global surveillance system. Some facilities have been hit twice. Other hospitals
are closing for fear of being attacked. A total of 49 health-care facilities have partially
or totally suspended their activities. I must remind all parties that intentionally
directing attacks against hospitals and places where the sick and wounded are
gathered, as well as against buildings, materials, medical units, transport and
personnel using the distinctive emblems of the Geneva Conventions in conformity
with international law, constitutes a war crime. Any military operations, including
those by and against United Nations-listed terrorist groups, must respect the rules of
international humanitarian law, including those on the protection of civilians and
civilian objects. In this regard, I emphasize that hospitals and schools must be
protected in accordance with the rules of international humanitarian law.
44. The escalation in the north-western part of the Syrian Arab Republic is
undermining the efforts of my Special Envoy to reinvigorate the political process, and
the threat of miscalculation and broader regional conflict is ever-present, posing
threats to international peace and security. I reiterate my calls to all sides to maintain
their commitments to upholding the memorandum on the stabilization of the situation
in the Idlib de-escalation area signed by the Russian Federation and Turkey on
17 September 2018 and to all parties to uphold international humanitarian law and
protect civilians. De-escalation is essential to advancing a political solution.
45. I condemn in the strongest terms reports of unlawful deprivation of liberty and
enforced disappearances of persons, including women and c hildren, held in
Government-run detention facilities or by non-State armed groups. I call upon the
Government and non-State armed groups to ensure full transparency in relation to
persons in their custody, accounting for their fate, whereabouts and conditi on to
relatives, and to institute effective and transparent investigations into all allegations
of torture and ensure that perpetrators are held accountable. For individuals who are
facing criminal prosecution, full respect for due process and fair trial r ights should be
ensured in accordance with international law. I would also remind the Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic that it should exert all efforts, in association with mandated
19-10124

15/22

S/2019/508

national and international bodies, to ascertain the whereabouts and condition of
missing persons.
46. I remain disturbed about the situation of civilians who have fled the last ISIL
hideouts in eastern Dayr al-Zawr, including women and children allegedly or actually
associated with ISIL. Many of these civilians are being held in unacceptable
conditions with limited access to humanitarian services, while others, including
women and children, have been detained in unidentified places, with no information
provided about their whereabouts or well-being.
47. Continued impunity for alleged serious violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law by parties to the conflict remains of grave concern. I
call upon all parties to the conflict, in particular the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic, all States, civil society and the United Nations system to cooperate fully
with the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011,
in particular by providing relevant information and documentation. Accountability
for serious violations of human rights and international humanitarian law is central to
achieving sustainable peace in the Syrian Arab Republic. I reiterate my call for the
situation in the country to be referred to the International Criminal Court.
48. In view of ongoing serious concerns repeatedly raised with regard to the
protection of civilians and other humanitarian and human rights conc erns in the
Syrian Arab Republic, I strongly urge the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic,
in line with Human Rights Council resolutions S-18/1 and 19/22, to cooperate with
OHCHR, including through the establishment of a field presence with the mandate to
protect and promote human rights.
49. I call upon all parties to the conflict, especially the Syrian parties, as well as
regional and international actors, to do their utmost to support the efforts of my
Special Envoy to advance a political solution, as mandated by Security Council
resolution 2254 (2015). I welcome his efforts to finalize the composition and terms
of reference of the constitutional committee and to facilitate confidence -building
measures. Only a comprehensive, inclusive, Syrian-led political solution that is in
line with resolution 2254 (2015) and meets the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian
people can lead the way towards a sustainable peace for the Syrian peopl e and put an
end to the unimaginable suffering endured by Syrians for far too long.

16/22

19-10124

S/2019/508

Annex
Reported incidents affecting civilians recorded by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights: April and
May 2019 *
Idlib Governorate
• On 7 April, four civilians were killed and 10 others injured as a result of what
were alleged to be ground-based strikes that hit the city of Saraqib in eastern
rural Idlib.
• On 8 April, one civilian was killed and two others injured (one woman and
one boy) as a result of an improvised explosive device that detonated near their
vehicle in the area of Dana in northern rural Idlib.
• On 8 April, at least 12 civilians, including 1 woman and 2 children, were injured
as a result of what were alleged to be ground-based strikes that hit the city of
Jisr al-Shughur in western rural Idlib.
• On 10 April, a doctor in Idlib city was arrested at his clinic, reportedly by
members of the Levant Liberation Organization, for being critical of the group
on social media. His status and whereabouts remain unknown.
• On 14 April, seven civilians, including five children, were injured as a result of
what were alleged to be air strikes that hit within the vicinity of weapons
warehouses belonging to the Levant Liberation Organization in the city of Ariha
in southern rural Idlib.
• On 18 April, eight internally displaced civilians, including five women and two
children, were killed as a result of what were alleged to be ground -based strikes
that hit within the vicinity of the Umm Jalal makeshift camp for internally
displaced persons near the village of Tuwaynah in the Ma‘arrat al-Nu‘man area
in southern rural Idlib. The camp reportedly hosts approximately 200 internally
displaced families.
• On 23 April, seven civilians, including two women, one girl and two boys, were
killed and the Haj Bakri school was partially damaged as a result of what were
alleged to be ground-based strikes that hit the city of Khan Shaykhun in southern
rural Idlib.
• On 24 April, at least 13 civilians, including 1 woman and 2 girls, were killed
and 24 others, including 6 women, were injured as a result of an “unidentified”
explosion that occurred in a residential area in the city of Jisr al -Shughur. The
explosion resulted in the collapse of several residential buildings. In previous
similar incidents in Idlib Governorate, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights confirmed that non-State armed groups,
including the Levant Liberation Organization, had placed arms depots in close
proximity to civilians and civilian objects, which resulted in the killing and
injuring of scores of civilians, including women and children, owing to the
uncontrolled blasts of such depots.

* The list of incidents exemplifies human rights issues of concern raised in the report. Owing to
the changing patterns of conflict and the loss of networks of credible and/or reliable sources in
many conflict-affected areas, however, verifying incidents is increasingly difficult. The list,
which contains only those incidents that were reported to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and that have been verified according to its methodology,
should not be considered comprehensive.
19-10124

17/22

S/2019/508

• On 27 April, gunmen arrested a humanitarian activist at a checkpoint in the Dana
area in northern rural Idlib and held him for 22 days befor e releasing him in
exchange for a large amount of money.
• On 30 April, five civilians, including one woman and one girl, were injured and
the medical facility of Habit was partially damaged as a result of what were
alleged to be air and ground-based strikes that hit the village of Habit in southern
rural Idlib.
• On 30 April, the Qasabiyah school was partially damaged as a result of what
were alleged to be air and ground-based strikes that hit the town of Qasabiyah
in southern rural Idlib.
• On 5 May, one civilian woman was killed and the Nabd al-Hayat hospital was
destroyed as a result of what were alleged to be air and ground -based strikes
that hit the town of Has in southern rural Idlib.
• On 5 May, three civilians, including a first responder (medical staff), were killed
and the Orient hospital was destroyed as a result of what were alleged to be air
and ground-based strikes that hit the town of Kafr Nubl in southern rural Idlib.
• On 6 May, three civilians were killed (one woman and two boys) and three
others, including one boy, injured as a result of what were alleged to be air and
ground-based strikes that hit the village of Rub’a al-Joz in rural Khan Shaykhun.
• On 7 May, five civilians, including two women and one girl, were killed and at
least 17 others injured as a result of what were alleged to be air strikes that hit
within the vicinity of a local market in Ra’s al-Ayn village in eastern rural Idlib.
• On 10 May, three civilians were killed (one woman and two children) and a
mosque was significantly damaged as a result of what were alleged to be air
strikes that hit the town of Ma‘arrat Sin in southern rural Idlib.
• On 14 May, eight civilians, including one girl, were killed and three others
injured and the Abdul Rahman Nasser school was partially damaged as a result
of what were alleged to be air strikes that hit within the vicinity of a local market
in the city of Jisr al-Shughur.
• On 16 May, a compound of three educational structures was damaged as a result
of what were alleged to be air strikes that hit the town of Kafr Sajnah in southern
rural Idlib. The compound included the Kafr Sajnah and Hamzah al -Khatib
primary schools and the Mustaqbal kindergarten.
• On 17 May, the Fadhel al-Khatib school was damaged as a result of what were
alleged to be air strikes that hit the town of Kafr Nubl in southern rural Idlib.
• On 19 May, 10 civilians, including 4 women and 4 children (3 boys and 1 girl),
were killed as a result of what were alleged to be air strikes that hit the town of
Kafr Nubl.
• On 21 May, nine civilians, including one boy, were killed as a result of what
were alleged to be air strikes that hit within the vicinity of a local market in the
city of Ma‘arrat al-Nu‘man.
• On 21 May, two civilian men were killed and the Ruqayyah Bint Malik school
was significantly damaged as a result of what were alleged to be air strikes that
hit the city of Jisr al-Shughur. On the same day, the Farahidi school was partially
damaged as a result of what were alleged to be air strikes that hit the city of
Khan Shaykhun.
• On 22 May, five civilians, including one boy, were killed and the Shifa hospital
was damaged as a result of what were alleged to be air strikes that hit the city
18/22

19-10124

S/2019/508

of Saraqib. On the same day, the Maysalun school was partially damaged as a
result of what were alleged to be air strikes that hit the town of Kafr Sajnah.
• On 23 May, three civilians, including one girl, were killed and the Abu Bakr
al-Siddiq school was damaged as a result of what were alleged to be air strikes
that hit the town of Kafr Nubl.
• On 23 May, the Kiwan medical centre was partially damaged as a result of what
were alleged to be air strikes that hit the town of Kansafrah in southern rural
Idlib.
• On 23 May, the Abdul Majid al-Haj Bakri school was significantly damaged as
a result of what were alleged to be air strikes that hit the city of Khan Shaykhun.
• On 25 May, the Ibn al-Shahid medical centre for physical therapy was partially
damaged as a result of what were alleged to be air strikes that hit the town of
Barah in southern rural Idlib.
• On 26 May, five civilians, including one boy and one woman, were killed as a
result of what were alleged to be air strikes that hit within the vicinity of a local
market in the city of Ma‘arrat al-Nu‘man.
• On 27 May, at least 12 civilians, including 7 women and 4 children (2 boys and
2 girls), were killed and at least 8 others injured as a result of what were alleged
to be air strikes that hit the city of Ariha.
• On 28 May, seven civilians, including one woman and five children (three boys
and two girls), were killed as a result of what were alleged to be air strikes that
hit the town of Ihsim in southern rural Idlib.
• On 29 May, six civilians (five women and one boy) were killed as a result of
what were alleged to be air strikes that hit the village of Sarjah in southern rural
Idlib.
• On 30 May, five civilians, including one woman and three children (two boys
and one girl), were killed as a result of what were alleged to be air strikes that
hit the city of Ma‘arrat al-Nu‘man.
Hama Governorate
• On 30 April, one girl was injured as a result of what were alleged to be air and
ground-based strikes that hit the town of Kafr Zayta in northern rural Hama.
• On 30 April, three civilians, including one woman, were killed and 10 others,
including 2 women and 1 boy, were injured as a result of what were alleged to
be air and ground-based strikes that hit the town of Kafr Nabudah in northern
rural Hama.
• On 1 May, two civilians (a man and his wife) were killed as a result of what
were alleged to be air and ground-based strikes that hit the town of Kafr
Nabudah.
• On 4 May, a man was killed and a woman injured (both civilians) as a result of
what were alleged to be ground-based strikes that hit the area of Qalʻat al-Madiq
in northern rural Hama.
• On 7 May, six civilians including three women and two children (one girl and
one boy) were killed as a result of what were alleged to be air strikes that hit the
town of Kafr Zayta.
• On 10 May, one civilian was killed as a result of what were alleged to be ground based strikes that hit the town of Kafr Zayta.
19-10124

19/22

S/2019/508

• On 11 May, a medical facility was significantly damaged as a result of what
were alleged to be air and ground-based strikes that hit the town of Lataminah
in northern rural Hama.
• On 13 May, one civilian was killed as a result of what were alleged to be ground based strikes that hit the town of Lataminah.
• On 12 May, six civilians, including one woman and five chi ldren (two girls and
three boys), were killed and six others, including three children, were injured as
a result of what were alleged to be ground-based strikes that hit a residential
area in the Government-held town of Suqaylibiyah in northern rural Hama.
• On 13 May, a 15-year-old boy was killed and five others injured as a result of
what were alleged to be ground-based strikes that hit a residential area in the
town of Suqaylibiyah.
• On 19 May, two civilians were killed (a woman and her boy) as a res ult of what
were alleged to be ground-based strikes that hit the village of Qastun in northern
rural Hama.
• On 26 May, one civilian was killed as a result of what were alleged to be air
strikes that hit the town of Kafr Zayta.
• On 26 May, the hospital of Suqaylibiyah was partially damaged as a result of
what were alleged to be ground-based strikes that hit the town of Suqaylibiyah.
Aleppo Governorate
• On 15 April, three civilian men were injured as a result of what was alleged to
be an explosion of an improvised explosive device attached to a motorcycle that
detonated inside a busy livestock market in the town of Qabbasin in the Bab
area in eastern rural Aleppo. No group claimed responsibility for the attack.
• On 14 April, six civilians, including two women and two girls, were killed and
11 others, including 1 woman and 2 children, were injured as a result of what
were alleged to be ground-based strikes that hit a local market in the
neighbourhood of Khalidiyah and a residential area in Nile Street in the
Government-held city of Aleppo.
• On 8 May, two civilians were killed and four others injured as a result of what
was alleged to be the explosion of an improvised explosive device attached to a
motorbike that detonated in the middle of a local market known by the name of
Arbi‘aa Souq (the Wednesday market) in the village of Farat in the Manbij area
in north-eastern rural Aleppo.
• On 14 May, 10 civilians (8 Palestinians and 2 Syrians), including 1 woman,
3 boys and 1 girl, were killed and at least 11 others injured as a result of what
were alleged to be ground-based strikes that hit the Palestinian refugees camp
of Nayrab in Aleppo city. The camp for internally displaced persons is in close
proximity to the Nayrab military airbase that is under the control of government
forces in Aleppo city.
• On 15 May, one civilian woman was killed as a result of what were alleged to
be ground-based strikes that hit the neighbourhood of Jamiliyah in the
Government-held city of Aleppo.
• On 21 May, six civilians, including one woman and four children, were injured
as a result of what were alleged to be ground-based strikes that hit a residential
area in the neighbourhood of Masakin al-Sabil and Tishrin Street in the city of
Aleppo.

20/22

19-10124

S/2019/508

• On 28 May, one woman was killed as a result of what were alleged to be air
strikes that hit the city of Atarib in western rural Aleppo.
• On 28 May, seven civilians, including two women and three children, were
killed as a result of what were alleged to be air strikes that hit the village of Kafr
Halab in western rural Aleppo.
Dayr al-Zawr and Hasakah Governorates
• On 11 April, members of a non-State armed group raided the fifth sector of the
Hawl camp in eastern Hasakah Governorate and took away at least 21 Syrians,
including 9 boys under the age of 15 years reportedly associated with Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) families. At the time of writing, the fate and
whereabouts of these individuals were unknown to their families or the
community in the camp.
• On 12 April, three civilians, including two women, were killed as a result of
what was alleged to be the explosion of an unexploded ordnance that detonated
inside their house in the neighbourhood of Suwar in the Sha ‘fah town of eastern
rural Dayr al-Zawr.
• On 26 May, members of a non-State armed group raided the fifth sector of the
Hawl camp and took away 20 Syrian women for unidentified reasons. At the
time of writing, the whereabouts and status of the women were unknown to their
families or the community in the camp.
Raqqah Governorate
• On 9 April, a double attack, reportedly with improvised explosive devices,
occurred near the Amir bakery in Nur Street, west of Raqqah city centre. The
first explosion killed one civilian and injured at least three others. As other
civilians rushed to the scene to help the injured, the second explosion soon
followed, killing three more civilians, including one woman and one boy, and
injuring at least two others.
• On 15 April, five children were injured as a result of what was alleged to be an
unexploded ordnance that detonated near them while they were playing in
agricultural land in the village of Qantari in the Tall Abyad area in northern rural
Raqqah.
• On 22 April, three civilians including two women were killed and one boy was
injured as a result of what was alleged to be an unexploded ordnance that
detonated in the vicinity of a building in Bassil Street, near the Jassim bakery
in Raqqah city.
Dar‘a Governorate
• On 8 April, five civilian men were arrested for unknown reasons by members of
the Air Force Intelligence manning a checkpoint in the Shaykh Miskin area. The
authorities refused to provide further information to the families of the detainees
and denied having them in their custody.
• On 12 April, the preacher of the Said bin al-Massib mosque in Harak town in
eastern rural Dar‘a was shot and killed by unidentified perpetrators in the
vicinity of the mosque.
• On 20 April, a civilian was shot and killed in front of his house by unidentified
armed men in the Tafas area in western rural Dar‘a. The victim was a
“reconciled” fighter who had reportedly taken part in the “reconciliation”

19-10124

21/22

S/2019/508

process in Tafas from July 2018 and later joined the Fourth Division of the
Syrian army.
• On 18 May, two boys (aged 11 and 12 years) were arrested by members of the
Military Security in a house raid in the Lajah area in northern rural Dar ‘a. The
families of the two boys were denied information by the authorities. The status
and whereabouts of the boys were unknown at the time of writing.

22/22

19-10124
