S/PRST/2004/46

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
14 December 2004
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5100th meeting of the Security Council, held on 14 December 2004, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Protection of
civilians in armed conflict”, the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council has considered the matter of protection of
civilians in armed conflict. The Council recalls all its relevant resolutions, in
particular resolutions 1265 (1999) of 17 September 1999 and 1296 (2000) of
19 April 2000 on the protection of civilians in armed conflict as well as
statements by its presidents and reiterates its commitment to address the
widespread impact of armed conflict on civilians.
“The Security Council reaffirms its strong condemnation of all acts of
violence targeting civilians or other protected persons under international law.
The Council is gravely concerned that civilians are increasingly targeted by
combatants and armed elements during armed conflict, in particular women,
children and other vulnerable groups, including refugees and internally
displaced persons, and recognizes the negative impact this will have on durable
peace and national reconciliation. The Council also reaffirms its condemnation
of all incitements to violence against civilians in situations of armed conflict,
in particular the use of media to incite hatred and violence. The Security
Council urges all parties to armed conflict, including non-State parties, to put
an end to such practices.
“The Security Council reiterates its call to all parties to armed conflict,
including non-State parties, to comply fully with the provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations and with rules and principles of international law, in
particular, international humanitarian law, and as applicable, human rights and
refugee law, and to implement fully the relevant decisions of the Security
Council. The Security Council recalls the obligations of all States to ensure
respect for international humanitarian law, including the four Geneva
conventions, and emphasizes the responsibility of States to end impunity and to
prosecute those responsible for genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity
and serious violations of humanitarian law. It further calls on all States which
have not already done so to consider ratifying or acceding to major instruments
of international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law, and to take
appropriate measures to implement them.

04-64601 (E) 141204

*0464601*

S/PRST/2004/46

“The Security Council underlines the importance of safe and unhindered
access of humanitarian personnel and assistance to civilians in armed conflict
in accordance with international law. The Security Council reiterates its call to
all parties to armed conflict, including non-State parties, to take all necessary
measures to ensure security and freedom of movement of United Nations and
associated personnel as well as personnel of humanitarian organizations. The
Security Council condemns all attacks targeting United Nations personnel and
other humanitarian workers, and underlines that the perpetrators of such
attacks must be held accountable as outlined in its resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003. The Security Council underscores the importance for
Humanitarian organizations to uphold the principles of neutrality, impartiality,
humanity of their humanitarian activities and independence of their objectives.
“The Security Council recognizes the importance of a comprehensive,
coherent and action-oriented approach, including in early planning, of
protection of civilians in situations of armed conflict. It stresses, in this regard,
the need to adopt a broad strategy of conflict prevention, which addresses the
root causes of armed conflict in a comprehensive manner in order to enhance
the protection of civilians on a long term basis, including by promoting
sustainable development, poverty eradication, national reconciliation, good
governance, democracy, the rule of law and respect for and protection of
human rights. It encourages further cooperation and coordination between
member States and the United Nations system. The Council, moreover,
recognizes the needs of civilians under foreign occupation and stresses further,
in this regard, the responsibilities of the occupying Power.
“The Security Council, recognizing the regional dimensions of certain
armed conflict, stresses the need for regional cooperation in order to address
cross-border issues such as disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
rehabilitation, cross border movement of refugees and combatants, human
trafficking, illicit flow of small arms and illegal exploitation of natural
resources and post-conflict situations. It encourages regional and subregional
organizations to develop, as appropriate, a regional protection strategy and
provide for a coherent and strong framework for addressing protection issues.
The Council welcomes the steps taken by regional organizations in this regard
and requests the United Nations system and other international organizations to
provide them with the necessary support, and to consider means for the
reinforcement of national capacities. The Council takes into account, in this
regard, the Secretary-General’s recommendation regarding the establishment of
a framework within which the United Nations could engage with regional
organizations more systematically on humanitarian issues related to protection
and access and better address those issues at the regional intergovernmental
level.
“The Security Council strongly condemns the increased use of sexual and
gender-based violence as a weapon of war as well as the recruitment and use of
child soldiers by parties to armed conflict in violation of international
obligations applicable to them. The Security Council underlines the
vulnerability of women and children in situations of armed conflict, bearing in
mind in this regard its resolutions 1325 (2000) on women, peace and security
and 1539 (2004) as well as all other resolutions on children and armed conflict,
and recognizes their special needs, in particular those of the girl child. It

2

S/PRST/2004/46

stresses the importance of developing strategies aimed at preventing and
responding to sexual and gender-based violence, through the improvement in
the design of peacekeeping and assessment missions by, inter alia, the
inclusion of gender and child protection advisers. It stresses also the
importance for women and children subject to exploitation and sexual violence
to receive adequate assistance and support.
“Mindful of the particular vulnerability of refugees and internally
displaced persons, the Council reaffirms the primary responsibility of States to
ensure their protection, in particular, by preserving the civilian character of
camps of refugees and internally displaced persons and to take effective
measures to protect them from infiltration by armed groups, abduction and
forced military recruitment.
“Reaffirms its readiness to ensure that peacekeeping missions are given
suitable mandates and adequate resources so as to enable them to better protect
civilians under imminent threat of physical danger, including by strengthening
the ability of the United Nations to plan and rapidly deploy peacekeeping and
humanitarian personnel, utilizing the United Nations Stand-by Arrangements
System, as appropriate.
“The Council considers that a coherent and integrated approach to
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and rehabilitation of excombatants, which takes into account the special needs of child soldiers and
women combatants, is of crucial importance for a sustained peace and stability.
The Council reaffirms the need for the inclusion of these activities in the
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping operations and emphasizes the
importance of resources being made available for such activities.
“The Security Council is concerned by the growing problem of
humanitarian emergency situations while funding and resources do not match
requirements. It urges the international community to ensure adequate and
timely funding in response to humanitarian need across crises so as to provide
sufficient humanitarian assistance in alleviating the suffering of civilian
populations, in particular those in areas affected by armed conflict or emerging
from a situation of conflict.
“The Security Council expresses its appreciation for the efforts of the
United Nations agencies, regional organizations, international humanitarian
organizations and other relevant actors aimed at raising international awareness
of the suffering of civilians in armed conflicts, including refugees and
internally displaced persons, and considers such efforts as a key element for
the promotion of a culture of protection and for the building of international
solidarity with the victims of armed conflict.
“The Security Council invites the Secretary-General to continue to refer
to it relevant information and analysis where he believes that such information
or analysis could contribute to the improvement of its work on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict and to continue to include in his written reports
to the Council on matters of which it is seized, as appropriate, observations
relating to the protection of civilians in armed conflict. In this context, the
Security Council reiterates the importance of the aide-memoire annexed in the
statement by its President (S/PRST/2002/6) as well as the road map for the

3

S/PRST/2004/46

protection of civilians in armed conflict as a practical tool for dealing with
protection issues.
“The Security Council notes the submission of the Secretary-General’s
report on protection of civilians in armed conflict of 18 May 2004
(S/2004/431) which examines the ten-point platform and requests him to
submit by 28 November 2005 his next report, and to include in this report
information on the implementation of Security Council resolutions previously
adopted on this subject as well as any additional recommendations on ways the
Council and other Organs of the United Nations, acting within their respective
spheres of responsibility, could further improve the protection of civilians in
situations of armed conflict.”

4
