S/2005/828

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
27 December 2005
Original: English

Note by the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit a letter dated 22 December 2005 from the
Chairman of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in
Africa to the President of the Security Council, transmitting the report on a seminar
on the cooperation between the United Nations and the African regional
organizations in the field of peace and security held at United Nations Headquarters
on 15 December 2005 (see annex).

05-66650 (E)

190106

*0566650*

230106

S/2005/828

Annex
Letter dated 22 December 2005 from the Chairman of the Ad
Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in
Africa to the President of the Security Council
You may recall that the Security Council Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa held a seminar on cooperation between the
United Nations and the African regional organizations in the field of peace and
security on 15 December 2005 at United Nations Headquarters.
I have the honour to forward the report of the seminar, which has been agreed
by the members of the Working Group.
I would like to request that the present letter, the attached report and its
annexes be circulated as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Simon B. Idohou
Ambassador
Permanent Representative
Chairman of the Security Council Ad Hoc Working Group on
Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa

2

05-66650

S/2005/828

Appendix
SECURITY COUNCIL AD HOC WORKING GROUP ON CONFLICT PREVENTION
AND RESOLUTION IN AFRICA
Seminar on “Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Regional Organizations
in the field of Peace and Security”
New York, UNHQ, ECOSOC CHAMBER, 15 December 2005
-------------------------------------

INTRODUCTION:

REPORT OF THE SEMINAR

1. In the framework of the implementation of its Programme of Work for the year 2005, the United Nations
Security Council Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa chaired by the HEM.
Simon Bodéhoussè IDOHOU, Permanent Representative of the Republic of Benin, held on 15 December 2005,
in the ECOSOC Chamber, a seminar on the topic "Cooperation between the UN and the African Regional
Organizations in the field of Peace and Security". The Concept paper is attached as Annex I.
2. The seminar was co-chaired by the Chairman of the Working Group, by HE. Professor Ibrahim GAMBARI
Under -Secretary-General for Political Affairs and by HE. Ambassador Michel DUCLOS, Deputy Permanent
Representative of France replacing HE Mr. Jean–Marc de la SABLIERE Ambassador Extraordinary and
Plenipotentiary, Permanent Representative of France.
3. The Seminar was open to all Members of the United Nations and Agencies, Programmes and Funds of the
United Nations and NGOs and other Organizations of the Civil Society. Three major items were examined:
- Presentation of the African Mechanism (s) for Peace and Security;
- African Mechanism(s) for Peace and Security in the framework of the collective peace and
security system established by the UN Charter;
- Capacity building for the African Mechanism(s) for Peace and Security .
4. During the Seminar the participants heard and discussed a keynote statement of President Alpha Oumar
KONARE, Chairperson of the African Union Commission delivered by Prof. R. Omotayo OLANIJAN, Ag.
Permanent Observer of the African Union. Statements were made by three following Speakers:
- H.E. Sir Emyr JONES PARRY, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, Permanent Representative of
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, President of the Security Council;
- H.E. Mr. Hedi ANNABI, Assistant Secretary General for Peacekeeping Operations;
- Professor Margaret VOGT, Deputy Director of Africa II Division of DPA.
The Statements and comments made are attached as annex III to this report.
The followings personalities were invited and took the floor as Discussants:
- H.E. Professor Judith Mbula BAHEMUKA, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Kenya to the United Nations;
- H.E. Mr. Peter MAURER, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, Permanent Representative of
Switzerland to the United Nations ;

05-66650

3

S/2005/828

-

HE Mr. Aboubacar Ibrahim ABANI, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Niger to the United Nations;
H.E. Mr. Maged Abdelfattah ABDELAZIZ, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, Permanent
Representative of the Arab Republic of Egypt to the United Nations;
H.E. Mr. Jagdish KOONJUL, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, Permanent Representative
of the Republic of Maurice to the United Nations;
H.E. Mr. Augustine P. MAHIGA, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, Permanent
Representative of the United Republic of Tanzania to the United Nations;
H.E. Mr. Michel DUCLOS, Ambassador, Deputy Permanent Representative of France to the United
Nations;
Mr. Vasu GOUNDEN, Executive Director of African Center for Constructive Resolution of Disputes
(African Center for Constructive Resolution of Disputes (ACCORD -South Africa);
Mr. Paul van TONGEREN, Executive Director of the European Center for Conflict Prevention;
Professor Shepard FORMAN, Director of the Center on International Cooperation of the New York
University.

5-Fourteen Non Governmental Organizations both from abroad and based in New York were invited to attend the
Seminar.
6. The purpose of the Seminar was to assess the developments of the African peace and Security structure and
the relationships with the United Nations and to workout recommendation on how to streamline them to increase
efficiency both of the United Nations and the African Regional Organizations in coping with the challenges facing
them in the field of peace and security. After thorough consideration of the topic the participants arrived to the
following conclusions:
A- AFRICAN UNION PEACE AND SECURITY ARCHITECTURE
7. The essence of the Peace and Security Architecture (PSA) a is to place the entire Continent under a
permanent observation and interpretation of any signals that may be symptomatic of a simmering crisis, with the
potential to explode into a disruptive conflict, whereby those signals will then trigger off remedial action, in short
early detection and timely and effective intervention to deal with crises and conflicts. Emphasis is also placed on
the need to promote democratic political and economic governance: The PSA comprises following components:
- the Peace and Security Council;
- the Chairperson of the Commission of the African Union;
- the Panel of the Wise representing a moral lever for preventing and resolving conflicts;
- Continental Early Warning System;
- Peace Fund (Provision of resources to carry out interventions)
- African Standby Force composed of regional brigades and the Military Staff Committee;
- Regional Mechanisms of Regional Economic Communities (REC). The REC have

4

05-66650

S/2005/828

B- CRITICAL UNDERTAKINGS FOR REINFORCEMENT OF THE AFRICAN PAECE AND SECURITY
ARCHTECTURE
8. The critical undertaking of the Peace and Security Council and the related structures identified by the
Chairperson are as follows:
- The anticipation and prevention of conflicts;
- The promotion and the implementation of peacebuilding;
- The development of a common defense policy for the Union;
- The coordination and harmonization of continental efforts in preventing and combating of terrorism; and
- The promotion and encouragement of democratic practices, good governance and the rule of law,
protect human rights and fundamental freedoms;
- The strengthening of the capability to launch peacekeeping operations to deal with blown out conflicts in
all their dimensions (refugee flows, internally displaced persons, humanitarian services etc.).
C- RULES FOR THE USE OF FORCE AND THE FULL INTEGRATION OF THE AFRICAN PEACE AND
SECURITY ARCHITECTURE IN THE SYSTEM OF COLLECTIVE PEACE AND SECURITY ESTABLISHED BY
THE CHARTER
9. African regional and sub-regional organizations had set new norms on the parameters for international
engagement in conflict situations, especially in civil-war contexts and in situations where a State was unable or
unwilling to perform its role and responsibility. The legal instruments establishing the PSA and the regional
mechanisms defined the principles and a new set of rules devised to meet the challenges facing the continent
which the UN should take notice of. It was clearly stated during the seminar that those rules go beyond the
Charter in setting up a more voluntarist proactive approach. In this spirit the African mechanisms established the
responsibility to protect. It was emphasized that African states went as far as to accept the intervention in case of
unconstitutional change of government.
10. The Additional Protocol relating to Democracy and Good Governance stated some revolutionary principles
emphasizing the interdependency between peace and security, good governance and democracy in the subregion of the ECOWAS. So for the first time in the history of international relations States have accepted a set of
rules for exercising state power and determined sanctions to be applied in case of violations, therewith putting
under international scrutiny questions considered as pertaining to the exclusive jurisdiction of national
sovereignty as internal affairs. In this sense, especially as regards the AU and Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) mechanisms, the two most advanced regional frameworks which go beyond the UN
Charter, in stating that the two mechanisms will be operational even without the consent of the host country,
these mechanisms have given a practical expression to the concept of the “responsibility to protect”.
11. The African PSA appears more and more as an integrated structure designed to be part and parcel of the
global collective peace and security system established by the Charter of the United Nations. The new African
mechanisms all called for their mandate to be endorsed by the Security Council. But the African Union would be
ready in certain circumstances to proceed without the endorsement by the international community taking into
account the new norms established by in the framework of the PSA. The responsibility to protect in principle rests
primarily on national states. The international community should help states fulfill it and starts thinking of
exercising this responsibility only when states are unwilling or unable to do that.

05-66650

5

S/2005/828

12. In this regard, the participants agreed on following recommendations:
-

-

-

-

-

The UN should embrace the normative evolution in Africa and seek a framework to integrate the African
Peace and Security Architecture and its new norms within the international legal framework and the
system of collective Security established by the UN Charter;
Mechanisms should be established to ensure clear and direct communication between the new organs
established and the UN and to maintain regular exchange of information,
A closer cooperation and a structured relationship should be established between the UN Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council. The United Nations Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council could hold joint meetings. In this sense the African Union
could be requested to provide regular reports on its activities and those of its subregional organizations
in the field of peace and security. The Security Council should insist on periodic reports and review to
allow for a collective review of progress made in the implementation of given mandates and a
transparent determination of when responsibility for the managements of such operations should be
transferred to the United Nations or to a coalition of the willing;
The AU should define more clearly how it will relate to its subregional organizations; the African Union
should remain the coordination center giving mandate to the subregional Organizations;
The United Nations Secretariat should seek to develop a wider menu of arrangements that would allow
closer interaction with the African regional mechanisms and would enable the UN to work with the region
at much earlier stage of conflicts;
The Security Council should support countries in difficulties and wanting assistance before the
emergence of a conflict. They stressed that the Security Council, in cooperation with regional
organizations, should better use and implement Security Council resolution S/RES/1625 (2005) adopted
by the Summit of the Security Council on 14 September 2005, on the prevention of conflicts, in particular
in Africa and do so while taking into account the Resolution 1631 (2005).
Severe human rights abuses should be seen as “a threat for bigger problems” and addressed at early as
possible ; The African Union has demonstrated commitment in tackling the spectrum of conflict in Africa
by putting itself a bit forward.

D- PRINCIPLES AND PRIORITIES OF THE COOPERATION IN THE FIELD OF PEACEKEEPING
13. The participants outlined following principles and priorities for the cooperation between the UN and the
African Regional Organizations in the field of peace and security:
- African states and regional organizations should be involved in a true international partnership, which
would have to be coordinated through the UN;
- Cooperation should go beyond peacekeeping and peacebuilding to include conflict prevention and
resolution, by focusing on social and economic problems in the region; stemming from lack of
development and distribution of resources, on political tensions due to marginalization non-participation
in the political system, and on environmental problems such as famines and droughts which tended to
exacerbate the already existing social, economic, and political challenges. They should be included in
the international approach to African conflicts; a particular attention should be given to youth and
unemployment problems on the African continent.
- The enhancement of regional capacity is and should be pursued as “strategic priority”;

6

05-66650

S/2005/828

-

-

-

-

Equal importance should be attached to military preparedness and to capacity-building for the civilian
components of peace operations;
Regional and UN efforts should be mutually reinforcing rather than duplicative or competitive, in order to
maximize efficiency. The comparative advantages of various organizations should be properly identified; it is
imperative to avoid on the one hand, treating the African states as “sub-contractors” of the UN, and on the
other hand, putting all of the responsibility on the Africans themselves; Strengthened regional capacities
should reinforce the collective approach, and thus not diminish the global responsibility in promoting peace
and security;
The cooperation should also focus on improving early warning, mediation and negotiation skills,
preparedness to respond to emergencies, peace support with a particular emphasis on civilian issues, and
peacebuilding, addressing issues such as security sector reform and institution building;
Peace consolidation should be seen as the next big challenge for the continent. In that regard, the envisaged
Peacebuilding Commission would present the right forum to assist countries emerging from armed conflicts.
Hence one of the main tasks of the UN today should be to prevent the reoccurrence of conflicts in Africa,
prevention strategies should include peacebuilding.
The UN should organize a “multi-stakeholder conference” in 2010 on “conflict prevention, peacebuilding and
development”. That conference should focus on a “coherent and integrated approach on the prevention of
armed conflict”.

E- STRUCTURING AND STREAMLINING OF THE COOPERATION
14. The participants stressed the need to take following recommendations into account as regards the structuring and
the streamlining of the cooperation:
- Enhanced cooperation between AU and UN on early warning mechanisms;
- Greater recognition of the role of mediators through full support to the Panel of the Wise;
- Redefinition of cooperation between UN and AU as regards common interests;
- Consideration of modalities and mechanisms for joint meetings of Regional Councils; and
- Establishment of a UN-AU Joint Task Team for post-conflict reconstruction;
- synchronization of external support according to the stage of development reached by each specific region;
- Shift in the logistic assistance from just training to actual and material support;
- Creation of a AU liaison desk at the UN to ensure constant linkages between the two organizations on African
warning mechanisms;
- Enhanced cooperation between the UN Security Council and the AU Peace and Security Council; and
- Greater attention to subregional organizations,
- Harmonization of the structure of the subregional mechanisms to enable the logical arrangement of regional
brigades and cooperation between regional economic communities; whereby ECOWAS, can provide a useful
model along which the support from the international community to the African continent can be channeled;
- Ascertaining of the African Union role as a coordination center giving mandate to the subregional
Organizations
- Maintaining the “centrality” of the UN in the strengthening of the cooperation between the UN and regional
organization.

05-66650

7

S/2005/828

F- CONCRETE STEPS TO SUPPORT THE AFRICAN PEACE AND SECURITY ARCHITECTURE - CAPACITY BUILDING
15. The participants identified following steps to be implemented in order to support the African peace and security
architecture:
- Equipping the AU and the Regional Economic Communities (REC) with appropriate management capability
for peace and security operations;
- Putting in place a reliable early warning capacity taking into account the contribution of civil society;
- Establishing appropriate organizational (less bureaucratic ) to manage the processes dealing with crises and
conflicts ;
- Effective mobilization of financial and logistical resources, with emphasis on internal resource mobilization;
- Enhancing the role of civil society in peace education and promotion of a culture of peace;
- Ensuring operational complementarities with the UN;
- Creating enabling conditions for the private sector;
- A more proactive role of the UN in coordinating with other international institutions in order to stimulate and
not to substitute regional initiatives ;
- Considering Impact assessment on peace building and human rights as an essential tool for fundraising;
- Increase of soft tools as essential elements to enhance peace and security (i.e. training of civilians and the
establishment of international standards for military and humanitarian operations);
- Improvement of UN good offices capacities to better support capacity building at the regional level; and
- Development of closer partnerships with civil society, NGOs and national parliaments.
- Training and provision of equipments and the institutional capacity building;
- Avoiding duplications;
- Sharing and replicating good practices;
- Funding of the implementation of the proposal by King’s College in London to set up a training program for
young Africans, intended to provide a clear focus on the relationship between security, human rights, and
development, and to endow the African regional organizations with adequate human resources.
Conclusion:
16. The seminar made clear that the African Peace and Security Architecture is shaped as an integrated structure
composed of subregional mechanisms and is entitled to be part and parcel of the global collective security system
established by the United Nations Charter. The subregional mechanisms still have to be harmonized. It was
suggested that this harmonization could be achieved through the adoption of the model of Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) which is the most elaborated and the most advanced beside umbrella mechanisms of
the African Union. A particular attention should be paid to the critical undertakings for the reinforcement of the African
Peace and Security Architecture, the principles and the priorities of the cooperation in the field of peacekeeping, the
recommendations regarding the rules for the use of force and the full integration of the African PSA in the system of
collective Peace and Security established by the UN Charter, as well as the structuring and the streamlining of the
cooperation and the capacity building.
New York, 21 December 2005
Simon B. IDOHOU
Chairman of the Working Group

8

05-66650

S/2005/828

ANNEX I
AD HOC WORKING GROUP OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL
ON CONFLICT PREVENTION AND RESOLUTION IN AFRICA
CONCEPT FOR A SEMINAR
ON THE COOPERATION BETWEEN UNITED NATIONS AND AFRICAN REGIONAL
ORGANIZATIONS IN THE FIELD OF PEACE AND SECURITY
1-The process of regional integration has favored the creation of regional economic
communities in many parts of the African continent. Accordingly, they were originally
devoted to promoting regional economic cooperation to foster regional solidarity and
sustainable development. But since the late 80s, the outbreak of internal armed conflicts
in many African countries led the regional economic communities to assume in the
absence of regional political organizations an active role in the efforts for conflict
prevention, management and resolution. This process was favored by the growing
awareness of the inherent interdependency between Peace Security and development. The
interdependency implied that peace and security were a paramount and an essential
prerequisite for the development. Hence, the many internal armed conflicts bereaving the
continent were a major obstacle to the development of African Countries.
2- This process was also fostered by the persisting call for African Governments to
take a larger share in peacekeeping efforts in Africa after the failure of the Operation
“Restore Hope” in Somalia which led to a certain degree of disengagement of western
countries from peacekeeping operations in Africa.
3- The Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) pioneered the process
by sending troops to Liberia and by setting up a mechanism for the early warning and for
quick response to conflict. The process of establishment of the mechanism took many
years and matured in the entry into force of the Protocol relating to the Mechanism for
Conflict Prevention, Management, Resolution, Peacekeeping and Security which
established many organs, including the Mediation and Security Council, the Council of
Elders and the Defense and Security Commission.
COMESA, IGAD and SADC have also established regional security regimes. The
COMESA Programme for Peace and Security was formally established after the fourth
Summit of the COMESA Authority in May 1999. It is established under Article 3(d) of the
COMESA Treaty. The COMESA Programme is mandated to facilitate meetings of Ministers of
Foreign Affairs from the region at least once every year to consider modalities for
promoting peace, security and stability in the region. This is to be done within the
framework of the African Union Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management and
Resolution.

05-66650

9

S/2005/828

As for SADC, it has developed a very elaborate peace and security mechanism. In
1996 SADC has established the Organ on Politics, Defense and Security Cooperation. The
cooperation got a legal backing through the 2001 Protocol on Politics, Defense and Security
Cooperation which entered into force 2 March 2004. The objective of the Organ is not only
to promote peace and security in the region but also democratic governance and the rule
of law. A mutual Defense Pact has already been signed and an Early Warning System is
being created. A Strategic Indicative Plan for the Organ (SIPO) has also been prepared. It
provides a concrete plan of action for the implementation of the objectives of the Organ.
4- No other regional Organization has gone so far in developing a peace and security
mechanism. In the meantime the initiative of transforming the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) into a more integrated and stronger political union gained momentum and
lead to the establishment of the African Union. The African Union appears as a
breakthrough in the process of regional integration since it endowed the continent with a
comprehensive mechanism which is entitled to act as an umbrella organization integrating
all regional economic communities of the continent. The African Union represents a
continental mechanism for conflict prevention, management and resolution.
5- The New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD) as a major regional
development programme, is devised not only to foster economic, social and cultural
development of African countries but also to promote peace and security as an
indispensable condition for this development. The NEPAD peace component encouraged
the international community to initiate during the G8 meeting held in Evian, in June 2003
a ten - year programme of support for the establishment of an African Peacekeeping
capacity.
6- Regarding the relationship between the United Nations and the regional
Organizations, it is obvious that the relations to the African Union were not adequately
tuned. In his report to the 59th session of the GA (A/59/285) the Secretary-General of the
United Nations observed, inter alia, that even though the mandate of the AU is different
from that of the OAU and that the scope of the AU’s undertaking in political, peace and
security matters has significantly expanded, the UN system has so far related to the AU in
a similar manner as it did with the OAU. The Secretary-General observed that in order to
boost the efforts of the AU in the areas of peace and security, new forms of collaboration
and enhanced coordination are required. Hence, he made his proposal for a 10-year
capacity building for Africa.
7- Subsequent debates in the GA and the Security Council on African issues have
emphasized the need for renewed and innovative cooperation between the UN and the AU.
In this regard, Member states have called for continued and greater cooperation between
the two Organizations and emphasized the impact of such cooperation on peace, security
and political stability in Africa (S/PRST/2004/44 adopted on 18 November 2004).

10

05-66650

S/2005/828

8- In its Resolution 1625(2005) adopted on 14 September 2005, the Security Council
endorsed the Secretary-General’s proposal for a 10-year capacity building for Africa, in
order to enhance cooperation and coordination with the African Union and affiliated subregional organizations. Such a decision is also justified by the need to deal in a more
rational and sustainable manner, given the existing resource constraints, with a variety of
challenges confronting the African continent and, in the long run, to enable the AU to
enhance its institutional capacity to address those challenges on its own.
9- The management of the crisis in Darfur, Sudan, has shown how useful is the
overarching African Union Mechanism. It has also exemplified the difficulties related to
the full implementation of the Constitutive Act of the Union and the need for a
comprehensive cooperation with the United Nations.
10- In this sense, the UN should work closely together with the AU in defining
modalities for a cooperation based on the AU’s priorities and the UN’s comparative
advantage within the framework of the 10-year capacity building programme for Africa
proposed by the Secretary-General in his report "In larger freedom". The following areas
are primarily of a paramount importance: political and electoral matters, peacekeeping
operations, governance, human rights and the rule of law, peacebuilding, humanitarian
assistance and institutional capacity building.
11- Especially in the field of peace and security, it is necessary, in this framework,
to initiate in the search of a systematic approach a broad and thorough reflection on the
ways to establish consensual ground rules for the cooperation with the African regional
organizations, taking into account relevant provisions of the Resolution 1631(2005)
adopted by the Security Council on 17 October 2005 after an open debate on the
Cooperation between the United Nations and the Regional Organizations.
12- The experts should address in this framework practical issues in order to help
identify efficient ways of cooperation in the pursuit of the stated goals.
12. 1- Presentation of the African Mechanism(s) for Peace and Security
a)- The Working Group could get a presentation of the African peace and Security
mechanism(s) that reflect the current state of the matter pinpointing the organs which are
most suitable for an interaction with the UNSC and the possible ways of staging such an
interaction. What are the structural specificities of African Peace and Security mechanisms
and inter alia, what are the organs established and how can the UN Security Council
cooperate with them to strengthen the effectiveness of its own action in the field of Peace
and security? How to shape a regular exchange of information between the African early
warning mechanisms and the UN in general and the Security Council in particular? How can
the United Nations stimulate such cooperation with the African regional and sub regional
organs?

05-66650

11

S/2005/828

b)- In this framework, an overall assessment of the efficiency of the mechanism(s)
should be presented with due regard to its or their capacity to cope with conflict
situations on the continent and to the added value which could be derived from the
cooperation with the United Nations.
12. 2. The African Mechanism(s) for Peace and Security in the framework of the
collective peace and security system established by the UN Charter
The Working Group could handle the issue of use of force under the United Nations
Charter, and the institutional relations between the UN Security Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council.
-

An assessment of the relationship between the United Nations and the
African regional Organizations in the last ten years could be undertaken.
The following questions could be addressed: To which extent is the
practice of the African regional Organizations consistent with the Charter
of the United Nations? How it could be improved;

-

The question of the use of force in the context of the African Union and the
acceptance by the African Union Member States of the responsibility to
protect civilians. The following questions could be addressed with a
purpose of proposing some ground rules for the cooperation with the UN:
An evaluation of the use of force by the African Union. What concrete
interaction frameworks can be established to provide as soon as possible
full legitimacy to the enforcement actions to be undertaken by African
regional Organizations in emergency situations? How can the UN relate to
the African regional organizations in the framework of the collective
security system established by the Charter of the United Nations?

12. 3- Capacity Building of the African Mechanism(s) of Peace and Security
The working group could focus on the questions related to capacity building in
different fields related to the maintenance of peace and security on the continent. In this
framework the following questions could be addressed: What are the constraints of the
African regional Peace and Security mechanism? What is the United Nations doing to
integrate the Peace and security mechanisms in Africa in the global collective security
system?

12

05-66650

S/2005/828

ANNEX II
SECURITY COUNCIL AD HOC WORKING GROUP ON CONFLICT PREVENTION
AND RESOLUTION IN AFRICA
Seminar on “Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Regional Organizations
in the field of Peace and Security”
Presided over by Ambassador Simon B. IDOHOU,
Permanent Representative of Benin to the UN,
Chairman of the Working Group
New York, UNHQ, ECOSOC CHAMBER, 15 December 2005
_______________________________________________________________________________
Session I – Presentation of the African Mechanism(s) for Peace and Security
Mr. Omotayo OLANIYAN, on behalf of Mr. Oumar KONARE, the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission.
The Chairperson of the African Union stated that efforts to put in place mechanisms for peace and
security dated back to the early sixties but were redoubled to deal with the specter of violent interstate
and intrastate crises and conflicts in Africa in the wake of the general transformation taking place on a
global scale in the aftermath of the Cold War. He described the historical process which the African
regional Organization went through to reach the present stage starting from the mechanism
established in 1993 within the framework of the Cairo Declaration to the establishment of the African
Union peace and security architecture, centered on new structures and processes as well as a new
culture of approaching conflicts and sustaining peace. He stressed that the purpose of the
establishment of the African Union Peace and Security Architecture was to endow the Continent with
a more robust apparatus for anticipating and preventing, managing and resolving conflicts. He defined
the essence of the Peace and Security Architecture (PSA) as stated in the Protocol relating to the
Establishing of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union. This essence is to place the
entire Continent under a permanent observation and interpretation of any signals that may be
symptomatic of a simmering crisis, with the potential to explode into a disruptive conflict, whereby
those signals will then trigger off remedial action, in short early detection and timely and effective
intervention to deal with crises and conflicts. Emphasis is also placed on the need to promote
democratic political and economic governance: He presented as follows the components of the peace
and security architecture:
- the Peace and Security Council;
- the Chairperson of the Commission of the African Union;
- the Panel of the Wise;
- Continental Early Warning System;

05-66650

13

S/2005/828

- Peace Fund (Provision of resources to carry out interventions)
- African Standby Force and the Military Staff Committee;
- Regional Mechanisms of Regional Economic Communities.
The Chairperson also identified and explained the critical undertaking of the Peace and Security
Council and the related structures:
- The anticipation and prevention of conflicts;
- The promotion and the implementation of peacebuilding;
- The development of a common defense policy for the Union;
- The coordination and harmonization of continental efforts in the prevention and the combating
of terrorism; and
- The promotion and encouragement of democratic practices, good governance and the rule of
law, protect human rights and fundamental freedoms.
He undertook an assessment of the implementation of the peace and security Architecture and
underscored the following features:
- Commitment to and support of the AU Member States to the peace and security architecture as
evidenced in the speedy signing and ratification of the Peace and Security Council Protocol by
most Member States;
- Active participation by the Members of the Council;
- Readiness to provide lead action in conflict, premised on positive interference on humanitarian
grounds (non –interference is no longer an obstacle to save suffering lives in member states);
- Growing coordination between the AU and the Regional Economic Communities and the
Regional mechanisms;
- Support from the African Civil Society, given the expanding AU- Civil Society Cooperation ;
- Support from External partners.
In conclusion, he defined as follows the steps to be taken to effectively implement the PSA:
- equipping the AU and the Regional Economic Communities (REC) with appropriate
management capability for peace and security operations;
- Putting in place a reliable early warning capacity ;
- Establishing appropriate organizational (less bureaucratic ) to manage the processes dealing
with crises and conflicts ;
- Effective mobilization of financial and logistical resources, with emphasis on internal resource
mobilization;
- Enhancing the role of civil society in peace education and promotion of a culture of peace;
- Harmonizing the regional economic communities (streamlining of membership) to enable the
logical arrangement of regional brigades ;
- Ensuring operational complementarities with the UN;
- Creating enabling conditions for the private sector.
He stressed the need for the United Nations and the larger international community, given the paucity
of financial resources and the logistical constraints facing the Continent, to provide assistance in these
areas as well as providing support for capacity building with a view to fully developing the new
continental peace and security architecture

14

05-66650

S/2005/828

Ambassador Judith Mbula BAHEMUKA, Permanent Representative of Kenya to the UN
Ambassador Bahemuka, highlighting the paramount importance of peace and security for the
development of the African continent, underscored the need for transparent and solid relationship
between the UN, and African organizations and the need to streamline and strengthen this
relationship. She stressed that Africa cannot expect rapid intervention without contributing and
regaining control of Operations. Instead of being seen as assistance the relationship should be seen as
cooperation on the basis of the priorities indicated by the Chairperson of the African Union. She said
that such cooperation should be structured on the following lines: (i) synchronization of external
support according to the stage of development reached by each specific region; (ii) shift in the logistic
assistance from just training to actual and material support; (iii) creation of a AU liaison desk at the
UN to ensure constant linkages between the two organizations on African warning mechanisms; (iv)
enhanced cooperation between the UN Security Council and the AU Peace and Security Council; and
(v) greater attention to subregional organizations, as ECOWAS, which can provide a useful model
along which the support from the international community to the African continent can be channeled,
whereby the African Union should remain the coordination center giving mandate to the subregional
Organizations.
Ambassador Peter MAURER, Permanent Representative of Switzerland to the UN
Ambassador Maurer, stressing the rationale of finding regional solutions to global problems of peace
and security, stated that regionalism needs solid global institutions. He underlined that peace/security,
development and human rights were strongly interlinked and welcomed the forthcoming creation of a
Peacebuilding Commission and a Human Rights Council. He raised a number of points related to the
ways in which the UN, as the best basis of legitimacy for collective action and international standards,
can better support regional organizations such as the AU in conflict prevention. Since African regional
organizations had weak capacities and had limited resources, enhanced support at the global level
would be needed. In that regard Ambassador Maurer suggested: (i) a more proactive role of the UN in
coordinating with other international institutions in order to stimulate and not to substitute regional
initiatives ; (ii) impact assessment on peace building and human rights as an essential tool for
fundraising; (iii) increase of soft tools as essential elements to enhance peace and security (i.e.
training of civilians and the establishment of international standards for military and humanitarian
operations); (iv) improvement of UN good offices capacities to better support capacity building at the
regional level; and (v) development of closer partnerships with civil society, NGOs and national
parliaments.
Ambassador Aboubacar Ibrahim ABANI, Permanent Representative of NIGER to the UN:
Ambassador Abani stressed that besides the different mechanisms put in place in the regional
framework to maintain peace and security the issues of peace and security remained urgent global
stakes which reflects the interdependency of all countries and the need for coordinated efforts to deal
with them. He underscored that Africa represents one of the greatest challenges in the field of peace
and security. He illustrated the mechanism that ECOWAS had set up to promote peace and security.
He briefly analyzed the following legal instruments defining its principles, structures and procedures:

05-66650

15

S/2005/828

the “Protocol related to the mechanism for conflict prevention, management resolution, peace-keeping
and security” of 1999; the “Declaration of Political Principles of ECOWAS” of 1999.
He underlined the conditions triggering the mechanism: Aggression or armed conflict in a member
state or threat of conflict, between two or more member states, intrastate conflict, massive violations
of human rights, and disruption of the rule of law, overthrow or attempt to overthrow a democratically
elected government. He emphasized the “Protocol on Democracy and Good Governance” of 2001,
which for the first time in the international relations prescribes a series of rules for intern power
management and defined sanctions to be applied in case of violation: He presented those rules and the
provision of sanctions which non compliance triggers. In these legal instruments the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) pledged to cooperate closely with the United Nations
and the African Union for their implementation to maintain peace and security and to inform the
United Nations of any military intervention undertaken for this purpose. Ambassador Abani
illustrated the cooperation with the UN by the example of ECOMOG intervention in Liberia and Cote
d’Ivoire which was later rehated into a blue helm peacekeeping Operation. He called for greater
support to the African continent through the Peacebuilding Commission for local initiatives
concerning the moratorium on small arms and light weapons, in training and provision of equipments
and the institutional capacity building, the strengthening of coordination. He also underscored the
necessity of avoiding duplications and the importance of sharing and replicating good practices.
Mr. Vasu GOUNDEN, Executive Director of African Center for Constructive Resolution of
Disputes (ACCORD-South Africa):
Mr. Gounden, presenting Burundi as a case point, made a number of recommendations in order to
improve African capacities in peace and security, including: (i) enhanced cooperation between AU and
UN on early warning mechanisms; (ii) greater recognition of the role of mediators through full
support to the Panel of the Wise; (iii) redefinition of collaboration and cooperation between UN and
AU as regards common interests; (iv) consideration of modalities and mechanisms for joint meetings
of Regional Councils; and (v) establishment of a UN-AU Joint Task Team for post-conflict
reconstruction.
Session II – African Mechanism(s) for Peace and Security in the framework of the system of
collective peace and security established by the UN Charter
Professor Margaret VOGT, Deputy Director, Africa II Division of the Department of Political
Affairs (DPA), UN Secretariat
Professor Vogt noted that the past few decades had witnessed the development of greater African
engagement in peace and security situations within Africa. African regional and sub-regional
organizations, she said, had been the vanguard of setting new norms on the parameters for
international engagement in conflict situations, especially in civil-war contexts and in situations where
a State was unable or unwilling to perform its role and responsibility. The African mechanisms
established the responsibility to protect going as far as to accept the intervention in situations that may
threaten large numbers of civilian populations and to prevent genocide. She also noted that African
stance against the unconstitutional change of government has established a new norm. Professor Vogt
16

05-66650

S/2005/828

stressed that the AU standby force arrangement is devised to fit into the global framework. She urged
the UN to embrace the normative evolution in Africa and seek a framework to control and domesticate
these within the international legal framework. She underscored that the new African mechanisms all
called for the mandates of operations launched by them to be endorsed by the Security Council,
especially as regards the AU and Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
mechanisms, the two most advanced regional frameworks which go beyond the UN Charter. In stating
that the two mechanisms will be operational even without the consent of the host country, these
mechanisms have given a practical expression to the concept of the “responsibility to protect”. In that
regard, she observed that the establishment of mechanisms to ensure clear and direct communication
between these organs and the UN might be required. The Security Council should insist on periodic
reports and review to allow for a collective review of progress made in the implementation of given
mandates and a transparent determination of when responsibility for the management of such
operations should be transferred to the United Nations or to a coalition of the willing. She called for
closer cooperation and for a structured relationship between the UN Security Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council. Finally, she said that DPA should seek to develop a wider menu of
arrangements that would allow closer interaction with the African regional mechanisms and would
enable the UN work with the region at much earlier stage of conflicts. “If we (the UN) don’t support
the African regional organizations they might not be there when we need them” she said. In
concluding she stressed that the African Union also should define better how it will relate to the
subregional organizations.
Sir Emyr JONES PARRY, Ambassador Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom to
the UN and President of the Security Council for the month of December 2005
Ambassador Jones Parry said that the Security Council had to improve its work with and support to
regional organizations, saying that it should recognize its obligation to support regional organizations
in Africa. He looked forward to the establishment of the proposed Peacebuilding Commission as an
essential tool to consolidate peace. He referred to the situation in Sudan as an illustration of good
cooperation between the international community and regional organizations, noting that the AU was
doing a “remarkable job” in producing, inter alia, a degree of security for the people of Darfur.
Ambassador Jones Parry said that the Security Council should support countries which are in
difficulty and desire assistance, before the emergence of a conflict. He stressed that the Security
Council, in cooperation with regional organizations, should better use and implement Security
Council resolution 1625 (2005) on conflict prevention. He also highlighted the importance of
addressing severe human rights abuses, not least because they are often symptomatic of wider
problems. Furthermore, he stressed that the responsibility to protect is a principle which rests
primarily with states. The international community should help states meet their responsibility and
only consider taking over this task when states are either unwilling or unable to do so. The African
Union has demonstrated commitment in tackling the issue of conflict in Africa by putting itself
forward. The ECOWAS framework, he said, is more courageous that the United Nations Security
Council. Ambassador Jones Parry stressed that the European Council of Ministers was working on a
new European strategy for relations with Africa and that it intends to strengthen the African Peace
Facility and to establish a European Union Battle Group. This Group will consist of 1,600 troops,
who will be available for Africa and the UN, when rapid deployment of troops is necessary to control

05-66650

17

S/2005/828

violence, in order to support countries, which are in difficulty and/or facing the risk of internal
disturbance. The Security Council should continue monitoring and harnessing our collective
responsibility for peace and work for better implementation of its resolutions. He stressed that we all
should learn how to better prevent conflict and have regional organizations present in the field. Better
delivery of observers and of humanitarian aid is also needed.
Ambassador Maged Abdelfattah ABDELAZIZ, Permanent Representative of Egypt to the UN
Ambassador Abdelaziz highlighted the importance of developing and enhancing the relationship
between the UN and the AU. In that regard, he observed that that the coordination between the AU
Peace and Security Council and the UN Security Council was crucial in reinforcing peace in Africa.
He stressed the need to ensure African ownership of peace and security in the region. He valued the
efforts of the European Union to promote peace and security in Africa and called for a trilateral
cooperation between the UN et EU and the AU. He underscored his conviction that the establishment
of a support fund could enhance the capacity of the AU in addressing challenges facing Africa.
Ambassador Jagdish KOONJUL, Permanent Representative of Mauritius to the UN
Ambassador Koonjul said that there was a need to ensure predictable funding for AU operations to put
in place a long term instrument for peace consolidation in order to avoid the recurrence of conflict. He
underscored the significance for proper attention to DDR processes, and noted the lack of funding on
that front. In that connection, he highlighted the need for the AU to be able to obtain funding on a
“predictable basis” rather than on a voluntary basis as it was currently the case. He noted that while
African forces could be “very good observers and peacekeepers”, they had “a problem when it came
to peace enforcement”. He stressed the need to have for such operations a single force under a single
military command, called for full support to African forces in order to help build that capacity. Finally,
Ambassador Koonjul looked forward to the establishment of the envisaged Peacebuilding
Commission as a key instrument to consolidate peace.
Mr. Paul VAN TONGEREN, Executive Director of the European Center for Conflict Prevention
Mr. Van Tongeren, highlighted the essential role played by the civil society in conflict prevention and
the need to strengthen and increase its contributions. Stressing the importance of early warning, he
presented the role of the West African Network for Early Warning (WANEP) and suggested that IASC
(the Inter-Agency Standing Committee) should be the lead agency for the UN system in collecting and
analyzing early warning signals and in proposing responses to prevent conflicts. He regretted that
Conflict Prevention which is at the heart of the mandate of the UN is not included in the mandate of
the Peacebuilding Commission and remains a “gaping hole “ in the UN system. On how to enhance
durable structures conducive to peace and stability, he believed that a “national civil society forum on
peacebuilding and reconciliation” could be a good instrument in that respect. Finally, stressing the
importance for all international and regional stakeholders to cooperate and to built-on joint
mechanisms, Mr. Van Tongeren proposed that the UN organize a “multi-stakeholder conference” in
2010 on “conflict prevention, peacebuilding and development”. That conference, he said, should focus

18

05-66650

S/2005/828

on a “coherent and integrated approach on the prevention of armed conflict” as proposed in the World
Summit Outcome Document in paragraph 75.
China
HE.Mr. ZHANG Yishan, Ambassador, Deputy Permanent Representative of the People’s Republic of
China held that the Security Council should do its best to assist Africa, and in so doing, it should duly
take into account the views of African countries. He also maintained that the Security Council should
strengthen its relationship with the AU, and should support the AU to further strengthen its capacity in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding areas. In that regard, he said that the UN should help mobilize the
international community to assist the AU. In closing, he stressed that China was willing to deepen
cooperation with the AU in all areas, in particular in the areas of peace and security.
Romania
Gheorghe DIMITRU, Ambassador, Deputy Ambassador Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Romania stressed that cooperation between the UN and regional organization should be further
strengthened while the UN should maintain its “centrality”. He highlighted the complementarity
between resolutions 1625 (2005) and 1631 (2005) regarding cooperation between the UN and regional
organizations. In that regard, he believed that a blue print for gradual implementation of those two
resolutions should be envisaged.
Brazil
Focusing on how to broaden the debate on the subject, Mrs. Irene Vida GALA of Brazil stressed that
there was an "under representation" of Africa in the Security Council, which she viewed as an
impediment to further cooperation between the UN and the AU and Regional African Organizations.
She believed that Africa should have a stronger voice in the Security Council to allow her to promote
the Security Council’s agenda regarding such cooperation, maintaining that the lack of permanent or
increased representation of Africa in the Council could hamper the UN/AU partnership. In that regard,
Brazil urged remaining speakers to comment on the positive impact an African increased presence in
the Council might have.

Session III – Capacity building for the African Mechanism(s) for Peace and Security
Mr. Hédi ANNABI, Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, UN Secretariat
ASG Hédi Annabi elaborated on the principles, which should guide collaboration between the UN and
regional organizations in conflict management, and stressed that the task facing the UN and the
Regional Organizations under Chapter VIII of the Charter is to work together to shape their future
collaboration in a way that will maximize effectiveness in the short term and strengthen international
cooperation in the long term. He suggested practical ways of achieving this goal. ASG Annabi pointed
out that partner organizations, particularly in Africa, were increasingly playing a role in addressing

05-66650

19

S/2005/828

threats to peace and security, as provided for in the UN Charter. In that context, he recalled four
priorities identified by the Secretary-General for the cooperation:
- the enhancement of regional capacity is seen as a “strategic priority”;
- the development of peacekeeping capacity should be mutually reinforcing rather than
duplicative or competing, whereby the comparative advantages of various organizations
should be properly identified to build upon them for greater efficiency;
- Cooperation should go beyond peacekeeping and peacebuilding to include conflict prevention
and resolution, by focusing on social and economic problems in the region;
- Strengthened regional capacities should reinforce the collective approach, and thus not
diminish the global responsibility in promoting peace and security.
Touching on the issue of implementation, ASG Annabi called for sustained, generous and coordinated
support for the implementation of the road map adopted by African Union for the enhancement of
African peacekeeping capacity in order to develop African Standby Forces that could be capable of
intervening in extreme cases. He referred to the emphases in the Secretary-General’s report
(A/59/591) on promoting African involvement in development of doctrine and staff training, and on
meeting logistical and planning needs including by direct operational support. He highlighted many
examples of practical cooperation which contribute to capacity -building. He identified fields where
the UN Secretariat can assist and called for the mobilization of greater resources in order to achieve
significant progress and to foster local ownership. ASG Annabi concluded his speech by stressing the
complementarities which should be promoted between African regional or sub-regional response
which is the best option in some case), and the United Nations peacekeeping operations which in
some cases, may be deemed necessary. Member states from all regions should be ready to provide
troops for such operations, since African Countries do contribute in operations far beyond their
continent. Finally, he recalled that the major challenge ahead was to provide the resources for regional
capacity building in Africa, and urged all member states to increase their support to the region to
enable the African troop –and police –contributors to play their full part in peacekeeping within and
beyond their continent whether under regional or UN command.
Ambassador Augustine MAHIGA, Permanent Representative of Tanzania to the UN
In his remarks, Ambassador Mahiga paid special attention to the need to focus on the root causes of
African conflicts. Particularly, he noted socio-economic problems stemming from lack of
development and distribution of resources, and political tensions due to marginalization nonparticipation in the political system. Finally, he noted that environmental problems such as famines
and droughts tended to exacerbate the already existing social, economic, and political challenges, and
hence should also be included in the international approach to African conflicts. As for the areas of
cooperation between the UN, the AU and the African countries, Ambassador Mahiga pointed to five
themes, which needed to be improved, namely early warning, mediation and negotiation skills,
preparedness to respond to emergencies, peace support with a particular emphasis on civilian issues,
and peacebuilding, addressing issues such as security sector reform and institution building.

20

05-66650

S/2005/828

Mr. Michel DUCLOS, Deputy Permanent Representative of France to the UN
Mr. Duclos repeatedly emphasized the need for African ownership and pointed out that while all
stakeholders agreed in the need to strengthen African peacebuilding capacities, and that African states
should take the lead in handling African conflicts, it was imperative to avoid on the one hand, treating
the African states as “sub-contractors” of the UN, and on the other hand putting all of the
responsibility on the Africans themselves. Mr. Duclos iterated that African states and regional
organizations should be involved in a true international partnership, which would have to be
coordinated through the UN. In discussing the tools to be applied in promoting African mechanisms
for peace and security, Mr. Duclos recalled the success of French experiences with a training program,
which included simulations of Peacekeeping Operations.
Professor Shepard FORMAN, Director of the Center on International Cooperation of NYU
Touching on the issue of African ownership Professor Forman emphasized three principles for
capacity building:
- the UN-African relations should not be conceived as one way tutelage relations but as a
partnership for shared responsibility and the determination of ways and means to build
capacity that can be shared globally, regionally and nationally;
- Enhanced coordination between bilateral donors and international actors to match and
reinforce important efforts being made by African Organizations;
- Equal weight to capacity-building for the civilian components of peace operations and to
military preparedness.
More concretely, Professor Forman reported with appreciation on a proposal by King’s College in
London to set up a training program for young Africans. The program was intending to have a clear
focus on the relationship between security, human rights, and development, and to include formal
training at King’s College, London, as well as practical training at the UN in New York, and to be
finalized by internships in the AU and other African organizations.
Guinea
Reacting to the King’s College Proposal, as introduced by Professor Forman, Guinea expressed his
concerns about further “brain drain” from Africa, and inquired where the students of the program
would come from, and how they would be chosen.
Professor Shepard FORMAN, Director of the Center on International Cooperation of NYU
Responding to the concern expressed by Guinea about the possibility for the King’s College
programme to result in further “brain drain” from Africa, Professor Forman noted that upon
completion of the program, the students would be required to return to Africa to work for either the
AU or a sub-regional organization for a minimum period of two years. Moreover, Professor Forman
reported that candidates would be drown from African universities, and that the application by and
nomination of the African students would be competitive, so as to assure the most qualified student
body.

05-66650

21

S/2005/828

Senegal
Ambassador Babacar Carlos MBAYE, Diplomatic Advisor of the President of the Republic of
Senegal, stated that he could not overemphasize the importance of prevention in Africa. Moreover, he
observed that the main challenges and needs confronting the continent had been clearly identified, and
that the main problem therefore related to how Africa would obtain the means to deal with these
challenges. That, he noted, ought to be the main priority for the partnership between the international
community and regional organizations in Africa.
Professor Ibrahim GAMBARI, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, UN Secretariat
In closing the Seminar, USG Gambari pointed out that the number of violent conflicts in Africa had
decreased over the past six years, adding that the next big challenge for the continent would be peace
consolidation. In that regard, he noted that the envisaged Peacebuilding Commission would present
the right forum to assist countries emerging from armed conflicts. Furthermore he opined that one of
the main tasks of the UN today was to prevent the reoccurrence of conflicts in Africa, adding that
prevention strategies had to include peacebuilding and an explicit focus on youth and unemployment
problems on the African continent. Touching on the issue of cooperation between the UN and the AU,
USG Gambari emphasized that true partnerships, which bring together the UN, the AU, and the
African countries on equal terms were necessary in order to address the African challenges, without
turning the region into a passive recipient of international assistance.

22

05-66650

S/2005/828

ANNEX III – STATEMENTS
SECURITY COUNCIL AD HOC WORKING GROUP ON CONFLICT PREVENTION
AND RESOLUTION IN AFRICA
Seminar on “Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Regional Organizations
in the field of Peace and Security”
New York, UNHQ, ECOSOC CHAMBER, 15 December 2005

STATEMENT
ON BEHALF OF
THE CHAIRPERSON
OF THE AFRICAN UNION COMMISSION
H.E. PROF. ALPHA OUMAR KONARE
BY
R. OMOTAYO OLANIYAN
AG. PERMANENT OBSERVER
OF THE AFRICAN UNION TO THE UNITED NATIONS
Input on the evolving peace and security architecture of the
African union (au) within the broad context of the un collective
peace and security culture
I.

Introduction

The efforts to put in place African mechanisms for peace and security date back to
the early sixties, with the accession of a significant number of African countries
(colonies) to independence. Those efforts have since been redoubled to deal with
the spectre of violent inter-state and intra-state crises and conflicts in the Africa. The
birth of the African Union (AU) in 2002 came against the background of devastating
conflicts in a number of African countries: Burundi, Cote d’Ivoire, Ethiopia/Eritrea
(border war) Liberia, Somalia, the Sudan, Rwanda and others. This came to be the

05-66650

23

S/2005/828

situation in the aftermath of the Cold War, despite the commitment of the political
leadership right from the establishment of the now-replaced Organization of Africa
Unity (OAU), to avert and resolve conflicts whenever they occurred.
In view of those crises and conflicts, and the general transformation then taking
place on a global scale, the African leaders adopted in Addis Abeba, July 1990, the
“Declaration on the Political and Socio-Economic Situation in Africa and the
Fundamental Changes Taking Place in the World”. In that declaration, the Heads of
State and Government noted, that:
“No single Internal factor has contributed more to the present socio-economic
problems in the Continent than the scourge of conflicts within and between our
countries. They have brought about death and human suffering, engendered hate
and divided nations and families. Conflicts have forced millions of our people into
drifting life as refugees and internally displaced persons, deprived of their means of
livelihood, human dignity and hope. Conflicts have gobbled-up scarce resources,
and undermined the ability of our countries to address the many compelling needs
of our people”.
Indeed, the Mechanism for the Prevention, Management and Resolution of Conflicts
of the OAU, which was established in 1993, within the framework of the Cairo
Declaration, provides an apparatus for dealing with crises and conflicts in the
Continent. However, the Mechanism faced a number of constraints during its period
of operation. It was against the background of the functional limitations of the
Mechanism that the then General Secretariat of the OAU made some reflections on
what could be done to equip the Continent with a more robust apparatus for
preventing, managing and revolving conflicts. In addition, such an apparatus was
also to deal with the inevitable and interlinked issues of peace building and post
conflict reconstruction. Those efforts, which received both political and intellectual
support from the Member States, culminated in the forging of a new peace and
security architecture of the AU, centered on new structures and processes, as well as
a new culture of approaching conflicts and sustaining peace.
II.

Essence of the Peace and Security Architecture (PSA)

“We, the Heads of State and Government of the Member States of the African
Union; desirous of establishing an operational structure for the effective
implementation of the decisions taken in the areas of conflict prevention, peacemaking, peace support operations and intervention, as well as peace-building and
post-conflict reconstruction, in accordance with the authority conferred in that

24

05-66650

S/2005/828

regard by Article 5 (2) of the Constitutive Act of the African Union; hereby agree on
the following,…, the establishment, nature and structure of a Peace and Security
Council within the Union, as a standing decision-making organ for the prevention ,
management and resolution of conflicts” (Assembly of the African Union, Durban, 9
July 2002).
The essence and spirit of the AU peace and security architecture is best set out in
the Protocol Establishing the Peace and Security Council (PSC) of the African Union.
In the Protocol, a vision of a more robust apparatus for anticipating and preventing
crises and conflicts is self-evident. The idea is to place the entire continent under a
kind of radar of permanent observation and interpretation of any signals that may
be symptomatic of a simmering crisis, with the potential to explode into a disruptive
conflict. Signals indicating a possible crisis or an emerging violent conflict will then
trigger off remedial action.
Thus, the emphasis in the evolving peace and security architecture is on the early
detection and prevention of crises and conflicts and on timely and effective
intervention to deal with those conflicts that become blown out. Not least, emphasis
is also placed on the need to promote democratic political and economic
governance, as a way of meeting the needs of all the sectors of the society in a
peaceful way. In this perspective, the cooperation of the governing political
authorities, the civil society and the private sector is indeed, very crucial.
As provided for in the PSC Protocol, the components of the peace and security
architecture that must always act in consonance are, in addition to the decision making Peace and Security Council itself:
. Chairperson of the Commission;
. Panel of the Wise;
. Continental Early Warning System;
. Peace Fund (provision of resources to carry out interventions)
. African Standby Force and the Military Staff Committee;
. Regional Mechanisms of the Regional Economic Communities.
In addition, the peace and security architecture includes the African Union NonAggression and Common Defense Pact, adopted by the 4th Ordinary Session of the
Assembly of the Union, held in Abuja, Nigeria, in January 2005; the Common African
Defense and Security Policy (CADSP), adopted by the 2nd Extraordinary Session of
the Union, held in Sirte, Lybia, in February 2005; as well as other security instruments of
the Union, such as the Treaty establishing the African Nuclear Weapons Free-Zone

05-66650

25

S/2005/828

(the Pelindaba Treaty), and the Convention for the Prevention and Combating of
Terrorism.
Notably, while previous efforts, during the 1963 to 2001 period, concentrated so
much on conflict resolution, the new peace and security architecture provides for a
holistic approach for the promotion of peace and security in Africa, taking account
of the political, social, economic, cultural, and military and other relevant conditions
inherent in the situation at hand.
III.

Critical undertakings within the Peace and Security Architecture

The critical undertakings inherent in the peace and security architecture, which are
the responsibility of the PSC and related structures, are:
. The anticipation and the prevention of conflicts;
. The promotion and implementation of peace-building;
. The development of a common defense policy for the Union;
. The coordination and harmonization of continental efforts in the prevention
and the combating of terrorism; and
. The promotion and encouragement of democratic practices, good
governance and the rule of law, protect human rights and
fundamental freedoms.
Furthermore, and premised on the assumption that conflict, especially violent
conflict, is an inherent characteristic of the human society, another critical
undertaking is that concerning the capability to launch peacekeeping operations to
deal with blown out conflicts in all their dimensions (refugee flows, internally
displaced persons, humanitarian services, etc…). In fact, peacekeeping is a central
pillar of the peace and security architecture; hence the need to build a credible
capacity in that domain.
a - Peacekeeping Operations in Africa
The notion and practice of peacekeeping operations in Africa, by the Africans, date
back to the late 70s, when the first experiments were undertaken. The fiasco of the
first peacekeeping venture undertaken by the OAU in Chad in 1979 to 1982,
coupled with the heinous tragedies in Rwanda and Burundi in the 1990s, provided a
new momentum for the need to build the capacity of the continent in the area of
peacekeeping. The lessons learnt from the operation were that: the effectiveness of
peacekeeping was commensurate with the capacity and political will of the troop -

26

05-66650

S/2005/828

contributing countries and the centrality of cooperation by the neighbouring
countries. The lack of a clear mandate, and a well-defined concept, particularly
with regard to logistics, operation and troop-generation, further demonstrated the
inexperience of the OAU. The Chadian experience was later to inform reflections in
the continent on how best to deal with peacekeeping, especially at the level of the
African Chiefs of Defense staff (ACDS).
The first meeting of the ACDS, which took place in Addis Ababa, from 3 to 6 June
1996, while emphasizing the responsibility of the OAU in anticipating and preventing
conflicts, recognized the primary responsibility of the United Nations Security Council
for the maintenance of International peace and security, particularly in the area of
peacekeeping. Subsequently, the 2nd ACDS meeting took place in Harare, from 20
to 22 October 1997, furthered the work initiated by the first meeting. The third
meeting of the ACDS, and including the participation of governmental experts from
AU member States, took place in Addis Ababa, from 15 to 16 May 2003. The
discussions allowed the ACDS to make substantive recommendations covering the
modalities of the concepts, training and liaison; command, control and
communications and budget and logistics. The outcomes of these and other related
efforts, have contributed immensely to the weaving of the new peace and security
architecture. Indeed, some of the components of the PSA deserve special mention.
Equally, it is crucial to put in light the vision of collaboration and cooperation in the
Protocol, as far as the work of the PSC is concerned, vis-à-vis the United Nations
Security Council.
b - Panel of the Wise-a moral lever for the preventing and resolving conflicts in
Africa.
Progress has been made in putting in place a Panel of the Wise, as provides for in
Article 11 of the PSC Protocol. The Panel shall advise the PSC and the Chairperson of
the AU Commission on all issues pertaining to the promotion, and maintenance of
peace, security and stability in Africa. It is to be manned by men and women of an
authoritative moral status and notable contributions to the African people. The
Panel will, in particular, help the Continent in dealing with the no-touch conflict
issues, by its combination of subtle methods of engagement with the stakeholders in
a conflict situation and the capacity of independently speaking out the facts. The
Panel is, therefore, to provide exposure even in the most complicated situations.

05-66650

27

S/2005/828

c - African Standby Force - main factor in the future of peacekeeping in Africa
As provided for in the Constitutive Act, particularly, its article 4 (h), the raison d’être
for the establishment of the African Standby Force (ASF) was to endow the PSC with
a sound mechanism for rapid deployment of peace support missions. As implicit in its
name, the ASF is based on the concept of standby or “ready to go” arrangement.
The Protocol provides that such Force or arrangement be composed of standby
multidisciplinary contingents, with civilian and military components based in Member
States. On the ground, the Standby Force is designed to comprise of regional
brigades. This requires regions privilege cohesion to the exclusion of political
competition that otherwise nullify the efforts to be deployed under the logic of the
PSA.
d - Operational complementarities with the United Nations - crucial for the success
of the PSA
Furthermore, the PSC Protocol takes account of the need for the PSC to work closely
with the United Nations Security Council, in order to render its own work more
effective. Article 17 of the Protocol provides for the functional cooperation of the
PSC with the United Nations Security Council and with the UN agencies in the
promotion of peace, security and stability in Africa. In the same article, provision is
made for the Chairperson of the Commission to maintain close and continued
interaction with the UN Chairperson of the UN Security Council, its African members,
as well as the Secretary-General, including holding periodic meetings and regular
consultations on questions of peace, security and stability in Africa. Thus, the
resource base and broad logistical capacity of the UN Security Council, within the
context of the established international collective security system, remains crucial for
effectively dealing with conflicts in Africa.
IV- Early assessment of the implementation of the peace and security architecture
It would be premature to judge the performance of, or the implementation of the
peace and security architecture at this early stage, as it is still at the learning stage
for all those involved in its implementation. So there are no benchmarks as yet.
However, it is possible to indicate some positive elements thus far, which are a
promise of bigger gains to come at a later stage, provided the current momentum is
maintained:
-

28

Commitment to and support of the AU Member States to the peace and
security architecture, as evidenced by speedy signing and ratification of
the PSC protocol, by most of the Member States;

05-66650

S/2005/828

-

Active participation by the core of the architecture, which are the
members of the PSC;
Readiness to provide lead action in conflict situations by some member
states;
An open culture of dealing with conflicts, premised on positive interference
on humanitarian grounds (non-interference is no longer an obstacle to
save suffering lives in Member States);
Growing coordination between the AU and the Regional Economic
Communities and the Regional Mechanisms;
Support from the African civil society, given the expanding AU-Civil society
cooperation;
Support from external partners.

V - Conclusion: the current needs for the effective implementation of the PSA
In order to effectively implement the PSA, as a culture for fostering peace and
development in the continent, the AU and the Regional Economic Communities
through their Regional Mechanisms, in collaboration with the private sector and the
civil society, should take a number of steps:
•

Equipping the AU and RECs with appropriate management capability for
peace and security operations;
• Putting in lace a reliable early warning capacity;
• Establishing appropriate organizational (less bureaucratic) procedures to
manage the process dealing with crises and conflicts;
• Effective mobilization of financial and logistic resources, with emphasis on
internal resource mobilisation;
• Enhancing the role of civil society in peace education and the promotion of a
culture of peace;
• Harmonizing the regional economic communities (streaming of membership)
to enable the logical arrangement of regional brigades;
• Creating enabling conditions for the private sector (major player in socioeconomic development).
In addition, there is need, given the paucity of financial resources and the logistical
constraints facing the Continent, for United Nations and the larger international
community to provide assistance in these areas, as well as providing support for
capacity building with a view to fully developing the new continental peace and
security architecture.

05-66650

29

S/2005/828

Security Council Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa
Seminar on cooperation between the United Nations and
the African regional organizations in the field of peace
and security
New York, UNHQ, Economic and Social Council Chamber, 15 December 2005
[Original: French]

Statement by His Excellency Mr. A. Ibrahim Abani,
Ambassador, Permanent Representative of Niger
Your Excellency President Konaré, Chairperson of the African Union
Commission,
Mr. Chairman of the Security Council Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa,
Ambassadors, distinguished guests,
I would like to take this opportunity to express my sincere thanks to the
distinguished members of the Group for having been so kind as to invite me to
participate in this seminar on cooperation between the United Nations and African
regional organizations in the field of peace and security.
I would also like to congratulate them for organizing such a timely and relevant
event at a time of renewed interest in identifying the best ways to enhance the
effectiveness of initiatives in the field of peace and security.
Two conclusions are immediately obvious from a review of the peacekeeping
activities of regional and international organizations:
– Although these organizations have outdone each other in devising imaginative
peacekeeping and security mechanisms, some of them very sophisticated and
deservedly considered to be highly innovative (Supplementary Protocol on
Democracy and Good Governance), others are rooted in local traditions and
customs (Council of Elders);
– Peace and security issues have nevertheless remained urgent global challenges
which remind us each day of the interdependence of all countries and of the need
for coordinated efforts to meet those challenges.
Africa today represents one of the greatest challenges in the field of peace and
security. The report of the Security Council sheds light on the problem by identifying
situations in which efforts are needed in this area. Sixty per cent of these situations are
in Africa.
Yet Africa is actively promoting peace and security through its continental
organization, the African Union, its subregional organizations and even its civil
society. The Chairperson of the African Union has just described the remarkable work
being done by that organization through its various mechanisms. For my part, I would

30

05-66650

S/2005/828

like to make a few comments on our West African organization, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS).
Issues of peace and security within the Community are governed by a variety of
instruments, foremost among which is the Protocol relating to the Mechanism for
Conflict Prevention, Management, Resolution, Peacekeeping and Security. Signed in
Lomé, Togo, on 10 December 1999, the Protocol seeks to ensure collective security
and peace by recalling the principles contained in the Charter of the United Nations,
and in the African Union Charter as well as those contained in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights.
In other words, from the very beginning ECOWAS committed itself to cooperation
with the United Nations in the area of peace and security.
That Mechanism defined a number of objectives, including the strengthening of
cooperation in the areas of conflict prevention, early warning, peacekeeping
operations, and efforts to combat transboundary crime, international terrorism, and the
proliferation of small arms and anti-personnel mines, among others.
The Mechanism has institutions through which it operates, including its
Mediation and Security Council, comprised of nine members, which authorizes all
forms of intervention and decides in particular on the deployment of political and
military missions and approves their mandates and terms of reference.
The Mediation and Security Council meets at the Head of State, ministerial and
ambassadorial levels. It is supported by the following bodies: the Defence and
Security Commission, the Council of Elders, and the ECOWAS Ceasefire Monitoring
Group (ECOMOG). There is also a subregional peace and security monitoring system
whose offices are located in four member States of the organization to ensure adequate
monitoring.
The following are the criteria for activation of the ECOWAS Mechanism:
aggression or armed conflict in a member State or the threat of such conflict; conflict
between two or more member States; internal conflict; massive violations of human
rights; threat to the rule of law; ouster or attempted ouster of a democratically elected
Government, among others.
We can see therefore that the Mechanism contains robust provisions for dealing
with questions related to peace and security.
The same will to act that led to the establishment of the Mechanism also led
member States to adopt a Supplementary Protocol on Democracy And Good
Governance, on 21 December 2001.
The Supplementary Protocol on Democracy and Good Governance sets out
certain revolutionary principles which explicitly highlight the interdependence
between issues of peace, security, good governance and democracy in the countries of
ECOWAS. For the first time therefore in a context of inter-State relations, a series of
criteria for good governance at the national level is set out and specific sanctions
provided in case of non-compliance. These include:
– The separation of powers between the executive, legislative and judicial
branches and accession to power through the ballot box;
– The prohibition of any unconstitutional changes and of any other non-democratic
means of acceding to or retaining power;

05-66650

31

S/2005/828

– An apolitical army that is subordinated to the duly established political authority;
– Obligation not to amend the electoral law at any time during the six months
preceding elections without the consent of a significant majority of the political
stakeholders;
– The obligation of the civilian authorities to respect the army’s apolitical
character.
The statement of these principles in the Supplementary Protocol is accompanied
by provision for sanctions in case of violation. These sanctions are imposed by the
Heads of State and Government and their severity is increased by increments. That
approach has proven effective in at least two recent situations where questions of
peace and security were at stake, and without the implementation of the entire range of
sanctions available. In those cases, communiqués from the current Chairman of
ECOWAS were issued regularly to recall the relevant provisions of the Protocol on
Democracy and Good Governance, to call for compliance with them and to threaten
the imposition of sanctions in accordance with the provisions.
On a number of occasions, the communiqués recalled that, in addition to
measures which it would take within the Community, ECOWAS “reserved the right to
appeal to the African Union and the United Nations for the adoption of similar
measures”. In other words, while preferring local solutions, ECOWAS remained open
to the possibility of action through multilateral cooperation, particularly the option
under Article 52 of the Charter of the United Nations regarding peace and security.
ECOWAS has always adopted an inclusive approach in its efforts at the continental
and international levels.
Accordingly, reference to these organizations in its basic texts has been followed
up in practice by appeals to the United Nations and the African Union for cooperation
to preserve peace and security. Article 52 of the Protocol relating to the Mechanism in
fact provides that “in pursuit of its objectives, ECOWAS shall cooperate with the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), the United Nations and other relevant
organisations ... ECOWAS shall inform the United Nations of any military intervention
undertaken in pursuit of the objectives of this Mechanism”.
The sanctions set out in the Supplementary Protocol include effective measures
for the virtual quarantine of offending Governments, including:
– Refusal to support candidates presented by the member State in question for
elected posts in international organizations;
– Refusal to hold any meeting of ECOWAS in the member State in question;
– Suspension of the member State in question from all organs of the organization;
– In extreme cases, restoration of the legitimate political authority may even be
considered, if proposed by the Mediation and Security Council.
During this special period, ECOWAS will continue to closely monitor the
situation and to adjust its position in accordance with the situation as its develops.
Another important instrument is the ECOWAS Declaration of Political Principles
of 6 July 1991, aimed at strengthening cooperation and collaboration among member
States for the promotion of peace, security and stability in the subregion, the

32

05-66650

S/2005/828

strengthening of good-neighbourly relations, the non-use of force, and the peaceful
settlement of disputes.
ECOWAS, therefore, like other subregional organizations, has throughout its 30
years of existence made a laudable effort to prevent conflicts and to maintain peace
and security in West Africa. The instruments to which I have just referred are naturally
complemented by other initiatives by the Governments of the Community to adopt
instruments such as the Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters and on
Extradition and the Moratorium on the Importation, Exportation and Manufacture of
Light Weapons.
Through the activities of ECOMOG in Liberia and other members of the
Community, ECOWAS was able to intervene to maintain peace and security within the
Community. Every effort must be made to capitalize on and strengthen the existing
partnership by stressing the following:
– Closer cooperation based on the comparative advantage enjoyed by ECOWAS in
West Africa and the strengthening of local capacities, which should be the key to
improving peacekeeping operations within the Community. The transformation
of ECOMOG forces into blue helmets in Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire is a good
example of this partnership.
– The Peacebuilding Commission currently being established could play a major
role in providing assistance and cooperation in the field of peacekeeping and
security. In this regard, considerations of national ownership and the important
role of subregional organizations in the functioning of the Commission will
definitely contribute to closer cooperation and to a more effective partnership
between ECOWAS and the United Nations.
– More support should be given to local initiatives for the implementation of the
Moratorium on Light Weapons, in particular the Programme for Coordination
and Assistance for Security and Development (PCASED) and the national
institutions responsible for the control of light weapons.
– Generally speaking, greater efforts are needed in the areas of training,
equipment, information, strengthening of institutional capacities, and closer
coordination among the various stakeholders for peace and security in the region
so as to avoid duplication of effort and also to ensure that best practices in these
areas can be identified, shared and replicated.
Thank you.

05-66650

33

S/2005/828

SECURITY COUNCIL AD HOC WORKING GROUP ON CONFLICT PREVENTION AND
RESOLUTION IN AFRICA
Seminar on “Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Regional Organizations
in the field of Peace and Security”
New York, UNHQ, ECOSOC CHAMBER, 15 December 2005
------------------STATEMENT
By Mr. Hedi ANNABI,
Assistant Secretary General for Peacekeeping Operations,
United Nations Secretariat
on
“Capacity building for African mechanisms for peace and security”
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,
I would like to thank the Security Council Ad Hoc Working Group
on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa for convening this
timely seminar. I am pleased to join you on this occasion.
I have been asked to address the topic of “Capacity building
for African mechanisms for peace and security.”
I would like to
focus on the area of peacekeeping and to discuss first, the
principles that should guide this process; and second, some
practical ways in which it can be advanced.
Principles
Our efforts to enhance peacekeeping capacity in Africa fall
within
a
larger
framework
of
collaboration
with
regional
organizations.
A number of important principles that should guide
such collaboration have been clarified in recent months, through
discussions by Heads of State and Government during September’s
World Summit, and subsequently during the meeting of the Security
Council in October.
As recognized during those discussions, partner organizations
are playing an increasingly active role in helping to address
threats to peace and security. This is particularly true in Africa,
where the AU, ECOWAS, and other African regional organizations are
making a crucial difference, and where organizations outside of the
continent, notably the EU and NATO, have also made an important
contribution.

34

05-66650

S/2005/828

The
Secretariat
welcomes
the
contribution
of
these
organizations, which is provided for in Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter. Our task now is to build upon this foundation, and
to work together to shape our future collaboration in a way that
will maximize effectiveness in the short term and strengthen
international cooperation in the long term.
The
World
Summit
“outcome
document”
encouraged
partner
organizations to develop capacities for rapid deployment, standby
and bridging arrangements;
endorsed development of a 10-year plan
for capacity-building with the AU; and urged regional organizations
with preventive or peacekeeping capacity to consider placing these
capacities in the UN standby arrangements system. Subsequently, the
Security Council added further momentum to exploration of regional
cooperation, through its adoption of Resolution 1631 (2005) on 18
October.
During the Security Council’s discussions, the SecretaryGeneral identified four priorities for the Secretariat’s
cooperation with regional organizations.
First, he noted the importance of enhancing regional
capacity, particularly in Africa.
The Secretary-General
described the UN’s partnership with the African Union as a
“strategic priority”.
He welcomed the commitment made at the
World Summit to support a 10-year programme to strengthen AU
capacity, and called for an “open and productive dialogue with
the AU and other regional partners” on how to implement this
programme.
The
Second, he stressed the importance of efficiency.
Secretary-General urged that the development of peacekeeping
capacity should be mutually reinforcing rather than duplicative
or competing. He noted that the various regional organizations
have different areas of strength, in responding swiftly, or
robustly, or in undertaking resource-intensive activities, and
urged that we should seek to identify where these strengths
lie, and to build upon them.
Third, the Secretary-General emphasized that cooperation
should go beyond peacekeeping and peace-building, to include
prevention and conflict resolution more broadly.
He also
underlined the need for a focus on the social and economic

05-66650

35

S/2005/828

aspects of peace, where
commission may assist.

the

creation

of

a

peace-building

Finally,
and
most
important,
he
stressed
that
the
development of regional capacity should maintain and reinforce
a collective approach to security. As urged by the SecretaryGeneral, the development of regional capacity should “advance
the purposes and principles of the Charter”. It should lead to
a net gain in capacity to promote peace and security, and does
not absolve any of us of our responsibilities under the Charter
to assure an effective response to conflict, wherever it
occurs.
It should not lead to an erosion of will to engage
outside of regional borders, including through United Nations
peacekeeping, which is a uniquely powerful symbol and catalyst
for international cooperation for peace.
Practical implementation
Having reviewed these broad principles that should guide our
efforts, I would like now to discuss some of the practical steps
through which the international community can assist in developing
African peacekeeping capacity.
A key blueprint for the enhancement of African peacekeeping
capacity was provided by the AU’s adoption of a “road map”, which
has received international support. Through progressive steps, this
is intended to support the development of African Standby Forces
that could ultimately be capable of intervening in extreme cases,
such as genocide situations or dealing with low level spoilers,
where the international community does not act promptly. However,
this Road Map can only take effect with sustained, generous and
coordinated support.
Detailed suggestions on how the international community can
assist in developing African peacekeeping capacity within this
framework were outlined a year ago in the Secretary-General’s report
on enhancing African peacekeeping capacity (A/59/592), and remain
valid, in our view. The report noted that direct assistance can be
provided by the Secretariat in a number of areas. At the same time,
it reflected the fact that this can address only a small fraction of
the requirements, and that real progress will depend upon broader
support from Member States, which the Secretariat can help to
coordinate.

36

05-66650

S/2005/828

Areas of support discussed in the report include the following:
•
•

•

development of doctrine and training, where the Secretariat can
promote African involvement in exercises, as well as organizing
staff exchanges and conducting relevant training;
meeting logistical needs, where the Secretariat can foster
information exchange and development of shared standards in
logistics or, possibly, provide direct operational support,
subject to availability of the necessary funding;
meeting planning needs, including by direct operational support
and capacity-building by the Secretariat.

Over the last 12 months, significant efforts in these areas
have taken place, drawing upon collaboration between the UN and
bilateral donors.
Much of this support has been focused around the AU’s efforts
to address the conflict in Darfur. The Secretariat has established a
UN Assistance Cell in Addis, and helped to organize a recent map
exercise (MAPEX) which brought together the UN, EU, NATO and the AU.
This exercise helped the AU identify its broader capacity-building
needs.
Meanwhile, the EU has provided indispensable assistance
through the African Peace Facility.
Another example of close cooperation has been the UN’s
participation in the AU-led AMIS assessment missions.
Such an
assessment is currently underway with a view to review the military
and civilian police components of AMIS; the UN, the EU and the US,
as well as other partners, are participating in the mission.
These initiatives have been supplemented by more general
efforts
by
the
international
community
to
enhance
African
peacekeeping capacity. Bilateral donors have supported an array of
training programmes, while DPKO has provided technical support to
the Situation Rooms of the AU, ECOWAS and ECCAS, and has organized
study tours for ECOWAS staff to New York to learn about UN
procedures in conflict prevention and management.
Next steps
These efforts over the past year have made a significant
difference in supporting the AU’s response in Darfur. However, they
can only be viewed as a beginning in addressing the challenges of
enhancement of African peacekeeping capacity.

05-66650

37

S/2005/828

Far greater resources are required to make significant
progress. While the EU’s assistance through the Peace Facility has
played a crucial role, these funds are now nearly exhausted, and
attempts by the AU, supported by the UN, to mobilise additional
resources from non-EU donors have thus far fallen short of
expectations.
Bilateral support must be both generous and
sustained, to ensure that this initial investment is not ultimately
in vain.
Likewise, the Secretariat’s own efforts, although modest in
scale, represent the most that can be done within the limited
resources available. In principle, the Secretariat is in a position
to
assist
with
a
number
of
coordinating
tasks,
including
harmonization of training standards, or providing a “clearinghouse”
function for bilateral training efforts, with a view to enhancing
perceptions of transparency and fostering local ownership. However,
such additional tasks – and or any direct training or operational
engagement -- would require further dedicated capacity.
Finally, I would like to reiterate that, as underlined by the
Secretary-General, efforts to enhance African peacekeeping capacity
should reinforce, rather than weaken, the vision of collective
security.
While African regional or sub-regional response may be the best
option in some cases, United Nations peacekeeping operations may be
indispensable in a number of areas, as a means to ensure political
focus and engagement by major powers; or to help to meet needs where
local response may face political and practical constraints; or to
facilitate a truly multidimensional response to complex civil
conflicts.
Member States from all regions should be ready to provide
troops to such operations, which underscore a global will to resolve
conflicts, and whose practical and political strength depends upon
broad participation.
It is important to remember that African
peacekeepers are making a valuable contribution far beyond their
continent, including in areas which have significant peacekeeping
resources, such as Europe and the Americas; it is fitting that
similarly, other regions remain ready to assist in Africa.

38

05-66650

S/2005/828

Conclusion
In summary, while some progress has been made, much remains to
be done to promote the development of African peacekeeping capacity.
A broad vision for the future has been elaborated.
A number of
practical steps have been identified, in particular in the
Secretary-General's report on enhancement of African peacekeeping
capacity, through which this vision can be realized.
But
substantial and sustained assistance, as well as dedicated
resources, will be necessary to give effect to the agenda that has
been outlined, and to enable African troop- and police-contributors
to play their full part in peacekeeping within and beyond the
continent of Africa, whether under regional or UN command.
By combining readiness to enhance African peacekeeping capacity
with continued will by non-African States to deploy on the continent
when necessary, the wider international community can strengthen the
structure of the collective security system envisaged under the
Charter.
The Secretariat looks forward to making its contribution
to this effort.

05-66650

39

S/2005/828

SECURITY COUNCIL AD HOC WORKING GROUP ON CONFLICT PREVENTION AND
RESOLUTION IN AFRICA
Seminar on “Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Regional Organizations
in the field of Peace and Security”
New York, UNHQ, ECOSOC CHAMBER, 15 December 2005
-----------------------------------------Analysis of African Mechanisms for Peace and Security
in the Context of the UN Charter
By Professor Margaret VOGT,
Deputy Director Africa Division II
Department of Political Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat
•

The last few decades have witnessed the development of greater African engagement in the
management of peace and security situations within the African region and in the various subregions. African regional and sub-regional organizations have been in the vanguard of setting
new norms on the parameters for international engagement in conflict situations, especially in
civil-war contexts and in situations where the state is unable or unwilling to perform its role
and responsibility. The fist generation of these interventions occurred in the seventies, when
Chad's neighbours and the then Organization of African Unity (OAU) was persuaded to
intervene both politically and then militarily to end the stalemate that was created when rebel
forces laid siege on N’djamena, surrounding the city, leading to terrible humanitarian
conditions in that country. Nigeria and the OAU negotiated the end on the siege, persuaded
the then President, David Malloum to vacate power and negotiated a power-sharing
arrangement and the deployment of the first-ever peacekeeping force by a regional
organization, led by a coalition of willing members. Even though this experiment ended in a
fiasco and the rebels failed to honour their commitments and mounted an assertive military
attack that led to the withdrawal of the regional peace-keeping force, this experience did not
prevent the members of ECOWAS from recommending another intervention by ECOWAS in
Liberia in 1990, led by a coalition of willing members to stop the rebel attacks on Monrovia
and to end the terrible attack on the civilian population of Liberia. Years later, South Africa
was to intervene in Lesotho to reverse a military takeover of government in the Kingdom of
Lesotho, and deployed, with Mozambique and Ethiopia, a policing force in Burundi, under the
auspices of the African Union. The force was to facilitate the relocation of the coalition
government in Bujumbura. This was indispensable to the successful implementation of the
Arusha Accord and the conduct of elections leading to the installation of a government of
national unity in Burundi.

•

The African regional organizations, at that time ECOWAS and the OAU established new
norms in undertaking these interventions within their sub-regions. Africa became the first

40

05-66650

S/2005/828

region to give interpretation to Chapter VII of the UN Charter in article 52 (1), which states
that "Nothing in the Charter precludes the existence of regional arrangements or agencies for
dealing with such matters relating to the maintenance of international peace and security as are
appropriate for regional action, ...." In article 52 (2), the Charter states that Members of the
UN that enter into such arrangements should do everything towards the pacific settlements of
such disputes before referring them to the Security Council. In launching active military
interventions in conflicts situations within the region, the regional organizations argued that
they did so for the following reasons: 1) the conflicts, being internal, did not lend themselves
to the classical intervention for the pacific settlement of disputes that was called for under
Chapter VI of the UN Charter; 2) Because the conflicts deliberately targeted civilian
populations and had particularly terrible impact on the civilian population, the regional leaders
felt that they had a "responsibility to intervene on humanitarian grounds" as they could not
stand-by and watch a fire consume the neighbourhood; 3) They felt that these interventions
were being undertaken within the framework of article 52 of the UN Charter that allows
regional arrangements to take responsibility in the advance of international peace and security.
•

The first generation of interventions by regional arrangements was led by a "coalition of
willing members" on behalf of regional organizations. Thus for example, ECOWAS as an
institution was not operationally at the helm of the management of the ECOMOG operations
in Liberia, but assumed the political leadership at a much later stage of the operations. This
was partly because neither ECOWAS nor the OAU had the political nor the administrative
frameworks to undertake such interventions, they developed these along the way and even
now, years after the adoption of the ECOWAS Mechanism in 1999 and the OAU Mechanism
in 1998 and AU in 2002, these instruments are still largely work in progress.

•

For the purposes of this discussion it is important to underline a number of principles: The
development of African Mechanisms for conflict management were conceived as part of the
larger international responsibility for the management of international peace and security,
especially in civil-war situations that called for robust external action to protect the civilian
populations; these interventions were informed by the evident reluctance of the international
community, especially following what was considered to be the "lessons learned from
Somalia" to again intervene in internal conflicts that were perceived not to be "ripe for
intervention" and were the conditions on ground do not provide for the useful deployment of
UN peace-keeping forces - were there is no peace to keep. The lessons of Somalia resulted in
a distinctive reluctance by non - African members of the UN to agree to the deployment of
their own forces in Africa. These lessons - which in my view were flawed, were partly
responsible for the reluctance of the international community to act in Rwanda, leading to the
genocide, which we all know so well.

•

The development of the African Mechanisms for conflict management have formalized and
institutionalized the role of the regions as partners of the UN in the international responsibility
to manage peace and security; the mechanisms have also been constructed within the larger
UN framework, to fit into the international architecture. There are important aspects to the
African regional frameworks - both the ECOWAS Mechanism as well as the AU Mechanism,

05-66650

41

S/2005/828

the two most advanced regional frameworks clearly go beyond the UN Charter in stating that
the Mechanisms will be operational even without the consent of the host country in situations
that are very clearly specified in their protocols - these are situations that threaten the security
of a major segment of the civilian population of these countries - these Mechanisms have
given a practical expression to the concept of the "responsibility to protect". Also, the African
Mechanism, now all of them, have mirrored the provisions in the AU Charter that sanctions
the unconstitutional changes of governments and bars the participation of the countries under
sanction in the decision-making processes of the organization.
•

The African Mechanisms are still very much work in progress as the organizational
frameworks for the practical management of the operations that result from decisions by the
regional organizations to deploy are still being constructed. Increasingly the African regional
organizations are taking the lead at the initial stages of conflicts within the region, in hosting
and leading the political negotiations of the cessation of hostilities and the first phases of the
military deployments. The concept of "rehatting" of regional forces and regional operations
by the UN as well as the concept of multi-dimensional operations that allows a more robust
deployment of forces by the UN to protect the civilian population are concepts that the UN
first initiated, taking the lead from the style of interventions by the African regional groupings
and to respond to new challenges.

•

It is important for the UN to embrace these normative evolutions in Africa and seek a
framework to control and domesticate these within the international legal framework. We
need to set new ground rules that would govern the practical application of these new norms.
The new Africa Mechanisms all call for the need to have their mandates endorsed by the
Security Council. The UN should exercise this responsibility with deliberateness, working
closely with the peace and security councils of the African regional organizations. In this
regard, mechanisms may be required to ensure clear and direct communication between these
organs and the UN. Secondly, we are yet to fully develop the linkages between the UN and
regional organizations for a more effective support of conflict prevention - this is the most
important value-added of the regional arrangement. Very often the region can intervene at
much earlier stages of conflicts, without the liability which is caused when an issue is put on
the agenda of the Security Council. DPA should seek to develop a wider menu of
arrangements that would allow closer interaction with the African regional mechanisms and
enable the UN work with the region at much earlier stages of conflicts. Finally, the present
trend to reinforce the capacity of regional organizations to effectively manage peace
operations should be encourages, as the UN is doing in Darfur. This is important because,
especially at the initial stages of intervention, the region has the comparative advantage to act
as they tend to be able to put greater pressure on the parties and to diminish their recourse to
external support. When the UN takes over responsibility for operations that are led by the
region, the management of such transfers need to be carefully handles in a way that would not
undermine the credibility or stature of the regional arrangement. The objective should be to
continue to develop these capacities as part of an expanded international capacity in reserve
for when they would be further required. On the other-hand, however, and to ensure the
continued engagement of the United Nations in the management of these operations, as well as

42

05-66650

S/2005/828

to provide an over-sight of the implementation of the endorsement given by the Security
Council to regional organizations, the Council should insist on periodic reports and review to
allow for a collective review of progress made and a transparent determination of when
responsibility for the management of aspects of such operations should be transferred to
another organization, perhaps the United Nations or other coalition of the willing.

05-66650

43

S/2005/828

SECURITY COUNCIL AD HOC WORKING GROUP ON CONFLICT PREVENTION AND
RESOLUTION IN AFRICA
Seminar on “Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Regional Organizations
in the field of Peace and Security”
New York, UNHQ, ECOSOC CHAMBER, 15 December 2005

COMMENTS by:
Paul van Tongeren
Executive Director of the European Centre for Conflict Prevention,
Secretariat of the Global Partnership for the Prevention of Armed Conflict
The European Centre for Conflict Prevention and the Global Partnership for the Prevention of Armed
Conflict welcome this discussion and believe it is of crucial importance in our collective work to
prevent armed conflict. For Africa the question of how cooperation between the UN and African
Regional Organisations can be improved is of particular importance in this regard.
Discussing new forms of collaboration, we should not limit our thinking to protocols and other formal
mechanisms alone; new ways should be discussed and considered. Further, we must look at how other
important stakeholders, including civil society actors, can be involved and consulted. This point is
missing in the list of issues of paramount importance in paragraph 10 of the concept paper, the
involvement of other stakeholders, like civil society; a focus on conflict prevention as well and the
establishment of a well functioning early warning/early response system.
Recognising the important role of civil society
Security Council Resolution 1625, adopted on 14 September, recognised the important supporting
roles civil society can play in conflict prevention and the need to include all possible contributions
from the local civil society (page 9). This point was reiterated in the Presidential statement from the
SC open debate on the role of civil society in conflict prevention on 20 September.
We as Global Partnership for the Prevention of Armed Conflict are beginning to see a growing
recognition of this role, but it must be strengthened and increased. In the Secretary-Generals report
‘The Prevention of Armed Conflict’, he urged ‘NGOs with an interest in conflict prevention to
organise an international conference of local, national and international NGOs on their role in conflict
prevention and future interaction with the United Nations in this field.’ In response, the following year
civil society organisations from around the world organised themselves and formed the Global
Partnership for the Prevention of Armed Conflict. After three years of dialogue, consultation and
research all over the world, 15 Regional Action Agendas and an overarching Global Action Agenda on
conflict prevention were formulated. These Action Agendas were presented at the Global Conference
‘From Reaction to Prevention-Civil Society Forging Partnerships to Prevent Conflict and Build
Peace’ which took place here at the UN in July of this year.

44

05-66650

S/2005/828

A focus on conflict prevention
The debate in the Security Council on 14 September focussed primarily on strengthening the
effectiveness of the SC in conflict prevention, particularly in Africa. I believe that it would be
appropriate to have a few relevant paragraphs of Resolution 1625 reaffirmed in preparation for the
Security Council debate in January 2006, including operative paragraph 2 on strengthening UN
conflict prevention capacities by supporting regional and sub-regional capacities for early warning,
among others.
SC Resolution 1625 pledges as well (in operative paragraph 4) to promote the establishment of an
effective programme of conflict prevention grounded on a comprehensive strategy. This is of
paramount importance and should be included in the collaboration with the African Regional
Organisations.
Early Warning
Within the Global Partnership, our partner in West Africa is WANEP, the West Africa Network for
Peacebuilding. They have a memorandum of understanding with ECOWAS and a Liaison Office in
Abuja. WANEP monitors information on elections, human rights and various political and socioeconomic issues from their contacts with a broad range of civil society actors. A Peace Monitoring
Centre collects the information and forwards it to ECOWAS. There are joint trainings for CSOs and
ECOWAS staff. Outputs are policy briefs, risk assessments and incidental reports, among others.
ECOWAS is interested in this cooperation and information because civil society often knows earlier
and better what is happening and if tensions will escalate. This model could be useful for other
regions in Africa as well.
Early warning information should be collected on a very systematic, regular and coordinated basis
globally, based on detailed information from the field. We believe IASC (the Inter-Agency Standing
Committee) with their quarterly Early Warning-Early Action Reports, fulfils those needs quite well
and should be perhaps the lead agency for the UN system in collecting and analysing early warning
signals and proposed responses to prevent conflicts.
Peace Building Commission
One of the results of the recent World Summit is the establishment of the Peace Building Commission
(PBC). We welcome the PBC and hope it gives a good and much needed contribution to
peacebuilding. One open question is how will the PBC relate to the Regional Organisations?
We would like to briefly raise four issues of concern that we hope can be addressed the coming
months:
- Missions to the field. We urge the PBC to consult in an early stage civil society in the countries
that are visited and develop a PBC-Civil Society collaboration mechanism.
- The Fund. The $250 million that was recommended by the High Level Panel is not enough by
far, taking in account the needs of countries such as Afghanistan, Liberia, Sudan and Iraq. The
Fund should be much, much larger.
- Staffing. The PB Support Office of the PBC should be composed of highly qualified and
experienced people, but at the same time staffed from the different departments and agencies.

05-66650

45

S/2005/828

-

There is a risk that PBSO will not be staffed adequately and not get the experienced staff that
is needed. Twenty people to achieve these huge tasks are also not adequate.
Mandate. Conflict prevention is at the heart of the mandate of the UN but not included in the
mandate of the PBC. Conflict prevention is still a ‘gaping hole’ in the UN system, to use the
Secretary-General’s language.
The sixth high-level meeting between the UN and regional organisations was convened at the
UN end of July this year. Participants of that meeting stressed the importance of the role of the
PBC in conflict prevention. When the PBC is working, it should look how to enhance a
prevention mandate as well.

Enhancing durable structures conducive to peace
Within the cooperation between UN and Regional Organisations, an important issue to be considered
is also how to enhance durable structures conducive to peace and stability. We believe that a national
civil society forum on peacebuilding and reconciliation, such as are being established in some West
African countries, could be a good instrument in that respect.
2010
The Peacebuilding Commission will be reviewed in 2010. It is important to see after five years how
this ‘gaping hole’ has functioned. But next to peacebuilding, another crucial function is conflict
prevention and this function has yet not found its place within the UN. This has to be repaired the
coming years.
Development is more than ever seen as interlinked and mutually reinforcing with peace and security
and human rights. In 2010 we will have another review of the MDG process and see how to continue
after 2015. After 2015 the process of MDGs should be firmly linked to peace and security. Thus 2010
would be the right moment to review how peacebuilding and conflict prevention have got a place
within the United Nations institutional machinery and how the process of the MDGs after 2015 should
be more interlinked with conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
How those issues are interlinked, has been more recognised.
At the same time, it has been more recognised that many stakeholders should act more cooperatively.
United Nations, Regional Organisations, governments, civil society and other stakeholders, must
cooperate and identify and build on joint mechanisms. Therefore we propose that the UN organise a
multi-stakeholder conference in 2010 on conflict prevention, peacebuilding and development.
Regional Organisations and CSOs should be crucial partners in this event. That conference should aim
for a coherent and integrated approach on the prevention of armed conflict as proposed in the World
Summit Outcome Document (par. 75).

46

05-66650

S/2005/828

SECURITY COUNCIL AD HOC WORKING GROUP ON CONFLICT PREVENTION AND
RESOLUTION IN AFRICA
Seminar on “Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Regional Organizations
in the field of Peace and Security”
New York, UNHQ, ECOSOC CHAMBER, 15 December 2005
-----------------------------COMMENTS
by Mr. Vasu GOUNDEN,
Executive Director of African Center for Constructive Resolution of Disputes
(ACCORD -South Africa)
Chair,
Excellencies,
Colleagues,
I have five brief points to make with regard to the topic before us. Let me preface my comments by
saying that ACCORD is an African specialist conflict management organization with thirteen years of
field experience in African and international conflicts. As specialized conflict resolution advisors we
have officially supported former President Masire and his team in the DRC intervention and former
President Mandela and his team in the Burundi intervention. In a similar context, as a specialized
conflict management training institution we have conducted in-mission trainings for UNMEE,
MONUC, UNMIB, and recently trained over twenty senior mission leaders for UNDPKO in relevant
aspects of peacekeeping. In addition, several of the rebel groups in the DRC and Burundi have been
prepared by us for the political negotiations brokered by former Presidents Masire and Mandela. We
continue to have an active role on the ground in among other countries, Angola, Burundi, the DRC,
Sudan and Somalia. My comments therefore are borne out of these experiences and close working
relations with the United Nations, the African Union and the RECs.
Chair, we recognize and continue to support the principle of the primacy of the United Nations as the
overarching authority in any and all situations of conflict requiring intervention to preserve peace and
security and dispense with its global responsibility to protect innocent citizens.
In the context of Africa, and in the spirit of promoting African Solutions to African Challenges, we
recognize and support the primacy of the African Union, within its delegated mandate from the United
Nations where possible and desirable, as the overarching continental authority in any and all situations
of conflict requiring intervention to preserve peace and security, to respect and preserve the sovereign
authority of a nation state, and most importantly, to dispense with its over-riding continental
responsibility to protect innocent citizens.
As organs of civil society we see a complimentary role for ourselves in supporting all efforts for
conflict prevention, transformation, and management within the parameters of our comparative
advantages and on the basis of the specific needs existing at the time. Mr Chair, today especially when
most conflicts are intra-state and fewer are inter-state, only a multi-plicity of actors with recognized

05-66650

47

S/2005/828

comparative advantage can make a difference and consequently this initiative today that allows us to
share this platform with you to seek solutions is timely and appropriate to the remedy required.
Chairman, having outlined the principles and understandings underpinning conflict prevention,
transformation and management, let me briefly highlight the problem with a case in point and then
make a few recommendations which I hope will add value to this important debate.
The case in point is the case of Burundi. We must examine, which I intend to do briefly, the reason for
the outbreak of violent and protracted conflict in Burundi, why it has taken so long to resolve the
conflict, transitional arrangements, the role of the legitimately elected Government and how we, the
United Nations, the African Union, civil society organizations and the like should interact with them,
and finally how should we best dispense with our respective roles and comparative advantages in the
post-conflict reconstruction of this country.
Firstly, the reason for the outbreak of violent conflict. The people of Burundi are not inherently
violent and like the tragic recent events in France and Australia have indicated, if we ignore early
warning anywhere in the world and we do not match it with early action we risk turning grievances
into violent conflict. We failed to heed the lessons of the several genocides in Burundi and
consequently we failed the people of Burundi. The first recommendation must therefore be a call for
greater cooperation and alignment between the various sources of early warning that should then feed
into the authority having overall responsibility and authority for intervention, and in the case of
Africa, this cooperation and collaboration must be geared towards supporting and strengthening the
capacity of the African Union Early Warning Mechanism.
Secondly, the reason for why conflicts develop into and remain protracted despite the best efforts of
intervenors is because, as was the case of Burundi, the legitimately mandated intervenor is not
supported with all the resources to do the job and equally challenging for the intervenor is lack of
respect shown by all and sundry for the central role of the intervenor. Consequently many side-shows
undermine the role of the mandated mediator and give the belligerent parties an opportunity to drag
the conflict on, in most cases, for years. Better coordination and recognition and respect for the central
role of a duly appointed mediator must be recognized. In this context the second recommendation is
for the United Nations to support the Panel of the Wise that is an instrument that recognises both
African tradition and culture and a universally accepted model for using experienced and credible
leaders to bring their wisdom to bear on situations of conflict. The United Nations, in its role as a
world government must then deal decisively with both do-gooders and spoilers who unwittingly and
wittingly undermine the role of the intervenor.
Thirdly, we must be careful how we portray our roles in a transition and especially how we relate to
each other and the messages that that sends to the local population. During the transition in Burundi
much was rightly made of the arrival of the African Military Observers in Burundi under the auspices
of the African Union Representative in Burundi. The African Union was seen to take, and took, centre
stage as the overarching authority in Burundi. On arrival of the United Nations, the authority for
peace and security was correctly handed over to the United Nations. Unfortunately, the role of the
African Union Mission in Burundi seemed thereafter to be relegated to that of a poor orphaned sibling
48

05-66650

S/2005/828

to the better resourced United Nation mission and not as a cooperating and collaborating partner. The
only culprit in this uncomfortable situation can be the lack of a clearly defined relationship between
the United Nations and the African Union as was observed by the Secretary General of the United
Nations in his report to the 59th session of the General Assembly (A/59/285), taking into account the
changed nature of the African Union from its predecessor the Organisation of African Unity (OAU).
The third recommendation must therefore be for an urgent review and redefinition of the relationship
between the United Nations and the African Union especially as regards cooperation and collaboration
in joint and common missions.
Fourthly, we need to reflect on the role of a legitimately elected Government and its supporters and
patrons which include this august body the United Nations, the African Union, civil society
organizations like ACCORD and donors and other multi-lateral and bi-lateral stakeholders. Just as we
have recognized the principle and understanding of the primacy of the United Nations or the African
Union where appropriate we must also recognize the principle of the primacy of a Government, duly
elected through the will of its people, to exercise sovereign authority over its people and borders.
Modalities for consultation, cooperation, and collaboration must be strengthened on the basis of early
mutual understandings of priorities and expectations of the duly elected Government and its people.
The current difference between the views of the Government of Burundi on the phased withdrawal of
ONUB contained in their presentation to the UNSC on 30 November 2005 and the views expressed in
the Council’s resolution threatens to detract unnecessarily from the key challenges faced by the
Government and its partners, including the United Nations, in the re construction of the country.
In this case one other approach that may become useful in the future is for increased cooperation
between the United Nations Security Council and the African Union’s Peace and Security Council,
where such sensitive issues of national pride and sovereignty may be canvassed in the region and may
even include joint sittings of the two bodies allowing a member state to feel that those closest to the
problem and more actively seized with the problem have also had an opportunity to deliberate on the
concerns and complications of such challenges. Such collaboration between the respective Security
Councils can only strengthen peace efforts and the joining of concerned parties is a universally
accepted norm in the resolution of disagreements. The fourth recommendation therefore Mr. Chair is
for the development of a precedent breaking effort to urgently consider modalities and mechanisms
for, where necessary and desirable, joint sittings of the Global and Regional Security Councils seized
with and having and interest and responsibility in the same matter.
Lastly, Mr. Chair I will not be-labour the point, merely to say, that it is crucial for the United Nations
and its agencies seized with the task of supporting post-conflict reconstruction, to harmonize their
efforts with the African Union mechanism for post-conflict reconstruction so that there is consistency
and coordination, not duplication and competition in responding to the identification by the sovereign
Government of priorities for reconstruction in their country. A good test case for such cooperation is
Burundi. My final recommendation therefore, Mr Chairman is for the urgent establishment of a joint
task team of the appropriate mechanisms of the United Nations and the African Union for postconflict reconstruction to sit down and share expertise and resources in preparation for their
complimentary roles.

05-66650

49

S/2005/828

Mr. Chair, thank you for inviting us to participate in this important debate. We are whether by
accident, divine intervention, or moral responsibility, partners in a noble cause. The people of Africa,
as they go about their daily work today may not know about our deliberations…let it not remain that
way…let us act now so that they know we will not fail them.
I thank you.

50

05-66650

S/2005/828

SECURITY COUNCIL AD HOC WORKING GROUP ON CONFLICT PREVENTION AND
RESOLUTION IN AFRICA
Seminar on “Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Regional Organizations
in the field of Peace and Security”
New York, UNHQ, ECOSOC CHAMBER, 15 December 2005
COMMENTS
on
“Capacity Building for the African Mechanism(s) for Peace and Security”
By Professor Shepard FORMAN,
Director of the Center on International Cooperation
of the New York University
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
1. I am privileged to have spoken before at meetings of the Ad Hoc Working Group at the invitation of
the Government of Benin, and am particularly pleased to be here today for this important meeting.
2. In the short time available to me, I would like to first iterate three principles derived from the
discussions that preceded me in this session and this morning’s and then to offer a concrete proposal
to realize the important goal of capacity-building.
3. The three principles are:
1) We must not conceive of capacity-building as a one-way tutelary proposition. There
are instances in which regional organizations and sub-regional organizations can do things
better than global institutions, and learning needs to be done in both directions. We will
accomplish more if we think in terms of partnerships for shared responsibility and
determine how best to build capacity that can be shared globally, regionally and nationally.
2) Coordination among bilateral donors and international actors -- the UN, the World
Bank, the G-8, the European Union – is necessary to match and reinforce the important
efforts being made by African Organizations to work better together.
3) Capacity-building for the civilian components of peace operations needs
to be given equal weight to military preparedness.
4. Let me now turn to a specific recommendation regarding civilian capacity-building, All of us who
have worked with the African Union and the Regional Economic Commissions know that they
struggle to meet a high level of demand with severely limited human resource capacity, itself a result
of budgetary constraints and the draining off of qualified staff to positions abroad.

05-66650

51

S/2005/828

5. To help address this long-standing personnel problem, Dr. Funmi Olonisakin of Kings CollegeLondon has developed an excellent, practical proposal to create a highly qualified pool of policymakers and practitioners to serve at the African regional and sub-regional organizations.
6. Now, it might seem awkward for me to be presenting this proposal in the presence of Dr.
Olonisakin, but it so happens that I am on the program and that I can be unabashedly positive about
her proposal in ways that she might be more reticent to do. And, I need to say, that I, along with my
colleagues at CIC and IPA, whom Dr. Olonisakin has kindly implicated in the proposal, am extremely
enthusiastic about it.
7. In a word, Dr. Olonisakin is proposing to create, over the ten year period proposed by the
Secretary-General, an initial cadre of at least one-hundred people from the African continent to help
address the human resource constraints at the AU and the African sub-regional organizations. The
program would work in the following way.
8. In a first year, ten students would be carefully selected for study at Kings College where, in close
collaboration with Centers of Excellence in Africa, they would participate in an established,
comprehensive graduate program covering all major areas of peace support, including prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, with a special focus on the nexus between security, development and
human rights. Students from African universities could apply directly or be nominated by their
academic departments or agencies.
9. In the second year, students would participate in policy research at CIC, IPA or another New Yorkbased institution, while undertaking a practicum in conjunction with a particular United Nations
Department, Programme or Specialized Agency in order to familiarize themselves with the workings
of the Global Body.
10. In a third and fourth year, progam participants would be required by contractual arrangement to
return to Africa to work in the first instance at the African Union and, once a sufficient number have
gone through the program, at other African sub-regional organizations.
11. To fund a program of this scale will require a substantial, sustained commitment on the part of
international donors, but it is essential if the goals of strengthening the capacity of the African
mechanism (s) are to be effectively met. We at CIC are committed to helping Dr. Olonisakin raise the
necessary resources for what we believe will be a decisive contribution to peace and security in
Africa.

52

05-66650

S/2005/828

INVITATION
The Chairman of the Security Council Ad Hoc Working Group
on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa,

Invites to a Seminar

Topic: "Cooperation between the UN and the African Regional Organizations
in the field of Peace and Security".

Date: 15 Decembe6r 2005, from 9:45am to 1:00pm and from 3:00pm to 5:00pm
Venue: UN headquarters in New York, ECOSOC CHAMBER, (See Conference Room in
the UN Journal under Security Council )
Three major items will be examined during the seminar:
-

Presentation of the African Mechanism (s) for Peace and Security; (Keynote Speaker:
President Alpha Oumar KONARE, Chairperson of the African Union Commission)(Invited);

-

African Mechanism(s) for Peace and Security in the framework of the collective peace
and security established by the UN Charter (Keynote Speaker: H.E. Sir Emyr JONES
PARRY, Ambassador of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland);

-

Capacity building for the African Mechanism(s) for Peace and Security (Keynote Speaker:
H.E. Mr. Hedi ANNABI, Assistant Secretary General for Peacekeeping Operations).

The seminar will be held in two sessions one in the morning and the other in the afternoon. All
Members of the United Nations and Agencies, Programmes and Funds of the United Nations and
NGOs and other Organizations of the Civil Society are most welcome to the Seminar.
The presentations by keynote Speakers and by Discussants will be followed by an informal
interactive debate on the issues addressed. The participants are requested to actively contribute
to the interactive debate by short statements, comments and/or questions. Interpretation
(English and French) will be available.
Tentative Agenda and concept paper and participation confirmation form attached.
The Chairman : Simon B. IDOHOU, Ambassador, Permanent Representative
of the Republic of Benin to the United Nations

05-66650

53

S/2005/828

SECURITY COUNCIL AD HOC WORKING GROUP
ON CONFLICT PREVENTION AND RESOLUTION IN AFRICA
SEMINAR
ON
"Cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Regional Organizations in the field of Peace and Security"
New York, UN Headquarters, ECOSOC CHAMBER, 15 December 2005
TENTATIVE AGENDA
9:45 am - 10:00am

Welcoming remarks by the Chairman of the Security Council Ad
Hoc Working Group: HE Mr. Simon B. IDOHOU, Ambassador
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Benin to the
United Nations

10:00 am – 11:30 am

Session I- Presentation of the African Mechanism (s) for
Peace and Security
Introductory remarks by the COCHAIR OF THE SESSION
HE. Professor Ibrahim GAMBARI,
Under- Secretary General Head of the Department of Political Affairs
United Nations Secretariat
KEYNOTE SPEAKER:
President Alpha Oumar KONARE, Chairperson
of the African Union Commission(Invited):
DISCUSSANTS:
H.E. Professor Judith Mbula BAHEMUKA, Ambassador
Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, Permanent Representative of the
Republic of Kenya to the United Nations
H.E. Mr. Peter MAURER, Ambassador Extraordinary and
Plenipotentiary, Permanent Representative of Switzerland to the
United Nations
HE Mr. Aboubacar Ibrahim ABANI, Ambassador Extraordinary
and Plenipotentiary, Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Niger to the United Nations

54

05-66650

S/2005/828

Mr. Vasu GOUNDEN, Executive Director of African Center for
Constructive Resolution of Disputes (ACCORD -South Africa)

11:30 am- 1:00 pm

Session II- African Mechanism(s) for Peace and Security in the
framework of the system of collective peace and security
established by the UN Charter
Introductory analysis of the developments of the African
Mechanism of Peace and Security by Professor Margaret VOGT,
Deputy Director Africa II Division UN Secretariat
KEYNOTE SPEAKER: H.E. Sir Emyr JONES PARRY, KCMG,
Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, President of the Security Council
DISCUSSANTS:
H.E. Mr. Maged Abdelfattah ABDELAZIZ, Ambassador
Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, Permanent Representative of the
Arab Republic of Egypt to the United Nations
H.E. Mr. Jagdish KOONJUL, Ambassador Extraordinary and
Plenipotentiary, Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Maurice to the United Nations
Mr. Paul van TONGEREN, Executive Director of the European
Center for Conflict Prevention

3:00 pm- 5:00 pm

Session III- Capacity building for the African Mechanism(s) for
Peace and Security
CO- CHAIR OF THE SESSION: HE. Mr. Jean-Marc de la
SABLIERE, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary,
Permanent Representative of France to the United Nations
KEYNOTE SPEAKER:
H.E. Mr. Hedi ANNABI, Assistant Secretary General
for Peacekeeping Operations – Secretariat of the United Nations
Comments by the Co- chair on the French and European practice in
the field of capacity building

05-66650

55

S/2005/828

DISCUSSANTS:
H.E. Mr. Augustine P. MAHIGA, Ambassador Extraordinary and
Plenipotentiary, Permanent Representative of the United Republic
of Tanzania to the United Nations
H.E Mr. Michel DUCLOS, Ambassador Extraordinary and
Plenipotentiary, Deputy Permanent Representative of the France to
the United Nations
Professor Shepard FORMAN, Director of the Center on
International Cooperation of the New York University

56

05-66650

S/2005/828

LIST OF THE MEMBERS
OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL AD HOC WORKING GROUP
ON CONFLICT PREVENTION AND RESOLUTION IN AFRICA IN 2005
MISSION
ALGERIA
ARGENTINA
BENIN
BRAZIL
CHINA
DENMARK
FRANCE
GREECE
JAPAN
PHILIPPINES

ROMANIA
RUSSIA
UNITED KINGDOM
TANZANIA
UNITED STATES
UN/SG/DPA

05-66650

NAME
Mahieddine DJEFFAL
Federico BARTTFELD
Jean-Francis R. ZINSOU
Assistant of the Chair
Eric SAIZONOU
Luis Fernando CARVALHO
SHEN Bo
Morten JESPERSEN
Lotte MACHON
Pierre.GAUDIN
Charles-Henri BROSSEAU
Vassilis PAPADOPOULOS
Masahio NAKATA
Anacleto Rei LACANILAO III
Patrick CHUASOTO
Bernadette CRUZ
Monica MATEI
Roxana PANA
Albert SITNIKOV
Jo MOIR
Stephane BONE
George PANGA
Gordon OLSON
Musifiky MWANASALI

57

S/2005/828

SECURITY COUNCIL AD HOC WORKING GROUP
ON CONFLICT PREVENTION AND RESOLUTION IN AFRICA
SEMINAR
ON
"Cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Regional Organizations in the field of Peace and Security"
New York, UN Headquarters, ECOSOC CHAMBER, 15 December 2005

LIST OF NGO PARTICIPANTS TO THE SEMINAR
1- Mr. Paul Van TONGEREN, Executive Director of the European Center for Conflict Prevention
(Netherlands)
2- Renske HEEMSKERK, European Center for Conflict Prevention (Netherlands)
3- Mr. Vasu GOUNDEN, Founder and Executive Director of African Center for the Constructive
Resolution of Disputes (ACOORD - South Africa)
4- Mr. Kwezi Mngqibisa, also from ACCORD
5- Görel BOGÄRDE, UN Representative of Save the Children Fax 1 212 490 3395
6- Shepard FORMAN, Director Center on International Cooperation New York University, 418
Lafayette Street , Suite 543 New York, NY 10003 FAX 1 212 995 4706
7- Mrs. C.Cora TRUE-FROST, NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security, 777 UN
Plaza, 8th Floor New York NY 10017 : Fax 1 212 557 3165
8- Mr. Greg PULEY, Policy Adviser, OXFAM International Advocacy Office 355 Lexington
Avenue, 3rd Floor New York, NY, 10017- FAX1 212 687 2092
9- Mrs. Necla TSCHIRGI, Vice -President of the International Peace Academy- 777 UN Plaza,
New York NY 10017-3521 FAX 1 212 983-8246
10- Mr. Mashood ISSAKA, Senior Program Officer, International Peace Academy 777 UN Plaza New York NY 10017-3521 FAX 1 212 983-8246
11- Ms. Catherine Guicherd, Visiting Fellow at International Peace Academy
12- Mrs. Marijan ZUMBULIV, United Nations Advocacy Manager, International Crisis Group,
New York Tel /FAX 1212 813 0820
13- Mrs. Maggie RAY, Africa Programme Assistant, International Crisis Group, New York Tel
/FAX 1212 813 0820 e-mail: mray@crisisgroup.org
14- Mrs. Ayca Ariyoruk, Research Fellow, Larger Freedoms Program, Center for U.N. Reform
Education, 211 East 43rd Street, Suite 1801, New York, NY 10017, Phone: (212) 682-6958 Cell: (646)-643-1259, Fax: (212) 682-6959
15- Prof. Funmi OLORUNISAKIN , Kings College – London Tel 1 646 269 8089

58

05-66650
