S/PV.7982

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7982nd meeting

Wednesday, 21 June 2017, 3.40 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Llorentty Solíz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Barro
Mr. Skau
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Hickey
Ms. Sison
Mrs. Carrión

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan (covering the period from
2 March to 1 June 2017) (S/2017/505)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-17895 (E)
*1717895*

S/PV.7982

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 3.40 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on South
Sudan (covering the period from 2 March to
1 June 2017) (S/2017/505)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of South Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, and Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Sudan and South
Sudan, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Haysom is participating in today’s meeting via
video-teleconference from Geneva.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/505, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on South Sudan covering the period
from 2 March to 1 June 2017.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.

21/06/2017

communities. It is the result of decisions by the Sudan
People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) in Government,
the SPLA in Opposition and various other entities to
pursue and sustain armed conflict in order to achieve
political goals. Extreme violence continues to create
ever deeper divisions among the people of South Sudan
and make it even more difficult for us to put the country
back on a path to peace and development. Hostilities
have persisted well after the ceasefire commitment
made by President Salva Kiir and continue to unfold
in various parts of the country. In the North, the SPLA
has dislodged Opposition forces from their strongholds
on the west bank of the Nile River. In the East, it has
taken towns in northern Greater Jonglei. In the west,
clashes between Government and Opposition forces
around Wau have forced 22,000 people to take refuge
with the Mission. And fighting in the South has left
towns in the Equatorias with as little as 10 per cent of
their previous populations.
In the midst of those hostilities, displacements and
human rights abuses, the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) has been doing its utmost to
protect civilians. Our peacekeepers persevere in getting
through checkpoints to reach vulnerable populations
even when their patrols are threatened and sometimes
shot at. Their proactive approach directly supports the
South Sudanese people, giving them confidence that
we are there to protect them, enabling us to report
human rights abuses, and helping us to support our
humanitarian partners in ensuring that assistance goes
to those who need it most.

I should state at the outset that the people of South
Sudan remain desperate for peace. More than half of
the country requires food aid, despite its tremendous
potential for food production. One third of the
population is displaced. Half of those displaced are
refugees, who have been arriving in Uganda at a rate of
50,000 for each month of this year. Others have fled to
the Sudan in record numbers, and Kenya and Ethiopia
are also hosting thousands of South Sudanese.

In the meantime, we continue to press forward with
the deployment of the Regional Protection Force (RPF).
The advance parties of the RPF vanguard units have
begun arriving, including those of the engineering and
high-readiness companies. The main bodies of both
contingents are on track to arrive by late July. Subject
to cargo readiness, security clearances and final tax
exemptions from the Government, the expected time
for the Ethiopian advance infantry company to begin
to deploy is July at the earliest. The commencement
of the Kenyan troops’ deployment remains subject
to completion of the ongoing repatriation of Kenya’s
contingent-owned equipment from Wau and its
subsequent refurbishment to meet the needs of its
RPF contribution.

We must not lose sight of the fact that this tragedy
is man-made. It is neither a meteorological phenomenon
nor the result of traditional enmities between local

Concerning the Government’s allocation of the
required second plot of land for the northern base
site of the RPF, the Government informed UNMISS,

Mr. Lacroix: I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
Secretary-General’s 90-day report (S/2017/505) on the
situation in South Sudan.

2/10

17-17895

21/06/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.7982

in a letter dated 11 April, that it had allocated a site
approximately 12 kilometres north of central Juba. On
19 April, an UNMISS integrated team, accompanied by
community leaders and country and local Government
representatives, visited the site to assess its suitability.
The Mission has a number of reservations about the
operational suitability and accessibility of the site, but
we continue to explore options for its use in conjunction
with existing bases at Tomping and United Nations
House, in order to ensure that the land issue does
not further delay the RPF’s deployment, since that is
still an important enabler for the political process in
South Sudan.

end of the transitional period, which was originally
estimated to be in 2018. We must be clear that if the
current situation of armed conflict, political paralysis,
massive displacement, humanitarian and protection
needs, and ongoing human rights abuses were to persist,
then credible, free and fair elections will not be possible
in South Sudan. Elections are the ultimate democratic
process and would require pervasive stability and
an environment in which people can freely express
their political opinions.They would also require that
the transitional institutions established by the peace
agreement be genuinely inclusive of all groups and
political persuasions, as envisaged in the agreement.

While we welcome the commitments made by
President Salva Kiir at the swearing-in of the National
Dialogue Steering Committee, we note with concern
that the unilateral ceasefire he announced has so
far not materialized. With regard to his pledge to
release political prisoners, I should point out to the
Council that, while one United Nations staff member
was recently released, two others have been held for
two years without being charged and another has
recently been detained in Rumbek. We must judge the
President’s commitments by his actions. And, critically,
the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism should finally be granted full
freedom of movement to monitor and verify ceasefire
violations. UNMISS and the Monitoring Mechanism
have been dealing with far too many obstructions
of their movements, making their work extremely
challenging and in some cases impossible.

Operative paragraph 34 of resolution 2327 (2016)
requested that the Secretary-General provide the
Council with a review of the progress made by the parties
in ceasing hostilities, returning to the path of dialogue
and achieving inclusiveness within the Government,
as well as recommend any relevant adjustments to
the UNMISS mandate. In the light of the lack of real
progress in these key areas and the continuation of the
political and security crisis that plagues South Sudan,
we cannot recommend any adjustments to the Mission’s
current mandate. The persistence of significant
military operations on the ground, the lack of dialogue
between the parties and the absence of authentic
inclusivity within the governmental structures in
South Sudan mean, unfortunately, that UNMISS’s
mandate, as currently structured under resolution 2327
(2016), remains relevant and suited to purpose; this
includes the role of the Regional Protection Force in
enhancing security and the protection of civilians in
the capital. Should a genuine cessation of hostilities
take hold, buttressed by the full implementation of
the peace agreement, revisiting the UNMISS mandate
and the tasks of the Regional Protection Force would
be warranted.

We are encouraged by the communiqué of 13 June
from the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), which included a number of concrete steps
aimed at resuscitating the South Sudan political
process. The proposed high-level revitalization forum
to be convened by the IGAD Council of Ministers and
the meeting of the chiefs of defence staff of the RPF are
welcome initiatives that we hope to see happen soon.
Allow me to register our strong support for IGAD and
regional partners as they move forward to actualize
the various initiatives spelled out in the communiqué.
The Mission and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations are ready to provide whatever support may
be required to that end.
I believe it important to take this opportunity
to emphasize our views on recent references to the
prospect of elections in South Sudan. Under the 2015
peace agreement, elections are to be held towards the

In conclusion, let me emphasize that the Secretariat
is continuing to make every effort to take forward the
core tasks of its mandate, including with respect to
expediting the deployment of the RPF. Meanwhile,
although the President declared a unilateral ceasefire
and the launch of the national dialogue on 22 May, it
remains to be seen whether these developments will
yield any tangible improvement in the security or
humanitarian situation on the ground. We cannot lose
sight of the fact that neither the RPF nor UNMISS
is a panacea for this crisis. Only a truly inclusive
political process and the genuine political will of the

17-178953/10

S/PV.7982

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

key protagonists to end the conflict and implement
the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan will bring peace to
this country.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Haysom.
Mr. Haysom: I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to brief the Council on South Sudan.
My remarks build on the briefing provided by UnderSecretary-General Lacroix and cover developments
specific to the resumption of a political process in
South Sudan.
My starting point is the concluding observation
of Under-Secretary-General Lacroix: that only a truly
inclusive political process and the political will to
implement the peace agreement will bring peace to
war-torn South Sudan.
It is important to define what is meant by an inclusive
political process in South Sudan. Simply put, a genuine
and inclusive political process at the least must involve
the combatants and those political leaders with whom
combatants and communities are aligned, as well as the
signatories to the 2015 peace agreement. At the moment,
no clear, inclusive political process is in sight. There is
still the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD)-sponsored peace agreement signed in 2015, to
which the United Nations is a witness. Even though its
current status is contested, it remains the only valid
document signed by the major stakeholders. Though
originally agreed with reservations by the Government,
there is now broad understanding that the text is mostly
and widely supported and should be adjusted only to
the extent necessary to reflect new realities, including
in respect of the inclusivity requirement.
The expulsion of Riek Machar — a key
signatory — from South Sudan and his procedurally
contested replacement by General Taban Deng has
added a particular difficulty to establishing such a
process: the demand for an inclusive process contradicts
the narrative that First Vice-President Deng represents
and will incorporate all opposition groups into the
Government construct. The Government has argued that
Mr. Deng’s participation in the Government meets the
inclusivity requirement set out in the peace agreement,
and, following this logic, the Government has been
required to pacify the remaining opposition-held
4/10

21/06/2017

areas and has consistently proposed alternatives to an
inclusive political process.
However, we sense that this opposition may be
softening. In the meantime, the pacification strategy
has allowed the opposition to claim that they are
in favour of peace, while justifying their military
posture as protecting themselves against a Government
offensive. Since July the conflict has spread throughout
the country, and new actors, armed and unarmed, have
emerged. All only pay lip service to the proposition that
there can be no military solution to this conflict.
As noted by Under-Secretary-General Lacroix,
the mere introduction of the Regional Protection Force
cannot substitute for a political solution, although it
would surely contribute to an enabling environment for
a peace process.
Questions have arisen as to whether the
national dialogue could substitute for an inclusive
political process. A genuinely inclusive and credible
national dialogue would, no doubt, be an important
nation-building exercise in and of itself. In South Sudan,
it would need to be anchored in a peace process and not
be offered as a substitute for such a process. It would
have to be preceded by a political process that creates
the security and political environment necessary for an
inclusive and credible dialogue.
The demand for the opposition to lay down
its weapons in order to participate in the national
dialogue is interpreted as a call to surrender, without
any assurance that the underlying grievances will be
addressed. Nonetheless, it is most encouraging that
the steering committee of the national dialogue only
yesterday announced its intention to consult opposition
groups outside the country, including Mr. Riek Machar.
It seems that other political alternatives have
been offered, such as trusteeship, early elections
and a return to the status quo ante, that are deemed
politically unfeasible. This realization, coupled with
the downward trajectory of South Sudan, has now led
to an increasingly broad understanding among South
Sudanese and regional and international players that
there is no way around an inclusive political process.
To that end, and following the 25 January meeting of
the Secretary-General, the African Union Chairperson
and the IGAD Chair, President Alpha Oumar Konare
engaged the South Sudanese Government and regional
players in order to revive the political process, obtain
17-17895

21/06/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

a cessation of hostilities and create an environment
conducive to inclusive dialogue.
His engagements — which, apparently, are due,
after a three-month hiatus, to recommence in earnest
shortly — were followed at the time by a visit of the
Chair of the African Union Commission, Moussa Faki
Mahamat, to South Sudan soon after taking office.
These efforts on their own have so far not led to concrete
steps forward on a political process.
The Chair of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission, President Festus Mogae, has spoken of the
limits to the implementation of the peace agreement in
the face of pervasive conflict and the non-participation
of active combatants and has called for a unified effort to
secure those conditions. I can report that arrangements
are now being made for both Presidents Konaré and
Mogae, and my office to work together on a joint action
plan, which will in turn be promoted jointly to regional
leaders in the coming weeks.
Faced with a deteriorating situation in South Sudan
and increasing calls from the international community
for engagement, South Sudan’s neighbours have also
been exploring ways and means to start a process
that could bring the conflict to an end. One of those
initiatives, led by President Museveni of Uganda, is
focused on the reunification of the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement (SPLM). Noting that the earlier
decision to exclude the SPLM in Opposition, led by
Riek Machar, from this exercise had drawn criticism
from some participants, Uganda has now belatedly
reached out to Mr. Machar, who declined to participate
due to his present circumstances and the short notice
of the invitation. It is to be recalled that the Ugandan
initiative was faulted earlier by the former detainees
group for prioritizing party unification over bringing
the war to an end.
We understand that there have also been discussions
between President Kenyatta and the opposition parties
on the facilitation of a meeting of all the opposition
groups in Kenya. Recalling the reported abduction
of opposition figures in Kenya, some groups have
expressed anxiety about the meeting venue. Yet they
seem to see the value of establishing a joint platform
as a necessary step for full political engagement with
the Government.
The most recent initiative emanates from the
extraordinary summit of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) held on 12 June.

S/PV.7982

Reiterating that the full implementation of the peace
agreement remained the only viable way to bring about
peace, IGAD had decided to convene a high-level
revitalization forum of the parties to the 2015 agreement,
including what it termed “estranged groups”. The forum
will address concrete measures to restore the permanent
ceasefire, advance the full implementation of the peace
agreement, and to develop a “revised and realistic
timeline” for democratic elections at the end of the
transition period. To that effect, the summit mandated
the IGAD Council of Ministers to urgently convene and
facilitate such a forum in collaboration with relevant
stakeholders, emphasizing the importance of IGADAfrican Union (AU)-United Nations collaboration.
Those proposals, as well as the appointment of an
IGAD Special Envoy, were positive outcomes of the
summit. One concern, however, remains, and that is
the lack of clear timelines for the implementation of the
proposals put forward in the IGAD communiqué.
There seems to be a common understanding now
that a credible political process in South Sudan is one
in which, inter alia, both President Kiir’s Government
and the SPLM in Opposition that is, the Riek Machar
faction, are represented, although not necessarily by
having the principal protagonists attend themselves.
In addition, it would require the attendance of the
new players that have come to the fore, at least for the
purposes of negotiating a ceasefire and an adjustment
to the peace agreement.
The opposition groups began meeting in April
and have started issuing joint statements regarding
developments in the country. They are reported to have
met with the Government officials of neighbouring
States to seek their understanding and support. It
remains to be seen whether the groups will overcome
the differences between them, especially on the issue of
the leadership of the Opposition. Still, the discussions
that took place in the Oslo forum last week among
the opposition groups, which I chaired, revealed more
common ground among them, and even between the
Opposition and the Government, than had been the
impression before.
I believe the demands for a resumption of an
inclusive political process are greater today than they
were a month ago, or three months ago; but much work
remains to be done for a credible political process to
be established. The international community should,
in support of those efforts, deliver a clear message

17-178955/10

S/PV.7982

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

that it supports an inclusive process that includes all
significant armed groups and the political parties that
are, to one degree of another, influential in bringing the
ongoing fighting to a halt. Initiatives, including regional
initiatives that promote dialogue within the opposition
and between the opposition and the Government should
be supported. Collaboration between IGAD, the AU
and the United Nations should further be promoted.
Finally, to reinforce the common message, credible
national elections can be held only to conclude a
transition period underpinned by political inclusion
and stability — not in circumstances of insecurity and
widespread displacement. My office will continue to
engage all South Sudanese stakeholders and work closely
with the United Nations Mission in South Sudan and the
members of the international community, particularly
IGAD and the AU, in pursuit of those objectives.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Haysom for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Carrión (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to express our gratitude for the briefings that
we have just heard from the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
and from the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Sudan and South Sudan, Mr. Nicholas Haysom. We
would like to thank them for their very comprehensive
overview of recent events in South Sudan.
Uruguay would like to reiterate its deep-rooted
concern and alarm in light of the political, security,
economic and humanitarian crisis currently ravaging
South Sudan. A month ago (see S/PV.7950), my
delegation recognized the launch of the national
dialogue and the declaration of the cessation of
hostilities by President Salva Kiir. At the time, we
made it clear that there was a need to follow up on both
of those initiatives. Today, we regret to note that there
has been little — practically zero — progress due to the
lack political will of the parties to the conflict, to the
great despair of the population. Despite the unilateral
declaration of the cessation of hostilities, armed clashes
have continued in the country over the past few months.
Furthermore, the national dialogue process
launched by the Government has been rejected in its
current format by various members of the opposition.
In that connection, it is necessary that the stakeholders
6/10

21/06/2017

continue to make efforts to ensure that the existing
dialogue process is more inclusive and representative
of all the voices of South Sudan. Only an inclusive
dialogue will achieve the legitimacy necessary to
finding a peaceful resolution to the conflict. It will
be unfeasible, moreover, to launch a credible dialogue
process in a climate of war and fear. The international
community, including the United Nations, the African
Union and regional and subregional bodies, must make
a coordinated contribution to the dialogue process in
South Sudan, in accordance with the relevant conditions
to be legitimate.
We support the observations set out in the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2017/505) in terms of
the current structure and mandate of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), which
remain relevant and appropriate to the realities on the
ground. On that particular point, Uruguay believes
that UNMISS should continue to have as its highest
priority the protection of civilians and the promotion
of human rights and the submission of reports on
human rights abuses and violations. In that regard,
we call upon the Government of South Sudan to fully
cooperate with the implementation of resolution 2327
(2016), including with regard to the deployment of
the Regional Protection Force. Any restrictions on
the free functioning of UNMISS should be lifted in
full compliance with the status of forces agreement.
We would like to recall that neither UNMISS nor the
Regional Protection Force are a panacea for resolving
the crisis. Only a genuine, inclusive political process,
complemented by the political will of the parties, will
bring peace to South Sudan.
I wish to conclude by paying tribute to the
courage and dedication of the staff of UNMISS and
to the humanitarian workers who continue to protect
and to provide assistance to millions of victims of
humanitarian disasters, and who do so in a very
dangerous operational environment.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for bringing the crisis in South Sudan
to the attention of the Security Council, and I express
my appreciation to the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Lacroix, and the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sudan and
South Sudan, Mr. Haysom, for their comprehensive and
insightful briefings.
17-17895

21/06/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

We fully endorse the recommendations contained in
the Secretary-General’s quarterly report (S/2017/7969)
and his monthly update on the deployment of the
Regional Protection Force. My delegation would like to
make the following observations and recommendations.
First, despite efforts made by the Transitional
Government and Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission, in general slight tangible progress has
been made in the peace process. Only inclusive and
transparent dialogue, as well as the full-fledged
implementation of the Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan can result
in genuine reconciliation.
In that regard, we need to fully support the concerted
efforts of the United Nations, the African Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
to achieve our objectives in South Sudan. At the same
time, we need to ensure that the national dialogue
launched by President Salva Kiir one month ago be truly
inclusive and transparent. We therefore welcomed the
decision made at the thirty-first IGAD Extraordinary
Summit of the Assembly of Heads of State to convene
a revitalization forum. It is noteworthy that that
platform will include all parties so as to discuss the
implementation of the peace agreement and prepare for
the upcoming democratic elections. The foundations
will therefore be laid to help build State institutions.
Secondly, Kazakhstan commends the efforts of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
to ensure the delivery of humanitarian assistance to
those areas in need. We note the report’s mention that
UNMISS continues to encounter bureaucratic obstacles
and restrictions in connection with its operations and
freedom of movement in implementing its mandate.
My delegation expresses its support for the three-tiered
approach to the protection of civilians, especially
with regard to women and children. We endorse the
Secretary-General’s recommendation that the Mission
remain structured under resolution 2327 (2016).
Thirdly, severe humanitarian and security
conditions, as well as the increasing number of
internally displaced persons, demand our serious
consideration. All sides and non-State actors should
stop attacks on humanitarian workers and ensure
unhindered humanitarian access, especially to areas
affected by famine. Similarly, perpetrators must be
brought to justice. We must ensure that no destruction

S/PV.7982

occurs in close proximity to homes, schools, hospitals
and other life-saving infrastructure.
We call on international partners and donors
to ensure the necessary funding for implementing
the humanitarian response plan. We also urgently
call for the cessation of hostilities by all parties and
the implementation of security sector reforms so
as to ensure the rule of law and bring an end to all
impunity. Whenever possible, hybrid courts should be
set up to carry out the process of transitional justice
and reconciliation.
Furthermore, the engagement of women and
youth would greatly promote conflict prevention and
settlement processes. We therefore commend the
appointment of women to the leadership organ of the
National Dialogue Steering Committee and call for an
additional increase in their numbers.
Lastly, the situation in South Sudan should remain
a top priority for the Council. We pay sincere tribute to
the personnel of UNMISS and Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Shearer for their work on the
ground in such a difficult environment. Kazakhstan
will work with Council members and key actors in
finding a lasting solution to the conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as the representative
of the Plurinational State of Bolivia.
We are grateful for the information that UnderSecretary-General Lacroix and Special Envoy Haysom
have provided us at today’s meeting. We recognize the
work that they are doing in a situation as difficult as the
one in South Sudan today.
Since the beginning of the year, we have been
examining the situation in South Sudan on almost
a monthly basis. Unfortunately, we have seen little
progress in the political arena and hardly any advances
in security and humanitarian situation, which remains
the same or has even worsened in various parts of
the country since last year. The revitalization of the
political process and fostering the full implementation
of the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in
the Republic of South Sudan need to be our shared goals
and understood as the only solution to the conflict.
In that regard, as we have said on previous occasions,
we welcomed the announcement of the unilateral
cessation of hostilities made by President Salva Kiir
and the rollout of the national dialogue. Nevertheless,

17-178957/10

S/PV.7982

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

it is clear that we need greater commitment from all
parties so that those initiatives can be successfully
implemented. We regret that, as the Secretary-General
states in his report (S/2017/505), hostilities have not
stopped, and confrontations continue in Upper Nile,
Greater Equatoria, Greater Bahr el-Ghazal, Jonglei and
Unity states.
We once again call on the Sudan People’s Liberation
Army and Sudan People’s Liberation Army in Opposition
to agree to the ceasefire, which would decrease tensions
and constructively pave the way towards dialogue.
The consequences of those confrontations have
corresponded to the increase in the humanitarian needs
of the millions of South Sudanese people who had to flee
their homes. Since 2013, 3.8 million South Sudanese
have had to leave their homes. As the SecretaryGeneral’s report indicates, since the beginning of this
year alone, Uganda has hosted approximately 247,500
South Sudanese refugees. Those statistics are alarming,
and we require the commitment of all parties to ensure
that humanitarian aid arrives unhindered and ensure
the safety of humanitarian workers.
Against that troubling backdrop, regional cooperation
is vital for progress to be made in that regard.
Bolivia welcomes the communiqué of the thirty-first
Extraordinary Summit of the Assembly of Heads of State
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), which took place on 2 June and was attended by
the Commissioner of African Union Peace and Security
Council, the Chair of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission, representatives of the United Nations and
the representatives of the troika on South Sudan. We
concur with all the conclusions reached at that important
meeting, which, in our opinion, brought together the key
stakeholders interested in finding a solution to the conflict
in South Sudan. Accordingly, I would like to underscore
the following points contained in the communiqué, which
calls on President Salva Kiir to
“follow up the strict implementation of the ceasefire
and ensure that his field commanders respect the
ceasefire and take swift measure against those who
violate his decision.
“In this connection, the IGAD Summit urges the
armed opposition groups to reciprocate the call for
a ceasefire as well as to renounce violence ... [while
emphasizing] that all armed opposition groups in
South Sudan also share full responsibility on the
8/10

21/06/2017

humanitarian consequences of the conflict and
human rights violations occurring in South Sudan”.
Furthermore the communiqué expresses
“concern on the obstacles facing humanitarian
agencies including killings of humanitarian
personnel and takes note of the progress made by the
Government to address the issue of access through
the establishment of the High-level Humanitarian
Oversight Committee, and the opening of the new
humanitarian corridors.”
We especially welcome the convening of the Highlevel Revitalization Forum to breathe new life into the
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan. We hope that this will be an
important element in efforts to advance the effective
implementation of the peace agreement.
Concerning the deployment of the Regional
Protection Force, we welcome the meeting with the
Chiefs of Staff of the troop-contributing countries and
the representatives of the Government of South Sudan
to take up pending issues and set a definitive timetable
for a full deployment to coordinate with the work of
UNMISS. We are anxiously awaiting the outcome of
that meeting.
Lastly, we would like to underscore the work of
Special Representative David Shearer, Special Envoy
Haysom and UNMISS. We wish them every success in
their endeavours, and we offer them a full support and
backing as they pursue the action going forward.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Malok (South Sudan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to address the Security Council
once again on this vitally important issue for my
country. I would also like to thank, Mr. Lacroix, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, and
Mr. Haysom, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the Sudan and South Sudan, for their kind briefings.
As I reported last month (see S/PV.7950), the
national dialogue has been officially launched and the
Steering Committee sworn in, and they have already
begun their work. The national dialogue is a positive
step in the right direction. The co-Chairs of the Steering
Committee have begun their efforts to reach out to the
stakeholders in South Sudan, as well as those outside
17-17895

21/06/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the country. The co-Chair of the Steering Committee
is currently leading a delegation to South Africa to
meet with Mr. Riek Machar, while the Deputy co-Chair
is leading another delegation to Khartoum and Addis
Ababa to meet with the other armed groups and political
parties. It is the hope of the Government that all
stakeholders will join the national dialogue initiative.
The national dialogue should not be in any way
seen as a replacement for the peace agreement signed
in 2015, but as a viable mechanism to resolve the
political problems and end the war, which is causing
death and suffering for the people of South Sudan. The
Government assures the Council and the international
community that it will not interfere in the national
dialogue. The dialogue will be inclusive and its findings
will be respected and adhered to by the Government.
The Government is engaging other armed groups
in the country. In the recent weeks, other armed groups
from Yei River state, Raja, the Luo tribe in Wau state
and in the greater Jonglei have agreed to put down
their weapons and join the national dialogue. There
are also positive initiatives being conducted by His
Excellency President Museveni of Uganda to reunify
the factions of the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement
and to encourage them to join the national dialogue.
We reiterate our commitment to the deployment of the
Regional Protection Force. Its deployment will also
address the concerns of those stakeholders who would
feel a sense of insecurity should they return to the
country now.
My delegation would like to emphasize that it is
not the policy of the Government to hinder the work of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
and the humanitarian actors. UNMISS is in South
Sudan at the invitation of the Government and we have
every intention to support it. Most of the violations
reported are usually at lower levels. We urge UNMISS
to coordinate with the Government by immediately
reporting incidents of impediments as they happen,
so that perpetrators are brought to book. It is in that
light that the President issued a decree that gives strict
instructions for all roadblocks to be removed and for
all field commanders to grant unhindered access to
UNMISS and the humanitarian actors.
Since the President declared the unilateral ceasefire,
there has not been any active and direct confrontation
between the Government and rebel groups. The overall
security situation in the country is relatively calm.

S/PV.7982

However, the ceasefire still faces challenges as other
stakeholders are yet to declare their own ceasefire. The
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement in Opposition
forces allied to Riek Machar resorted to conducting
attacks with the intention to cause instability and to
seek attention from the international community. The
Transitional Government of National Unity strongly
condemns the most recent attack by the former
Vice-President’s group on a civilian bus being escorted
from Nimule to Juba.
In order for the unilateral ceasefire to hold, we
call upon the Security Council and the international
community to ask the other stakeholders to respect
the ceasefire so as to allow humanitarian actors to
deliver aid to those areas in need. From the side of the
Government, I wish to assure the Council that it is fully
committed to the unilateral ceasefire. We also call on
the Security Council and the international community
to discourage the moral equivalence approach, which
causes the other stakeholders to take advantage. There is
a need to pinpoint exactly who is in violation and when.
The general amnesty issued by the Government
to those who denounce violence is not intended to
obstruct accountability and justice, but to create an
environment that would allow people to come back and
join the national dialogue. It is the firm belief of the
Government that people should be held accountable for
their actions following due process.
The humanitarian situation in the country continues
to be of great concern. Climate change, which also
affects the region, and falling oil prices have had
adverse effects on the economic situation and prevented
the Government from being able to address the crisis.
The Government is working to put measures in place,
which include collecting non-oil revenues, reducing
expenditures and strengthening the banking and
monetary system. The results of those measures cannot
be seen overnight. We call on our friends and partners
to step in and help the Government avert a crisis.
We recognize our shared objective of bringing
sustainable and lasting peace, security and stability to
our country. The Transitional Government of National
Unity is grateful for the efforts and initiatives being
exerted by the leaders of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, the African Union and all
friends and partners of South Sudan. We thank the
men and women in police and military uniform and
the civilian components of UNMISS, as well as the

17-178959/10

S/PV.7982

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

humanitarian actors, for their unwavering and tireless
efforts in helping the people of South Sudan
The Transitional Government of National Unity
remains committed to finding peace, stability and
prosperity for South Sudan and to working with
UNMISS and humanitarian actors. At this critical
juncture, when the Transitional Government of National
Unity is seeking to bring about peace, reconciliation
and healing through the national dialogue, we hope

10/10

21/06/2017

that the Security Council, United Nations and the
international community will positively support those
efforts, instead of the scepticism, negative messages
and threats of sanctions being sent out by some.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.

17-17895
