S/PV.8073

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8073rd meeting

Tuesday, 24 October 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Delattre. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-34235 (E)
*1734235*

S/PV.8073

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Albania,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia,
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Montenegro, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of Korea, Romania,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain and Turkey to participate in
this meeting.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): In accordance with rule 33.3 of the provisional
rules of procedure of the Security Council, I should like
to propose to adjourn this meeting until 7 November.
Also in accordance with the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure, I should like to explain why we are
presenting this motion.
Let us not pretend that we do not understand what
is happening here. It is absolutely clear to us why
adopting a draft resolution ahead of time has been
proposed — I think that it is clear fto the members of
the Security Council, and probably for most people in
the Chamber. In addition, I am sure that it is absolutely
clear to the authors of this deplorable idea. This has
not been done out of good intentions; it is intended to
embarrass Russia once again.
I also want to be absolutely clear. Today’s
decision will in no way affect the future of the Joint
Investigative Mechanism (JIM). The way it functions
up to 17 November is the way it will continue to
function, regardless of the decision we take today, and
even if we take no decision to extend it. That does not
mean, however, that the decision on extending the JIM
cannot be adopted in principle. The authors of the draft
resolution understand our position very well. We have
expressed it more than once. First we receive the report,
then we consider it, and then we discuss the extension.
There is no need present the situation so as to make it
appear that the future of the JIM and of the planet itself
depends on today’s decision. Let us not mislead anyone.
2/14

24/10/2017

Over the past year, we have not seen a single
substantive report from the JIM. Obviously, we would
all like to see the report of the Mechanism on the
episode in Khan Shaykhun, which is to be published
on 26 October. That is only two days from now — the
day after tomorrow. It is unprecedented and unjustified
by any logic that the United States should insist on
extending the operation of a body with a limited time
frame before the publication of a report that we are all
eagerly awaiting. Moreover, the argument that the JIM
has a great deal of work ahead as a justification for this
untimely decision simply does not stand up to criticism.
We suggest adjourning this meeting until
7 November, when, in accordance with the plans of the
Italian presidency in November, we will discuss the
Syrian chemical dossier. At that time, we will take a
decision on extending the JIM in a calm atmosphere,
without any of the unprecedented pressure to which we
have been subject. I ask the members of the Council
to support us, in accordance with rule 33.3 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council,
in postponing the meeting until 7 November.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): We will not
agree to Russia’s procedural proposal. The United States
wants this vote on the Joint Investigative Mechanism
(JIM) to take place today. The JIM needs to be renewed
now, as soon as possible and in a non-politicized way to
keep its important work on track, without interruption.
There is no time to waste. It is not every day that the
Council considers an issue that is so horrific and so
shocking to the conscience as the use of chemical
weapons against civilians. We need to keep this
important work of the JIM on track.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): Russia’s
procedural proposal is a cynical attempt to link two
things that do not need to be linked and that should
not be linked — the mandate of the Joint Investigative
Mechanism, on the one hand, and its report, which is
due imminently, on the other. Attempting to link the
two, as Russia is doing, is politicization. Going ahead
with the meeting and with the vote as planned is the way
that the supporters of the draft resolution (S/2017/884)
have attempted to avoid politicization. I think that we
should go to great lengths to make sure that there is
no politicization in the mandate renewal of the Joint
Investigative Mechanism, and the best way to avoid
politicizing such an important issue is to go ahead with
the vote on the mandate renewal today, as planned.
17-34235

24/10/2017

The situation in the Middle East

Secondly, on a point of practicality, we saw what
happened a year ago when there was uncertainty about
the future of the Joint Investigative Mechanism. Its
staff left, its capability dwindled and it was unable to
operate for some months. The only beneficiaries of a
significant similar delay this time around would be
the users of chemical weapons in Syria — Da’esh, the
Syrian regime and their backers.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): Bolivia is taking the floor because
of our concern that it is very possible that, today in
the United Nations, the Security Council will send a
completely negative signal to the world.
We agree with the proposal made by the Russian
Federation because we believe that the Security Council
must remain united and unanimous in its fight against
the use of chemical weapons. We deplore the fact that
proposals are presented in the full knowledge that they
will be vetoed and opposed, and deliberately without
providing the time necessary to reach the consensus
and unity that Security Council has demonstrated on so
many occasions.
For that reason, Bolivia expresses its support for
the proposal of the Russian Federation to postpone the
voting on the draft resolution before us.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now put
the proposal of the Russian Federation to the vote, in
accordance with rule 33 of the provisional rules of
procedure of the Security Council.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Kazakhstan,
Russian Federation
Against:
France, Italy, Japan, Sweden, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Uruguay
Abstaining:
Egypt, Ethiopia,Senegal
The President (spoke in French): There were 4
votes in favour, 8 votes against and 3 abstentions. The
proposal has not been adopted, having failed to obtain
the required number of votes.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

S/PV. 8073

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2017/884, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Albania, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Montenegro, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of Korea, Romania,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Turkey, Ukraine, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): What is happening right now smells bad.
Let me explain. A few days before the release of the
report of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM), a draft resolution (S/2017/884) on
extending it for a year is thrown together. In the runup to that, a major information campaign is under way
in the media. Ambassador Haley gives a number of
interviews in which she unambiguously accuses Russia
of wanting to torpedo the work of the JIM. She sends a
letter to Security Council members on the urgent need
to extend the Mechanism’s mandate for a year.
At the same time, it justifies the lack of action by
the Fact-finding Mission of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), based on a
conveniently timed note from the Fact-finding Mission
supposedly explaining — but actually justifying that
lack of action — why a fact-finding mission did not
attempt to establish the facts and did not even visit the
scene of the incident under discussion. We will come
back to the Fact-finding Mission later. The note from
the Permanent Representative of the United States
suddenly, and clearly accidentally, falls into the hands
of the The New York Times, which last Saturday,
21 October, publishes a long article on the subject,
beginning with the words “A confrontation that is
looming at the United Nations between the United
States and Russia”.
What do we call that? We call it preparing your
artillery. Let me remind the Council that the JIM
was established in August 2015 as a joint — I repeat,

17-342353/14

S/PV.8073

The situation in the Middle East

a joint — initiative of Russia and the United States.
It was established in order to conduct a thorough,
professional and objective investigation and to identify
the perpetrators of incidents involving the use of
toxic chemical agents. The Mechanism was given a
broad mandate and provided with everything needed
for its implementation. On 26 October — that is, this
Thursday — the JIM report on the 4 April incident in
Khan Shaykhun is due to come out. Naturally, we have
all been eagerly awaiting the release of the report and
its conclusions.
Incidentally, contrary to what Ambassador Haley
claimed in one of her interviews, Russia has not read
the JIM report in advance and is not familiar with its
conclusions. So why extend the Mechanism’s mandate
two days before the release of the report? We all want
to familiarize ourselves with it, discuss its content and
conclusions calmly, and then, just as calmly, return to
the issue of the extension of the JIM, whose mandate
expires on 17 November. Which means we have plenty
of time to extend it. Is that illogical? Or confrontational?
Then why put the cart before the horse?
There is something else I should explain. Let me
remind the Council of the facts. On 4 April, there was
an incident involving the use of chemical agents in Khan
Shaykhun. The United States and its allies were quick
to blame Damascus for it and on 7 April, violating every
norm of international law, the United States launched
a missile strike on the Shayrat airbase. From day one,
before any conclusions and before the investigation
itself, it had already decided on the perpetrators.
Clearly, then, that illegal action can be justified only
if the JIM investigation’s findings confirm its version.
And should the JIM dare to come out with a different
version, that would raise the question of why it bombed
Shayrat. And that would not be very convenient.
The United States is not interested in either the lack
of evidence or the laughable techniques and methods
of the investigation. It has decided on the guilty party,
and decided it in advance. Let me point out that it has
said that at every opportunity. In human terms, this is
understandable. A bad performance, badly directed,
has not done the job. There is no evidence for an air
strike, and what there is is all too clearly a stitch-up.
We have to shove it out of sight so that no one is any the
wiser and extract ourselves from an awkward situation
without losing face. How do we do that? Easy. After all,
we can always blame Russia for everything.
4/14

24/10/2017

So how do we arrange the cover-up? We can throw
together a draft resolution extending the JIM mandate
a few days before the report’s release on 26 October,
even though that is not remotely urgent. The JIM will
be operational until 17 November and there is nothing
forcing us to take the decision to extend it before
then. So why do we do so now, and in such a hurry?
Does nobody find that strange? Is it not the case that
the American side knows the report’s conclusions and
understands that the evidence for their theory will not
stand up to any criticism and that in turn could call into
question extending a mechanism that is not equal to its
task and serves only to justify unseemly political aims?
The United States — and, incidentally, not only
the United States — has accused Russia of putting
pressure on the JIM. To quote Ambassador Haley, in an
interview on 18 October she said,
“The Russians have made it very clear that
should the report blame the Syrians suddenly, they
won’t have faith in the JIM. If the report doesn’t
blame the Syrians, then they say that they will”.
We have never said that, and there is no record of
any such quote from us. And if it is not a quote but
the Americans continues to assert it anyway, that is
defamation. What we have always said is that what
we are expecting from the JIM is a fair, objective,
professional, unbiased investigation. We have said that
we are relying on the fact that the JIM will not go the
route of the OPCW Fact-finding Mission and repeat its
obvious mistakes, which I fear are deliberate. We have
also said that if the report presents irrefutable proof of
the guilt of any of the parties, we will agree with it.
But, yes, we really have said that we doubt that any
such proof will be presented. And we have reason to
doubt it, because the JIM’s methods of work, which we
have indeed criticized, give cause for concern. Because
it is impossible to conduct a full-fledged, objective,
professional investigation with such methods. But we
have also said that we should not anticipate. Let us
wait for the release of the JIM’s report and then judge
it on its professionalism and objectivity. Note that I
do not say judge it based on whom it accuses, but on
its professionalism and objectivity. But in the same
interview I cited, Ambassador Haley said,
“It would be a shame if Russia chose to decide
whether to have an investigative mechanism based
on who was to blame in Khan Shaykhun”.
17-34235

24/10/2017

The situation in the Middle East

Let me repeat that we have never raised any
such question.
I will cite one more quote from Ambassador
Haley’s interview — I like quoting her. “We can’t go
and pick and choose who we want to be at fault.” There
I fully agree with her. Only this is the problem — it is
not us but the United States that has already decided
who is to blame. From day one, the United States has
asserted that the Syrian Government was at fault, and
it punished Syria for that with a missile attack on the
Shayrat airbase. It has asserted that the Syrian Air Force
dropped a sarin bomb on the heads of its own citizens.
I am not even talking here about the feeble evidence
presented to us or the obvious signs that the video they
showed us of the scene of the incident was staged. We
discussed all of that during the briefing on the margins
of the General Assembly on 13 October. If anyone is
not yet familiar with it, we can circulate copies of the
statement in English right now. But has anyone thought
about the sense of Syrian aircraft using a sarin bomb? Is
anyone here capable of understanding how pointless its
use would be from a military point of view when there
are other conventional and far more effective means of
destruction at one’s disposal? Has it never occurred to
anyone that there is less reason to blame Damascus for
using chemical weapons than anybody else?
By introducing this draft resolution now, the United
States is destroying the Security Council’s unity and
artificially dividing it. We all understand how important
that unity is. We understand it. Our colleagues in the
Security Council understand it, as do the other Member
States. But something else is important to the United
States. It needs to show that Russia is to blame for not
extending the JIM and proclaim to the whole world that
it is Russia that has divided the Council.
(spoke in English)
The United States is begging for confrontation in
the Security Council.
(spoke in Russian)
But right now we are trying to help the American
delegation save face. They will not be able to show
Russia in an unattractive light, which is what they are
obviously trying to achieve.
We will not allow the adoption of the draft resolution
now because, as we have said, and as they were well
aware, when they proposed the text of this hastily drawn
up draft resolution we said that the extension should

S/PV. 8073

follow the report and its discussion — in that order.
However, nothing is preventing us from going back and
extending the JIM mandate after the report has been
published and we have taken our time to review and
discuss it in the Security Council.
Moreover, when the issue of extending the
JIM mandate is discussed in the Council, we will
insist upon amending its mandate to ensure that it
succinctly includes the elements of professionalism
and impartiality that we want to see. Others should not
try to give the impression that, unless they take our
arguments into account and, contrary to the voice of
reason, adopt the draft resolution today, the JIM will
become a dead letter. They know that we will not allow
the draft resolution to be adopted today. Could it be
that this is an an intentional attempt to demonstrate
to the world that Russia wants to close down the JIM
at any cost? That is not true. We are ready to return
to negotiations aimed at extending the JIM mandate
following the publication of the report and its discussion
after 26 October.
For the time being, I call on the United States
delegation to postpone the adoption of the draft
resolution until the report’s publication. I should not
like to feel obliged to repeat the words of the United
States representative who proposed postponing a vote
in 1946 “in order to avoid the painful necessity of
casting a negative vote at this time” (S/PV.55, p. 68).
The President (spoke in French): The Council is
ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
before it. I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Egypt, Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Senegal,
Sweden, Ukraine, United Kingdom, United States,
Uruguay
Against:
Plurinational State of Bolivia, Russian Federation
Abstaining:
China, Kazakhstan
The President (spoke in French): There were 11
votes in favour, 2 against and 2 abstentions. The draft
resolution has not been adopted, owing to the negative
vote of a permanent member of the Council.

17-342355/14

S/PV.8073

The situation in the Middle East

I shall now give the floor to those members of
the Council who wish to make statements following
the voting.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): As I just said
prior to the voting, it is not everyday that the Security
Council considers an issue as horrific and shocking
to our collective conscience as the use of chemical
weapons against civilians. Today is an important date on
the calendar. It is United Nations Day, on which we the
peoples of the United Nations commit to unite — as the
preamble of the Charter of the United Nations states — to
maintaining international peace and security. We all
know that there has long been an international norm
against the use of chemical weapons because their cruel
and indiscriminate nature are such that their use is
never justified. In one of its rare moments of unity, the
Council appropriately condemned chemical weapons
attacks in Syria. We even collaborated on establishing
an independent, impartial body to investigate confirmed
cases of chemical-weapon use. That body is comprised
of internationally recognized independent experts. It
employs professional, scientific means of investigating
attacks and identifying those responsible, and yet that
body is under attack by the Syrian regime’s allies.
The question that we must ask ourselves is whether
the Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM) is being
attacked because it has failed in its job to determine
the truth in Syria, or because its conclusions have been
politically inconvenient for some Council members. We
just voted on a short, simple draft resolution to extend
the mandate of the Joint Investigative Mechanism.
We mandated that technical body to investigate
chemical-weapon attacks on the innocent men women
and children of Syria. Made up of experts from the
United Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), the JIM has the simple
task of finding out who ordered and carried out the use
of those weapons in Syria. The United States and 10
other members of the Council voted in favour of the
draft resolution today, as it is clear to us that there is
more work to be done and more chemical-weapon
attacks to investigate.
The JIM has been successful in its work, and we
want that vital work to continue without interruption in
its operations. We want to know the truth about those
attacks regardless of where it takes us. The United
States deeply regrets that one member of the Council
vetoed the text, thereby putting political considerations
over the misery of Syrian civilians who have suffered
6/14

24/10/2017

and died from the use of chemical weapons. The
reasons offered this morning fool no one. We reject
the cynicism, and we reaffirm our confidence in the
technical experts — men and women — who come from
many regions, backgrounds and perspectives. They
knew their work would be attacked by Syria’s allies,
yet they have carried out their mandate effectively
and responsibly.
Claims of JIM partiality just do not stand up
to scrutiny, when we consider that all parties have
acknowledged that sarin gas was used in Khan
Shaykhun, and, as reported by the OPCW, once again
this week the Syrian regime itself provided the JIM
with samples of evidence that support that conclusion.
The JIM has even gone so far as to visit Syria several
times to further its investigation, which we had hoped
would satisfy the inappropriate demands of some
members of the Council. But it appears that it will
never be enough for some Council members. We are
not deceived or deterred, however, and we call on all
members of the Council to join us in rejecting such
attacks on the JIM. Such attacks are not intended to get
us closer to the truth, they are intended to hide the truth.
They are not designed to get us closer to accountability
for chemical-weapon use in Syria, they are designed to
shield the perpetrators of some of the worst war crimes
of our century.
Fortunately, the Council will have more chances to
show that it values the truth and to show its solidarity
with the Syrian people. The JIM’s mandate expires on
16 November, in almost three weeks from now. That
investigative body should be a great symbol of what the
Council can do when we work together. It is a symbol
of our commitment to justice and accountability, and it
represents hope for thousands of suffering and grieving
Syrian civilians. We therefore call on all Council
members not to turn their backs on this hope, and
to preserve the Council’s unity in the face of Syrian
chemical-weapon attacks. We call on the Security
Council to take up this vital matter once again and
vote to extend, at that time, the mandate of the Joint
Investigative Mechanism.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): A little more than
four years ago in this very Chamber, a member of the
Security Council proudly declared,
“the use of chemical weapons by any party will
be carefully investigated by the Security Council,
17-34235

24/10/2017

The situation in the Middle East

which will stand ready to take action under Chapter
VII of the Charter” (S/PV.7038, p.4).
“By any party” were wise words indeed. Does anyone
know who uttered those words four years ago? Are
there any guesses? It was the Russian Foreign Minister,
Mr. Sergey Lavrov. Today, those words have lost all
meaning. They ring hollow in this Chamber today,
drowned out by Russia’s veto — its ninth on Syria in
six years.
Today, we should have been extending the
investigation that Minister Lavrov called for, allowing
the Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM) another year to
conduct its vital work. Instead, because of Russia alone,
that investigation is destined to come to a premature
and unnecessary conclusion next month. Unless Russia
changes its mind, as I hope it does, the report of the
Joint Investigative Mechanism on Khan Shaykhun will
be its last, despite the continuing evidence from the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
of other cases of chemical weapons use in Syria.
I have often expressed my disappointment at
Russia’s actions on Syria in this Chamber. I have often
expressed my frustration at their refusal to allow the
Security Council to respond to the most heinous crimes
committed in Syria, but today all I will ask is, why?
Why has Russia alone stopped an investigation whose
work is not yet complete? Why has Russia brought an
end to a Mechanism that it initiated and we all created
and mandated when there are still questions to answer
about sarin in Al-Latamneh. Russia called for the
formation of the JIM; it negotiated its terms and it
agreed its mission. Yet, when faced with the prospect
of the JIM revealing the truth, why has Russia alone
chosen to shoot the messenger?
It seems that, not content with spuriously
questioning the JIM’s methods and conclusions, Russia
has now sought to silence them. Instead of respecting
the professional and impartial work of the JIM, whose
tireless efforts I pay tribute to today, Russia alone has
chosen to abuse its veto to support a regime that has no
regard for international treaties, no regard for the most
basic rules of war, no regard for its own people.
We have worked hard together to build the
international norms and conventions that have long
prevented the use of chemical weapons. For decades
it seemed as though the international community had
reduced these weapons to a historical footnote from the
First World War — no longer used, no longer a part of a

S/PV. 8073

modern humane society. But now, what kind of message
does this veto send to those who might consider using
such weapons? What kind of message does it send to
groups like Da’esh, the very groups that Russia says it
is committed to defeating?
We have heard a lot about breaking the unity of
the Security Council. It is not the 11 members of the
Security Council who voted in favour of draft resolution
S/2017/884 who are breaking the unity. It is not the 11
members of the Security Council who did not support
the Russian procedural shenanigans this morning who
are breaking the Security Council’s unity. It is Russia,
which is protecting the Syrian regime, that has broken
the Security Council’s unity.
The United Kingdom cannot and will not let
Russia’s actions today erode the norms that we have
worked so hard to create. Russia’s action will not stop
us from working with our partners to find justice for
the victims of chemical weapons and we will not let
up in our efforts to prevent the use of these weapons
by anyone anywhere. The work of the JIM will not go
to waste. We have its findings; we have its reports and,
whatever Russia’s actions today,
“the use of chemical weapons by any party will
be carefully investigated by the Security Council,
which will stand ready to take action under Chapter
VII of the Charter” (S/PV.7038, p.4),
to quote Minister Lavrov again. We owe it to the victims
to ensure justice.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): Bolivia would like to express once
again its firmest and categorical condemnation of the
use of chemical substances as weapons. This is an
unjustifiable and criminal act wherever and whenever it
happens and whoever does it. The use of these weapons is
a serious violation of international law and international
peace and security. We believe that it is essential for the
perpetrators of these terrible and criminal acts to be
brought to justice and held accountable.
Bolivia once again reiterates, as it has been doing
for several months, that it is not against the renewal
of the mandate of the Joint Investigative Mechanism
(JIM). On the contrary, we believe that we should
allow the Mechanism to conduct its work in the most
methodical, technical, professional, supported and
depoliticized way possible. The renewal of its mandate
should be considered after its report is issued.

17-342357/14

S/PV.8073

The situation in the Middle East

Over the past few months, some technical concerns
and observations have been raised in various ways by
some Council members. We believe that these concerns
should be considered and resolved. That is why we
believe that, prior to the renewal of the Mechanism’s
mandate, we need to consider its report. We believe
that, in this case, two days before the deadline of the
publication of the report, time is not really a mitigating
factor since, I reiterate, its publication is only two
days away.
We feel that the Mechanism’s work was undermined
at least twice this year — first, when its reports were
politicized through the addition of information to draft
resolutions that were not contained in these reports,
which, on a previous occasion, had been a reason for
a veto of a draft resolution that had been submitted.
Furthermore, another serious issue that weakens the
Mechanism’s mandate and the Security Council’s
commitment are the unilateral military actions which
are in breach of international law.
This is a fundamental issue for the international
community and for our work. If we clearly state that
maintaining the Council’s unity on this situation is
essential, we do not understand why draft resolutions
are designed that we know in advance will be vetoed
for the reasons I mentioned earlier. Why must the
Council consider draft resolutions that are intentionally
designed to be vetoed? What is the political calculus
behind these intentions? We regret that, instead of
coordinating efforts to try to reach consensus positions
on a topic that is clearly in everyone’s interest, pressure
is brought to bear on certain members and their image
is maligned before the international community.
Lastly, my delegation wants to state very clearly
that on this and other topics, it will reject all pressure
brought to bear on it by any member of the Council or
Member of the Organization. My delegation’s actions
and decisions will be taken based on the principles
and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations. We
categorically reject any attempt to unduly influence
or put pressure on the Bolivian delegation in its
decision-making.
A vote against draft resolution S/2017/884 is
not a vote against the JIM. A vote against this draft
resolution is a vote against the politicization of the
Security Council. A vote against this draft resolution
is an appeal to make greater efforts so that we may
8/14

24/10/2017

demonstrate unity on a topic that is so important for the
international community.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): Several cases of alleged use
of chemical weapons in Syria remain unresolved and
the work of the Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM)
is clearly not over. The continued role of the JIM is
essential to ensuring accountability. Japan supported
draft resolution S/2017/884, submitted by the United
States, because we believe that it makes sense to ensure
the continuity of the work of the JIM through the
extension of its current mandate.
I listened very carefully to statements made by the
representatives of Russia and Bolivia. It is unfortunate
that the Mechanism’s mandate was not renewed
today. At the same time, I understand that Russia and
Bolivia do not oppose the renewal of the mandate as
such. Japan has full confidence in the Mechanism’s
expertise, impartiality and professionalism. It is the
responsibility of the international community and
indeed of all humanity to ensure accountability for the
use of chemical weapons. It is therefore important that
the Security Council decide to extend the mandate of
the Joint Investigative Mechanism.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Ukraine sponsored
and voted in favour of draft resolution S/2017/884,
on renewing the mandate of the Joint Investigative
Mechanism, in order to ensure that the Mechanism
continues its crucially important work. Considering
the scope of investigations, the gravity of the crimes
and the large number of questions still pending, we
believe that nothing should impede the activity of the
Mechanism as an independent and unique tool for
investigating the confirmed — and I stress the word
“confirmed” — cases of the use of chemical weapons
in Syria.
However, in spite of overwhelming support for
the draft resolution, one Council member continues to
block each and every decision that could move us closer
to bringing the perpetrators of those terrible crimes to
justice. It is not about the visit to the sites in Syria or
other manipulations with this particular effect; we all
know that there was no need to conduct such a visit. It is
not about the final conclusions of the Mechanism, which
will be presented later. It is not even about politicizing
the whole process or creating purely artificial obstacles
for an objective and thorough investigation.
Today’s voting has demonstrated a much more
dangerous tendency — one in which fundamental
17-34235

24/10/2017

The situation in the Middle East

international norms are cynically ignored and
independent structures are held hostage. Today’s voting
has demonstrated once again the increasing abuse of
the right to veto. Today, the Council has failed to do
its job again. The Mechanism’s mandate ends on
17 November. That means that there about three weeks
left to find a solution as to how the Mechanism can be
preserved. We think it is still doable, and it is necessary.
We cannot fail and send to the world a completely
wrong signal with far-reaching consequences for
the existing non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction regimes.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that it is the
ultimate responsibility of the Council to defend and
restore respect for justice and international law,
notwithstanding any attempts of reactive manipulation
or altering the facts.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): As the global non-proliferation
architecture continues to face extremely serious
challenges, the Security Council has the responsibility
to uphold the integrity and credibility of these crucial
long-standing norms for our collective security,
preserving pathways for accountability in the case of
violations. The Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism is a critical tool in that respect, and Italy
fully supported the renewal of its mandate today and
will continue to support it for the future, hoping that
the Security Council will be able to find consensus on
such a key issue. In our view, a timely renewal would
have, contrary to what happened last year, ensured
the continuity and the predictability of the activities
of the Mechanism. It would have helped to retain the
crucial know-how developed by the Mechanism’s team
during this year regarding the pressing objective that
we continue to share as allegations of new incidents
continue to emerge.
We are therefore disappointed that the renewal has
been impossible today. The result of the voting not only
risks affecting the future of the Mechanism but also
augments divisions in the Security Council that, frankly,
should not be there and that we hope can be overcome
since upholding the chemical non-proliferation regime
is in everybody’s interest. So, while we look forward
to the final report of the Mechanism on the events in
Khan Shaykhun and Om Hush, confident that the report
will confirm the Mechanism’s impartiality, objectivity
and independence. We hope that the Council will be
able to find again its unity in the coming weeks on

S/PV. 8073

such crucial issues for our collective security. Fighting
impunity, identifying perpetrators and holding them
accountable must be a shared priority of the Council,
one that unifies us instead of dividing us.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): It is regrettable that the
Council could not adopt draft resolution S/2017/884,
renewing the mandate of the Joint Investigative
Mechanism, which was created based on consensus. The
reason why we voted in favour of the draft resolution
is because there are still credible allegations of the
use of chemical weapons under investigation by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic, and
the work of the Mechanism is not yet over.
We believe that the Mechanism remains an important
mechanism to establish those responsible for the use of
chemical weapons in Syria, both State and non-State
actors. We are also convinced by the explanation of
the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, that renewing the Mechanism’s
mandate in a matter that ensures institutional continuity
and stability, drawing lessons from the experience of
last year, was crucial.
Despite today’s outcome, we are hopeful that every
possible effort will continue to be made to restore the
Council’s unity and achieve the necessary compromise
to renew the Mechanism’s mandate. The Mechanism’s
existence is indispensable as a deterrent to the use of
chemical weapons, not only in Syria, but also in the
wider region. Without a mechanism to clearly establish
responsibility, the Council would be sending the wrong
message to the perpetrators of this heinous crime.
Of course, we know the final report of the
Mechanism will be coming out shortly, and the way we
voted today should in no way be interpreted as an a
priori endorsement of the report or even the slackening
of our resolve to be as objective as possible, focusing
on the technical work of the Mechanism, from which
we expect the highest level of objectivity and fidelity
to what the facts of the case dictate. Its final report is
expected to establish clear responsibility on the Om
Hush and Khan Shaykhun incidents.
Our position has always been consistent. Those
responsible for the use of chemical weapons in Syria
should be punished based on robust and conclusive
evidence. It is impossible to overlook the concerns
of the Russian Federation and Bolivia. That is why
the Mechanism has an enormous responsibility to be

17-342359/14

S/PV.8073

The situation in the Middle East

objective and to avoid the appearance of politicizing the
matter, which for some already appears to be politicized.
It is also a matter of self-respect for members of the
Mechanism, as well as its Chair, to be as scrupulous
as possible in that regard. I can assure the Russian
Federation and Bolivia that our standard is very high,
and we will not accept shoddy work. As we have stated
repeatedly, we attach great importance to this matter
of the use of chemical weapons not only because we
are a member of the Council and a signatory to the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons
and on Their Destruction, but also because of historical
reasons which are not necessary to delve into at this
point. Therefore, we will take an appropriate position,
based on the content of the upcoming report, which,
we believe, has to be robust and reliable, both in its
methodologies and in its conclusions.

24/10/2017

similar views on the urgency of the work of the JIM.
We therefore have to work with greater political will to
find the desired compromise. We are not supportive of
today’s action, especially at a time when the Council
does not have unity or agreement on the issue. The
contrary positions, which are known to all parties, have
led us to predictable results. In the current situation,
we could not take the position of either side, since
doing so would not solve the problem in the end. Only
unity and mutual compromise can lead us to a mutually
acceptable solution of the issue, which we did not see in
the current situation.
In that regard, my country abstained in the voting
and encourages the Council to speak with one voice
against current challenges. We remain convinced that
the mandate of the JIM will be renewed before its
expiration date, especially when we hear a consensus
on the necessity to do so.

Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan takes a
firm and consistent position on the issue before us. We
have always opposed the use of any type of weapons of
mass destruction in any circumstances by anyone. My
country and my people are very engaged in and have
always supported the fight against such atrocities.

Mr. Skoog (Sweden): It is highly regrettable that
the Council was unable to unite behind a technical
extension of the mandate of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigate Mechanism (JIM), and that the draft
resolution (S/2017/884) before us was not adopted.

We fully endorse the need to continue the work
of the Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM), which
remains a restaining and arbitration mechanism with
no alternative. In view of the continued incidents of the
use of chemical weapons in Syria and the existence of
undisclosed crimes, we are confident that the mandate
of the JIM must be maintained and continued.

Sweden condemns in the strongest terms the
repeated use of chemical weapons in Syria. We offer our
full support for the JIM and its objective, impartial and
independent investigations. There must be no impunity
for those responsible for chemical weapons attacks. The
JIM, which was unanimously set up by the Council,
plays a critical role in protecting the international
disarmament and non-proliferation architecture. Its
important work must continue.

We respect the position of our colleagues who
support the extension of JIM’s mandate. We are aware
that the Mechanism lost its momentum and expertise
potential in the past year because of a delayed extension,
two months after the initial completion of its mandate.
We would not like to see a similar situation this year. At
the same time, we consider it logical that once we are
close to the date of the report, there is merit in seeing
and evaluating the outcome of the work of the JIM. It
is also necessary to extend the work of the Mechanism,
taking into account any existing challenges and
difficulties that it has encountered, if any.
It is regrettable that we are not able to bring
together common approaches and visions on the issue,
especially with regard to when and how to preserve and
improve the work of the Mechanism. On the other hand,
there is no doubt that members of the Council have
10/14

The JIM’s mandate expires in less than a month
and a timely renewal remains essential. Today’s vote
is a temporary setback, but it does not signal the end of
the JIM and its mandate.
(spoke in French)
Now is not the time to sit back.
(spoke in English)
There are some 60 cases of alleged use of chemical
weapons in Syria that are currently being examined
by the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons, which could later be referred to the JIM. One
can also not exclude the possibility of new attacks. If
the JIM did not already exist, we would simply have
17-34235

24/10/2017

The situation in the Middle East

to invent it. Now is the time for the Council to roll up
its sleeves, come back together and speak with one
voice in support of the JIM and accountability for the
use of chemical weapons in Syria. That will demand
good-faith negotiations on the part of everyone, but it
is not impossible.
We will continue to do our utmost over the coming
weeks to seek to ensure the continuation of the JIM
and the protection of its autonomous mandate. We will
support all serious and genuine initiatives that aim to
achieve that objective, and we stand ready to help in
facilitating efforts to find a way forward in the Council.
The Syrian people, who have been suffering for more
than six years of conflict, deserve no less from us.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): We are
disappointed that the Security Council was not able to
maintain its unity to adopt a technical renewal of the
mandate of the Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM) for
another year.
Senegal voted in favour of draft resolution
S/2017/884, as we are convinced of the central role that
the Mechanism plays in the framework of the global
non-proliferation architecture and of its efforts to
independently, impartially and objectively implement
its mandate under resolution 2235 (2015), which was
renewed through the unanimous adoption of resolution
2319 (2016).
It is important to recall that the mandate consists
of identifying, to the greatest extent possible, the
individuals, entities, groups or Governments that
have perpetrated, organized or ordered the use of
chemicals — including chlorine gas and all other toxic
chemical products — as weapons in Syria, as well as
those who have participated in such actions in any
way. The continued allegations of the use of chemical
weapons in Syria further demonstrate the need for
the JIM to pursue its work, particularly in a context
in which non-State actors, including terrorist groups,
could obtain such weapons of mass destruction.
The delegation of Senegal is hopeful that following
the publication within 48 hours of the report of the
Mechanism, the Council will be able to return to the
essential issue of accountability for the unacceptable
use of chemical weapons. We therefore reiterate our
appeal for a return to the spirit of consensus that
prevailed during the adoption of resolutions 2118
(2013), 2235 (2015) and resolution 2319 (2016), which

S/PV. 8073

led to tangible progress in addressing the issue of the
problematic use of chemical weapons in Syria.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): It is
said that humans are the only animals that trip over the
same stone twice. In 2016, we had a situation in which
the mandate of the Joint Investigative Mechanism
(JIM) was about to expire. There were doubts about its
continuation. There was a brief rollover of its mandate
and finally, in November, it was adopted. What
happened in the meantime?
What happened is that the JIM is not just an idea.
It is based on the work of human beings — men and
women who earn salaries, who have families and who
need to know what is going to happen to their lives. That
is what happened last year. In the face of uncertainty,
most of the staff of the JIM sought contracts elsewhere.
They withdrew and looked for other means of earning
a living.
A small country like Uruguay makes great efforts
not to stumble over the same obstacle twice. That is
precisely where we are today. We are less than a month
away from the expiration of the mandate of the JIM.
The men and women who work for the JIM have the
right to know what is going to happen to their lives,
what is going to happen to them, and whether they
will have to change jobs. We therefore believe that we
should be pragmatic and renew the JIM mandate. Let
us not make the same mistake twice. Let us renew the
mandate as soon as possible and retain the Mechanism’s
staff. Essentially, last year we had to wait six months
for the JIM to be stood up anew. There was almost no
JIM activity from November of last year until May of
this year. Is that what we are after? I think what is most
logical is to renew the mandate.
For us, renewing the mandate matters because
Uruguay alone does not have the means of investigating
what happened in Syria or what is happening in the 60
reported cases of potential chemical-weapon use. We
need an impartial body to do the work. The United
Nations, in cooperation with the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, and the Security
Council established the JIM. Let us once again give it
an opportunity to continue its work.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
is deeply concerned about the use of chemical weapons
in Syria and feels the suffering that is inflicted upon
the Syrian people by such attacks. China is always
opposed to the use of chemical weapons, under any

17-3423511/14

S/PV.8073

The situation in the Middle East

circumstances, by any State, organization or individual
and regardless of the motivation.
We support the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM) on the chemical weapons of Syria in
carrying out its comprehensive objectives and impartial
investigation of the incidents in question, according to
the mandate of the Security Council, so as to arrive at
a result that is based on conclusive evidence and stands
the test of time and facts.
All Council members have condemned the use
of chemical weapons in Syria, so there is consensus
on demanding that the incidents in question be
investigated. The unity and single voice of the Security
Council on the question of Syrian chemical weapons are
conducive to finding out the facts, bringing to justice
the perpetrators and responsible parties and deterring
the further use of chemical weapons in Syria.
The draft resolution (S/2017/884) that was just
voted on by the Security Council included some
positive elements on which there exists consensus,
such as support for the continued work of the JIM. On
the other hand, some Council members expressed the
hope of comprehensively reviewing the mandate and
extension of the JIM in connection with the upcoming
report of the Mechanism, so as to help to improve its
work more effectively.
The Security Council could have continued
consultations on the contents of the draft resolution
and the timing of its adoption in an effort to agree
on a document that enjoys the unanimous support of
all Council members. China has tirelessly urged the
Council to continue consultations in a bid for consensus.
However, regrettably, the Council rushed to vote on the
draft resolution in the absence of consensus. That is not
conducive to the unity of the Security Council, nor is it
helpful in solving the Syrian chemical weapons issue.
Against that backdrop, China abstained in the
voting on the draft resolution. Political settlement is the
only way to lift the Syrian people out of their suffering.
Recently, positive progress has been achieved in the
Geneva peace talks and the Astana dialogue. With
regard to the political settlement of the question of
Syria, we are beginning to see the light at the end of
the tunnel.
At this critical juncture, China calls upon all
members of the Council to bear in mind the broader
12/14

24/10/2017

objective of continuing the political process in Syria,
maintain unity on the question of Syrian chemical
weapons and create favourable conditions for the
Syrian parties to arrive at a settlement that is acceptable
to all as soon as possible through the Geneva peace
talks, thereby playing a constructive role for an early,
comprehensive, just and appropriate settlement of the
question of Syria.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
voted in favour of the draft resolution (S/2017/884)
that was submitted today, because of our keen interest
in ensuring that those involved in the use of chemical
weapons in Syria are identified. That requires the
continued mandate of the United Nations-Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)-Joint
Investigative Mechanism (JIM), as it has been tasked
by the Security Council to perform its work to the best
of its abilities.
Egypt’s interest is based on the need to enhance
the concept of accountability and uncover the facts of
the Syrian crisis, which would also allow us to confront
an urgent threat that the world has yet to deal with
effectively. The use of chemical weapons in Syria and
the growing proliferation and possession that we have
seen is a threat to the security of the countries of the
region and the world.
While the international community has created a
system that deals with the possession of that type of
weapon by Governments, it has not yet established a
system that is able to deter non-State groups from
seeking to possess chemical weapons or acquiring the
technologies for their production. That is exacerbated
by the interconnectedness and coordination that
exists between non-State groups, which are scattered
throughout the Middle East, and their increased ability
to transport and manufacture such weapons.
Egypt voted in favour of the draft resolution
regardless of the final outcome of the voting process.
However, we voted in its favour because we wanted to
express our commitment to naming the perpetrators of
chemical-weapon use in Syria and stress the need to
improve the working methodologies of the JIM.
In the past, the Security Council has discussed the
methodology of the Joint Investigative Mechanism and
the working methods of the OPCW fact-finding mission
in the Syrian Arab Republic, of which the findings
directly impact the Joint Investigative Mechanism. It
has become clear to Egypt and many members of the
17-34235

24/10/2017

The situation in the Middle East

Security Council that there is an urgent need to work
to improve the methodologies of both mechanisms,
especially with regard to visiting the sites in Syria where
they must investigate the use of chemical weapons.
Needless to say, conducting those visits, inspecting
the sites under investigation, recording and collecting
the evidence and available samples in a timely manner
and examining all possible scenarios would no doubt
contribute to creating a strong foundation for any
findings to be issued by the fact-finding mission or
the JIM.
Despite the draft resolution not being adopted
today, we believe that there is still an opportunity for
the Security Council to renew the JIM mandate. There
is also a chance for the Security Council to improve the
working methodologies of the JIM, because just as the
Council created the Mechanism, it is also responsible
for guiding and supporting it, without influencing
its work or the outcomes of its reports, which must
remain neutral, independent and out of the clutches of
political manipulation.
I renew our call to Security Council members to
work on preserving the Mechanism and supporting
and developing its working methodology. We stress the
need to maintain the unity of the Council in that regard,
which is in line with our interests and the interests of
all our peoples.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation voted against the
draft resolution (S/2017/884) that was submitted by
the United States on the technical extension of the
mandate of the United Nations-Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) Joint
Investigative Mechanism (JIM). It is regrettable that
the authors have chosen a path of confrontation and
division in the Security Council. That is exactly the
kind of politicization that we have been talking about
today and, incidentally, that same cynicism that the
representatives of the United States have talked about.
We want to emphasize that we too are very concerned
about the use of chemical weapons in Syria. In response
to the representative of the United Kingdom, I can affirm
everything that Foreign Minister Lavrov has said, whom
he quoted today, for which I thank him. Every incident
should be investigated and the perpetrators found and
punished. Speaking for ourselves, that is what we are
working to achieve. But what do those words have to do
with today’s meeting?

S/PV. 8073

I want to emphasize that today’s vote is also
meaningless because it will not affect the fate of the
JIM in any way. It will go on functioning as it did
before. We will return to the discussion of the question
of its extension.
(spoke in English)
We have not stopped it, as the representative of
Great Britain said. We have not brought it to an end.
(spoke in Russian)
Since it is possible that some here were not listening
very attentively to my statement, I will quote myself
again:
“Today’s decision will in no way affect the future
of the Joint Investigative Mechanism. The way
it functions up to 17 November is the way it will
continue to function”.
In response to my friend and colleague from
Uruguay, who is concerned about the fate of the
unfortunate JIM staff, we will of course be sorry for
them, if need be, although nothing has happened to
them yet. But the JIM is not a charity for the support
of its employees’ families. It is dealing with something
rather more important, and the tasks ahead of it are
considerably more important than that, although it is of
course important too. We will have time to worry about
the fate of the families of employees. There is no need
to insist on it right now.
I found it amusing today that not one but several
delegations read out prepared statements condemning
some countries’ use of the veto. Did they know in
advance that we would exercise the right of veto today?
That only confirms that today we have been witnessing
a staged performance with a single goal, that of
pillorying one particular country. Incidentally, I have
a request for those who talk to the journalists at the
stake-out after today’s meeting, which is to ask them
to please not distort our position. I have already been
obliged to repeat myself, and I will say once again that
we have not shut down the JIM, we simply have not
made a decision about its extension today, and we will
return to the issue.
Just one more thing. It is regrettable that today’s
meeting was held at all. But it is clear that whoever
requested it knew what the scenario would be ahead of
time, and that their aims were certainly not what they
declared them to be in their statements. We will return

17-3423513/14

S/PV.8073

The situation in the Middle East

to the question of extending the mandate of the JIM
after the release of its report and a calm discussion in
the Security Council of its content and conclusions. We
will see what kind of mandate it should have in order
to ensure that it performs its work objectively and
professionally and so that we do not have meetings like
today’s in the future.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of France.
France deeply regrets the result of this vote.
The ongoing reports of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) show that
chemical-weapon attacks in Syria have never ceased.
That justifies, more than ever, the continuation of
investigations to identify and punish those responsible,
in the light of, among other things, the latest conclusions
of the Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic
on a sarin attack in Al-Latamneh, in north-western
Syria, on 30 March.
Today’s vote was therefore yet another squandered
opportunity. By failing to renew the mandate of the
Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM), we are depriving
ourselves of the possibility of documenting the cases of
use of these weapons not only by the Syrian army, but
also by non-State actors. It is a new kind of threat for
which we must prepare ourselves.
We regret that the mandate renewal could not
be adopted today, as it should of course have been,
with pragmatism and responsibility, free from all
politicization, to ensure the continuity of the work of the
JIM. The Mechanism has proved itself. It is therefore our
shared responsibility to build the consensus necessary
to end the use of chemical weapons in Syria and prevent
their re-emergence elsewhere. I would like to recall
that 192 States, including Syria, have committed to
renouncing the use of chemical weapons. Beyond the
specific responsibility of the States parties, including
Russia, we must all protect and strengthen the chemical
non-proliferation regime.
As the final conclusions of the Mechanism
approach, France will never give up. My country will
not resign itself to tolerating the deconstruction of the
non-proliferation regime. On the contrary, our priority
must remain the full and complete dismantling of the
Syrian chemical-weapon programme and the fight
against impunity. In that spirit, France fully supports

14/14

24/10/2017

and reiterates its full confidence in the existing
mechanisms of the United Nations and the OPCW.
France considers compliance with non-proliferation
commitments to be among the most fundamental
standards of international relations. Their violation is
a danger to us all. We must therefore send a message of
strength, including by identifying the perpetrators of
these crimes. Any hope of lasting peace and stability
in Syria requires the truth. That is a priority for France.
This hope also calls for a political solution leading to
a negotiated democratic transition, in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex). That is the aim of France’s efforts
to establish a contact group to actively support the
mediation of Mr. Staffan de Mistura.
As we celebrate United Nations Day today, I believe
that it is important to put everything that is at stake into
perspective. The international non-proliferation regimes
are among the most important shared achievements of
recent decades. Let us make no mistake — these regimes
are the backbone of international peace and security.
Yet they are being put to the test today, from the nuclear
programme of North Korea to the use of chemical
weapons in Syria, not to mention many other threats all
over the world. On behalf of France, I would therefore
like to appeal today for our extraordinary vigilance and
for action. Let us not allow political differences — or,
worse, short-term tactical calculations — to undermine
those regimes. The continued existence and solidity of
the international non-proliferation regimes are of vital
importance to our common security. That is why it is
the responsibility of the international community, and
of the Security Council in particular, to maintain and
strengthen them. And that is why today’s negative vote
is not and cannot be the last word.
France therefore solemnly calls on all States
members of the Security Council to come together
around the essential issues that I have outlined and
to build the necessary consensus before the mandate
of the JIM lapses in mid-November in order to renew
it. We should all be aware that this is our historic
responsibility.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

17-34235
