UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
SECOND YEAR

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
PROCES ..VERBAUX OFFICIELS
DEUXIEME ANNEE

No. 65

168th meeting

168eme seance

28 July 1947

28 juillet 1947

,

Lake Success

.in 1948

New York

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Hundred and sixty-eighth meeting
251. Provisional agenda
252. Adoption of the agenda

,

TABLE DES MATIERES
Cent-soixante-huitieme seance
Pag,

Pagls

1549

251. Ordre du jour provisoire. . . . .. . . . . .. 1549

1549

252. Adoption de l'ordre du jour

1549

253. Application of Yemen for membenhip
in the United Nations
1549

253. Demande d'admission du Yemen a l'Organisation des Nations Unies. . . ... . .. 1549

254. Continuation of the discussion on the
Greek question . . • • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 1550

254. Suite de la discussion sur la question
grecque
1550

Documents

Documents

The documents relevant to the hundred and sixtyeighth meeting appea.r as follows:

Les docUI:J:1ents se rapportant a. la cent-soix!Ultehuitieme seance figurent dans les publications
suivantes:

Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Y,ar:

Proces-verbaux officiels du
Deuxieme Annee:

Supplement No. 15, Annex 39

COns6jl

de

sicurite~

SuppUment No 15~ AnnexB 39

Amendments to the United States draft resolution on the Greek question submitted by the
representative of France at the one hundred
and sixty-second n.eeting of the Security
Council (docw:nent 5/430)

Amendements au projet de resolution des EtatsU nis sur la question grecque~ presentes par le
representant de la France a la cent-soixantedeuxi~m.e seance du Conseil de securite (document 8/430)

Special Supplement No. 2.

SUPplJ11U'Rt splcial No 2
Rapport presente au Conseil de securite par la
Commission d'enquete sur les incidents survenOli la frontiere grecque (document 5/360)

Report of the Commission of Investigation
COIlcernhlg Greek Frontier Incidents to the
Security. Council (document 8/360)

UNITED NATIONS

NATIONS UNIES

OFFICIAL RECORDS
SECOND YEAR

PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS
No. 65

DEUXIEME ANNEE

No 65

HLlNDRED AND SIXTY-EIGHTH MEETING

CENT-SOIXANTE-HumEME SEANCE

Held at Lake Success, New York,
on Monday, 28 July 1947, at 3 p.m.

Tenue Lake Success, New-York,
le lundi 28 juillet 1947,
15 heures.

President: Mr. O. LANGE (Poland).

President: M. O. LANGE (Pologne).

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Poland, Syria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom,
United States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants: Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine, Colombie, Etats-Unis d'Amerique, France, Pologue,
Royaume-Uni, Syrie, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques.

251. Provisional agenda (document S/438)

251. Ordre du jour provisoire
<document 5/438)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter dated 21 July 1947 from Prince Seif
cl Islam Abdullah of Yemen to the Secretary-General (document S/436) .
3. The Greek question: report of the Commission of Investigation concerning Greek
Frontier Incidents to the Security Council
(document 8/360).'

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.
2. Lettre adressee au Secretaire general par le
prince Sdf e1 Islam Abdullah du Yemen, en
date du 21 juillet 1947 (document S/436).
3. La question grecque: rapport presente au
Conseil de securite par la Commission d'enquete sur les incidents survenus a la frontiere grecque (document S/360)'.

252. Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

253. Application of Yemen for membership in the United Nations

a

a

252. Adoption de I'ordre du jour
L'ordre du jour est adopee.

253. Demande d'admission du Yemen
l'Organisation des Nations Unies

a

The PRESIDENT: The following letter from
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : La lettre
Prince Seif cl Islam Abdullah of Yemen has been suivante du prince Seif el Islam Abdullah du/
transmitted to the Security CoUncil by the Secre- Yemen a ete transmise au Conseil de securite par
tary-General :
le Secretaire general:
"J'ai l'honneur de porter a votre connaissance
"1 have the honour to inform you that the
Government of His Majesty the Imarn Yehia, que, desireux d'apporter sa contribution tant a
King of Yemen, desirous of contributing both to la consolidation de la paix et la securite internathe. consolidation of international peace and se- tionales qu'au developpement d'une cooperation
cunty and to the development of friendly and amicale et fructueuse entre les Etats pacifiques, le
fruitful co-operation between peace-loving States, Gouvernement de Sa Majeste l'iman Yehia, roi
has ~~tructed me to submit its application for du Yemen, m'a charge de presenter sa demande
~dnusslOn to membership in the United Nations pour etre admis clans l'Organisation des Nations
ID accordance with Article 4 of the Charter.
Unies, conformement a l'Artic1e 4 de la Charte.
'See Of!!cial Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, SpeCIal Supplement No. 2.

'Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de sJcurite, Deuxieme Ann6e, Supplement special No 2.

1550
"It is hardly necessary to add that Yemen is
already a member of the Arab League, which,
within its regional limits, is pursuing purposes
fully in harmony with those of the United
Nations.

"11 est a peine besoin d'ajouter que le Yemen
est deja membre de la Ligue des Etats arabes
qui poursuit dans des limites regionales des finalites parfaitement en harmonie avec celle de
l'Organisation des Nations Unies.

"Accordingly Yemen, in aspiring to share in
the work of the United Nations, is merely maintaining and reaffirming its determination to help
in strengthening the foundations of peace and in
promoting the progress of international life.

"En aspirant done a exercer sa part d'activite
au sein de cette Organisation, le Yemen ne fait
que maintenir et raffennir sa resolution de collaborer au renforcement des assises de la paix et
au progres de la vie internationale.

"Hence I have particular pleasure in asking
you to be good enough to take the necessary
steps to submit this application to the competent
organs, and in stating in the name of the Government of Yemen that it is willing to accept the
obligations contained in the Charter of the
United Nations.

"Aussi m'est-il particulierement agreable de
vous prier de bien vouloir prendre les mesures
necessaires pour saisir les organes competents de
cette demande ainsi que de declarer, a la meme
occasion, au nom du Gouvernement du Yemen,
qu'il est pret a accepter les obligations prevues
par la Charte des Nations Unies.

" (Signed)
Prince SElF EL ISLAM Abdullah of Yemen"

" (Signe)
Prince SElL EL ISLAM Abdullah du Yemen"

According to rule 59, unless the Security
Council decides otherwise, the letter is automatically referred by the President to the Committee
on Admission of New Members.

Conformement a l'artic1e 59 du reglement et
a moins que le Conseil de securite n'en decide
autrement, il incombe au President de transmettre automatiquement la lettre au Comite
charge d'etudier l'admission de nouveaux Membres.

As there is no objection, I shall refer the letter
to the Committee on Admission of New Members.

Comme il n'y a pas d'objections, je transmettrai la lettre au Comite charge d'etudier l'admis.
sion de nouveaux Membres.

254. Continuation of the discussion on the
Greek question

254. Suite de la discussion sur la question
grecque

At the invitation of the President, Colonel
Kerenxhi, representative of Albania, Mr. Mevora.h, representative of Bulgaria, Mr. Dendramis,
representative of Greece, and Mr. Vilfan, representative of Yugoslavia, took their seats at the
Council table.

Sur invitation du President, le colonel
Kerenxhi, representant de l'Albanie, M. Mevorah, representant de la Bulgarie, M. Dendramis,
representant de la Grece et M. Vilfan, representant de la Yougoslavie, prennent place la table
du Conseil.

The PRESIDENT : We have under discussion
the French amendment' to the United States
resolution.' The discussion has been proceeding
rather slowly. This is understandable in view of
the importance of the problems which are before
us. However, I should like to appeal to the members to make their discussions as brief as possible
because we have other questions to examine,
namely, the admission of new Members and the
report of the Security Council, which must be
concluded before the next session of the General
Assembly.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l' anglais): Nous
discutons en ce moment les amendements soumis
par le representant de la France' a la resolution
presentee par les Etats-U nis·. La discussion a
progresse assez lentement. Ceci est comprehensible etant donne l'importance des problemes que
nous examinons. Cependant, je desire prier les
membres du Conseil de donner a leurs interventions toute la concision possible, car nous devons
etudier d'autres questions dont l'examen doit
etre termine avant la prochaine session de l'Assembleegenerale, a savoir l'admission de nouveaux Membres et le rapport du Conseil de securite.

We have under discussion paragraph 3 (a)
of the United States draft resolution (document
S/391). I understand that the representatives
of France and the United Kingdom wish to
speak in connexion with this resolution.

Nous examinons maintenant le paragraphe
3 a) du projet de resolution presente par les
Etats-Unis (document S/391).]e crois que les
representants de la France et du Royaume-Uni
desirent prendre la parole au sujet de cette resolution.

Mr. ]OHNSON (United States of America) :
I wish to ask a question. Did the President refer

M. ]OHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais): Je voudrais poser une ques-

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, SeCond
Year, Supplement No. 15, Annex 39.
• Ibid., Second Year, No. 51, 14-7th meeting.

rite, Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 15, annex~ 39.

a

1

Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de scc,,-

• Ibid., Deuxieme Annee, No 51, 147eme seance.

1551
to paragraph 3 (a) of the original resolution of tion. Le President parle-t-il du paragraphe 3 a)

the United States?

The PRESIDENT : Yes.

de la resolution primitive des Etats-Unis?
.Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Cer.
tamement.

¥.

Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America) :
JO:~INSO~ (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traThat paragraph deals with the composition of duzt de l anglaxs): Ce paragraphe traite de la
the commission, which question I understood c~mpo~ition de la commission, question dont la
was deferred.
dIScussIOn avait, je crois, ete remise a plus tard.
The PRESIDENT: I am glad to defer the quesLe PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Je suis
tion of the composition of the commission, and heureux de remettre a plus tard l'examen de la
to discuss paragraph 3 (b) and the following question de la composition de la commission et
paragraphs. I think the statements that the two de discuter le paragraphe 3 b) et les paragraphes
representatives on my list wished to make were suivants. Je crois que les declarations que les
with regard to this paragraph.
deux representants inscrits desiraient faire
concernaient cet alinea.
Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America) :
M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (tra~
But the discussion would be on paragraph 3 (b), duit de l'aglais): La discussion portera bien sur
not paragraph 3 (a)?
l'alinea 3 b) et non sur l'alinea 3 a)?
The PRESIDENT: Yes.

Le. ;PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Qui,
certamement.

Mr. PARODI (France) (translated from
M. PAROD! (France): Je voudrais, pour le
French): For the moment I should like tv con- moment, limiter mes observations a l'aspect jurifine my comments to the legal aspect of this· dique de la question.
question.
Wc have already discussed this aspect during
previous meetings. To tell the truth, I, too, am
very anxious not to prolong our discussion on
such a technical level. But comments hav~ been
made, objections raised, with undoubted force.
These objections are serious, and it seems to me
that the difficulties which have thus been raised
should be thoroughly examined before we go
any further in our discussion.

Nous avons deja discute de cet aspect au cours
des precedentes seances. A vrai dire, je suis tres
desireux, moi aussi, de ne pas prolonger notre
discussion sur un plan aussi technique. Mais des
observations ont ete presentees, des objections
ant ete formulees avec une force incontestable.
Ce sont des objections serieuses et il me parait
necessaire que les difficultes qui nous ont ete ainsi
opposees soient examinees afond avant que nous
n'allions plus loin dans notre discussion.

Hence, after the comments which have been
made, in particular by the representatives of
Bulgaria, Yugoslavia and the Union of Soviet
Sociali'it Republics, I consider it necessary to
revert to the legal question and to explain to you
as briefly as possible how the question appears
to me after reflection on these important comments. I shall begin with the views expressed by
the representative of the USSR on the scope of
Article 34.

J'estime done necessaire, apres les observations qui ont ete presentees, notamment par les
representants de la Bulgarie, de la Yougoslavie
et de l'Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques, de reprendre la question de droit et, si
VOllS le permettez, de dire, sous une forme aussi
breve que possible, comment, apres avoir refJechi aces importantes observations, m'apparait
cette question. Je partirai, si vous le voulez bien,
du point de vue qui a ete exprime par le representant de l'URSS en ce qui concerne la portee
de l'Article 34.

n' se presente a propos de cet Article, sur
Two legal difficulties arise with regard to this
Article, upon which the United States resolution lequel s'appuient la resolution des Etats~ Unis et
les amendements fran~ais, deux difficultes de
and the French amendments are based.
.
droit.
As regards the first, I would refer you to Mr.
Gromyko's comments the other day; particularly
when, replying to a question which I had put to
him, he expressed the view that Article 34, in
stating that the Security Council may investigate
any dispute, simply means that the Security
Council may recommend an investigation and
not that it has the powcr to decide upon one.'
He argued that the provisions of Chapter VI,
taken together, give only a power of recom-

J'aborde d'abord la premiere en me reportant
aux observations que M. Gromyko a presentees
l'autre jour, notamment lorsque, repondant a
une question que je lui avais posee, il a expose
que, a son avis, l'Article 34, en indiquant que le
Conseil de securite peut enqueter sur tous le.s
differends, signifierait simplement que le Conse~
de securite peut recommander une enquete mars
n'aurait pas le pouvoir de decider qu'elle sera
faite'. L'argumentation qu'il a presentee it eet

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 64.

'Voir les Proces-verbaux o/!iciels du Conseil de securite, Deuxieme Annee, No 6*.

1552
mendation, and that there was no reason why
the Security Council's powers should be different
in the case of Article 34. In particular, assuming
that the measures increase in. severity from Chapter VI to Chapter VII, Mr. Gromyko found it
difficult to admit that the initial measure, the
investigation, should give the Security Council
greater powers than it would have when, having
concluded its investigation, it came to make recommendations.

egard est que 1'ensemble des dispositions du
Chapitre VI comporte uniquement un pouvoir
de recommandation et qu'on ne voit pas pourquoi les pouvoirs du Conseil de securite seraient
.differents dans le cas de l'Article 34. En particulier, si 1'on admet que du Chapitre VI au Chapitre VII on va de mesures moins graves a des
mesures plus graves, it paraissait a M. Gromyko
difficile d'admettre que la mesure tout a fait initiale, qui est l'enquete, comportat pour le Conseil
de securite plus de pouvoirs qu'il ne peut en
avoir lorsque, ayant termine son enquete, il
arrive a des recommandations.

Article 34 of the Charter, however, says: "The
Or, dans l' Article 34, la Charte dit: "Le
Security Council may investigate . . ." These Conseil de securite peut enqueter . . ." Ces
tenus appear sufficiently clear in themselves and termes, par eux-memes, paraissent assez clairs et
seem to me perfectly definite when taken in con- ils me semblent prendre une tres grande precijunction with the other provisions of Chapter VI. sion si on rapproche cette diposition des autres
dispositions du Chapitre VI.
The terms used by the authors of the Charter
in the other Articles of Chapter VI dealing with
the powers of the Security Council are all extremely precise. Article 33, paragraph 2, says
that the Security Council, when it deems it necessary, shall "call upon" the parties. Article 36,
paragraph 1, says that the Security Council may,
at any stage, "recommend", and paragraph 3 of
the same article begins with the words "In making recommendations . . ." In Article 37 we
find the word "recommend". In Article 38 there
is again the word "recommendations".

Dans tous les autres Articles du Chapitre VI,
qui traitent de ce que peut faire le Conseil de
securite, les termes dont les redacteurs de la Charte
se sont servis ont toujours ete d'une extreme precision. 11 est dit a l'Article 33, paragraphe 2,
que le Conseil de securite, s'ille juge necessaire,
"invite" les parties. A l' Article 36, paragraphe 1,
il est dit que le Conseil de securite peut a tout
moment "recommander", et le paragraphe 3 du
meme Article commence par les mots: "En faisent les recommandations . . ." A l'Article 37,
on trouve le mot "recommander". A l'Article 38,
i1 y a de nouveau le mot "recommandations".

Les redacteurs de la Charte se sont done serThe authors of the Charter have therefore,
with great precision, made use of terms to which vis avec beaucoup de precision de termes auxthey gave an extremely clear meaning. These quels ils ont donne un sens extremement clair.
different Articles speak of "recommending", Dans ces divers Articles, il est question de "rewhich is not the same thing as "deciding".
commander", ce qui n'est pas "decider".
When, on the other hand, these terms are
Lorsqu'on rapproche, au contraire, ces tercompared with those of Article 34, it at once mes de ceux de l'Article 34, i1 apparalt tout de
appears that Article 34 is quite differently suite que l'Article 34 est d'une redaction tout a
drafted. Here there is no question of "recom- fait differente. La, il ne s'agit pas de "recornmending" an investigation, or of "calling upon" mander" une enquete, i1 ne s'agit pas "d'invithe parties to accept an investigation. The text ter" les parties a se plier a une enquete. Le texte
says "The Security Council may investigate ..." dit: "Le Conseil de securite peut enqueter." Le
It appears to me that the text of these different texte de ces divers Articles me parrot par luiarticles itself settles the question: the drafting is meme regler la question: la redaction en est trap
too different. I repeat, taken together, the terms differente. Encore une fois, l'ensemble des terused in Chapter VI have obviously been too mes employes dans le Chapitre VI a ete visiblecarefully weighed for the difference in wording ment trop bien pese pour que la difference de
between Article 34 and the other Articles not to redaction que l'on constate entre l'Article 34 et
have a meaning.
les autres Articles n'ait pas un sens.
If we refer to the preparatory work, we find
that Article 34 in its present form follows two
previous almost identical wordings, ' the only real
difference being that, instead of "The Security
Council may investigate ...", there was "The
Security Council has the power to investigate ..." The sense of these two expressions is
obviously the same, although the expression "has
the power to" was perhaps even more precise
and made a better distinction between what is
meant in Article 34 and the powers of simple

Si l'on se reporte aux travaux preparatoires,
on constate d'ailleurs que l'Article 34, sous sa
forme actuelle, fait suite a deux redactions anterieures sensiblement equivalentes" a cette difference pres qu'au lieu de "Le Conseil de securite peut enqueter", il y avait: "Le Conseil de
securite a le pouvoir d'enqueter." Le sens de ces
deux expressions est evidemment le meme; cc·
pendant l'expression "a le pouvoir de" etait peutetre encore plus precise et distinguait mieux ce
dont i1 s'agit a l'Article 34 des pouvoirs de simple

1 See United Nations Conference on International Organization: Documents, volume 12, pages 163 and 259.

1 Voir les Documents de la Conference des NationI
Unies sur {'organisation internationale, volume 12, pages
169 et 261.

1553
recommendation mentioned in the other Articles
of this Chapter.
For my part therefore, contrary to the contention put forward the other day, I consider
that the Security Council has indeed the right
to decide upon an investigation.
I would add that when the representative of
the USSR told us that a series of successive
measures was contemplated in Chapter VI and
Chapter VII, and that it was inconceivable that
the initial measure should be the one in which
the Security Council would have the greatest
power, he was developing a line of argument
which in the first place could not go against the
very clear terms of Article 34, and which, even
considered on its own merits, does not seem to
me to be able to cast any doubt on the meaning
of that article.
To start with, I do not very well see the
Ugradation" from Chapter VI to Chapter VII.
On the one hand we have Chapter VI with one
series of measures; and then we have Chapter
VII with another series of measures. On the
other hand, is it singular, is it inexplicable that,
in Article 34 which deals with the power of investigation, the Security Council should have
greater power than when it reaches the end and
the conclusions of its investigation? This appears
to me to be easily explained. Article 34 refers
only to an investigation for the sole purpose of
providing the Security Council with information.
It is an entirely preliminary measure preceding
all the measures which the Security Council may
latcr contemplate. It is a simple measure of enquiry, and it is quite natural that here the Security Council should have greater power-even
within the province of Chapter VI-and that it
should be able to decide, and not merely recommend, that an investigation should be made.

A certain number of comments have already
been made here on the second legal difficulty
raised by the application of Article 34. According to Article 34, an investigation may be made
to determine whether the continuance of a dispute is likely to endanger the maintenance of
peace. The following line of argument is then
put forward: Once the Security Council has
recognized that a situation bears such a character, it has exhausted the powers of investigation conferred upon it by Article 34; these
powers were given to it to reach a certain conclusion, to allow it to appreciate the facts; once
this appreciation has been made, Article 34:
should cease to have effect.

I have already pointed out how narrow this
argument is. I have emphasized that its consequence is that the less serious the situation, the
m?re the Council can keep an investigation
gomg, whilst in the most serious cases, it would
?e obli~ed to interrupt its investigation, which
IS certamly not a satisfactory interpretation of
the text.
Let me explain further what I mean: A distinction may be made between two kinds of

recommandation vises dans les autres Articles
de ce Chapitre.
Je considere donc, pour ma part, que, contrairement a la these soutenue l'autre jour, le Conseil
de securite a bien le pouvoir de decider qu'une
enquete sera faite.
J'ajoute que, lorsque le representant de
l'URSS nous disait qu'il y a une serie de mesures
successives prevues entre le Chapitre VI et le
Chapitre VII et que l'on ne comprendrait pas
que la mesure initiale soit celle pour laquelle le
Conseil de securite aurait le plus de pouvoirs, il
developpait une argumentation qui, tout
d'abord, ne pourrait pas aller contre les termes
tres clairs de l'Article 34, mais qui, meme prise
en elle-meme, ne me parrot aucunement pouvoir
jeter un doute sur le sens de cet Article.
Tout d'abord, je ne vois pas bien la "gradation" existant entre le Chapitre VI et le Chapitre VII. Il y a, d'une part, le Chapitre VI
avec un ensemble de mesures; puis il yale Chapitre VII, avec un autre ensemble de mesures.
D'autre part, est-il singulier, est-il inexplicable
que, dans l'Article 34, qui traite du pouvoir
d'enquete, le Conseil de securite ait plus de pouvoir qu'il n'en a finalement lorsqu'il en arrive
aux termes et aux conclusions de son etude?
Cela me paralt s'expliquer tres bien: dans l'Article 34, il n'est question que d'une enquete
ayant pour seul objet de renseigner le Conseil
de securite. C'est une mesure tout a fait prealable
qui precede l'ensemble des mesures que le
Conseil de securite peut envi~ager ensuite. C'est
une simple mesure d'instruction et il est tout a
fait naturel que, sur ce point, le Conseil de securite ait plus de pouvoir - meme en ce qui ressortit au Chapitre VI - et qu'il puisse decider,
et non pas seulement recommander, qu'une enquete ait lieu.
En ce qui concerne la seconde dift1culte de
droit que souleve l'application de I'Article 34,
eHe a deja fait id l'objet d'un certain nombre
d'observations. La question se presente ainsi:
d'apres I'Article 34, uneenquete peut avoir lieu
pour determiner si la prolongation d'un differend peut menacer le maintien de la paix. On
developpe alors l'argumentation suivante: a partir du moment ou le Conseil de securite reconnalt qu'une situation a un tel caractere, il a, par
la-meme, epuise les pouvoirs d'enquete qu'il tenait de l'Article 34; ces pouvoirs lui etaient attri.
bues pour arriver a une certaine conclusion, pour
permettre une appr.eciation des faits; une fois
cette appreciation portee, l' Article 34 devrait
cesser d'avoir effet.
J'ai deja indique ce que cette argumentation
avait d'etroit. rai souligne qu'eHe aboutirait a
ceci: moins la situation est grave, plus le
Conseil peut maintenir une enquete en cours,
alors que dans les cas les plus graves il serait
oblige d'interrompre son enquete, ce qui n'est
certainement pas une interpretation satisfaisante
du texte.
J e voudrais preciser davantage ma pensee:
1'0n peut distinguer deux ordres d'incidents pou-

1554
incidents which may endanger peace and to
which Article 34 may apply. There is first of all
the case of a specific incident, not of a recurrent
nature, as its recurrence would have to be considered as constituting a second incident. An
example which we have had is the case of the
Corfu mines. That is a closed case. If any more
mines exploded tomorrow, it would be a new
incident, not a continuation of the first.

vant menacer la paix et sur lesquels PArticle 34
peut jouer. 11 y a d'abord le cas d'un incident
bien determine, non susceptible de se renouveler,
car s'il se renouvelait, il devrait etre considere
comme constituant un second incident. Je prends
un exemple: l'aflaire des mines de Carfou, que
nous avons connue. C'est un cas termine. Si demain de nouvelles mines explosaient, il s'agirait
d'un nouvel incident qui ne serait pas la suite
du premier.

In such a case, it is understandable that the
investigation, having reached a result, should
thereby be terminated. Even in this case, however, I consider that the investigation might be
re-opened if new facts came· to light, as is the
normal procedure before a court-and a fortiori
before us who are not a court.

En presence d'un eas comme celui-la, on cornprend que l'enquete, ayant une fois conduit a
un resultat, soit par HI.-meme terminee. Meme
dans ce cas, d'ailleurs, je considere que Penquete pourrait etre reprise si des faits nouveaux
apparaissaient, comme c'est la procedure normale devant une juridiction - et, a fortiori,
devant nous, qui ne sommes pas une juridiction.

It is quite conceivable, therefore, that the
Security Council might order a new investigation of a case on which a ruling had already
been given, if it considered that new facts, new
arguments or new proofs had been adduced and
that there were grounds for further investigations.

On pourrait done concevoir tres facilement
qu'une nouvelle enquete soit ordonnee par le
Conseil de securite dans un cas ou il a deja
statue, s'il estime que des faits nouveau, des
arguments nouveaux ou des preuves nouvelles
sont apportes et qu'il y a lieu d'approfondir son
instruction.

Mais nous ne sommes pas en presence cl'un eas
We have not, however, a case of this nature
before us. We are faced with a situation which de cet ordre. Nous sommes en presence d'une
by its nature consists of successive developments. situation comportant, par sa nature meme, des
We are faced with a situation which exists on developpements successifs. Nous sommes en pn~­
the Greek frontier, and the facts with which we sence d'une situation existant a la frontiere de la
are dealing consist, not of one incident, but of a Grece, et les faits qui nous occupent ne consistent
series of incidents which, as we know, are likely pas en un incident, mais en une serie cl'incidents
to be repeated. In these circumstances, it seems qui, nous le savons, sont susceptibles de se reto me quite normal that the Security Council nouveler. 11 me parait, dans ees conditions, tout
should have the power to continue an investiga- a fait normal que le Conseil de securite ait le
tion in order to follow the development of a pouvoir de prolonger une enquete afin de suivre
situation, even if it has already formed the opin- le developpement d'une situation, meme si
ion that that situation threatens the peace.
ceIle-ci lui a deja paru menac;;ante pour la paix.
I will go still further. Suppose the Security
Je vais preciser encore davantage. Supposons
Council has terminated its investigation after que le Conseil de securite ait termine son enhaving found that there is a threat to peace; quete apres avoir constate qu'une menace pour
suppose that it has made certain recommenda- la paix existe; admettons qu'il ait fait certaines
tions with regard to this situation and that, recommandations en fonction de cette situation
tomorrow, new incidents occur which are only a et que, demain, de nouveaux incidents se pro~
development of the same situation. These inci- duisent qui ne sont que le developpement de
dents might well be of such a character as to cette meme situation. 11 se peut que ces incicall for different recommendations on the part dents aient un caractere tel qu'ils appellent de
of the Council. In this case, the Security Council la part du Conseil des recommandations diffe~
should certainly be able to dispatch a new com- rentes. Dans ce cas, certainement, le. Conseil de
mission of investigation to make a new inquiry securite devrait pouvoir renvoyer une nouvelle
into the new facts which may require new commission d'enquete faire une nouvelle instrucrecommendations.
tion dans le dessein d'etudier ces nouveaux faits
qui pourraient donner lieu a de nouvelles recommandations.
It seems to me that what the Security Council
Ce que le Conseil de securite pourrait faire
can do in the case of new incidents; it should be en cas de nouveaux incidents, il me semble qu'it
able to do a priori, by maintaining a commission doit pouvoir le faire, a priori, sous la forme du
of investigation when it wishes to be kept in- maintien d'une commission d'enquete, lorsqu'il
formed of a situation which is likely to develop s'agit pour lui de rester informe d'une situation
further and which it knows will almost neces- susceptible de developpements ulterieurs et dont
sarily, by its nature, involve renewed friction il sait que, par sa nature m~me, eIle comportera
for weeks and months to come.
presque necessairement, pendant les semaines et
les roois qui viennent, de nouvelles frictions.

I consider therefore that Article 34 does in
fact give the Security Council the power to

Je considere done que l'Article 34 donne bien
au Conseil de securite de pouvoir de maintenir

1555
maintain a commission for as long as the Council
considers the situation dangerous.

une commission susceptible de durer aussi longtemps que le Conseil estimera la situation dangereuse.

Such are the comments which I wished to
tnake. Nevertheless, having heard the Yugoslav
representative, among others, I must say that,
the interpretation of the text having thus been
defined, the amendment we have submitted is
perhaps not entirely correct from the legal point
of view. I propose to correct it.

Telles sont les observations que je desirais presenter. Cependant, apres avoir entendu, notamment, le representant de la Yougoslavie, je dais
dire que, l'interpretation du texte etant ainsi
precisee, l'amendement que nous avons presente
n'est peut-etre pas tout a fait exact du point de
vue juridique. Je me propose de le corriger.

The conclusion to be drawn from what I have
En dIet, ce que je viens de dire conduit a
said is as follows: The Security Council has at ced: le Conseil de securite, actuellement, a le
present the power to give two kinds of functions pouvoir de donner, a la commission dont nous
. to the commission which we propose should be envisageons la creation, des fonctions de deux
set up. On the one hand it may give it the task ordres. 11 peut lui donner, d'une part, des foncof offering its good offices, of applying simple tions de bons offices, des fonctions se rattachant
recommendations. Here I do not think there are a la mise en jeu de simples recommandations. A
any real difficulties: the commission can do no cet egard, je ne crois pas qu'il y ait vraiment des
more than assist, lend its good offices for a con- difficultes: la commission ne peut faire davanciliation; by definition, this cannot encroach tage qu'aider, que preter ses bons offices pour
upon what the various States may finally decide une conciliation; par definition, il n'y a 13. aucun
to accept or reject. The commission's other task empietement sur ce que les differents Etats peuis based on Article 34; it is that to which I have vent finalement decider d'accepter ou de rejeter.
just referred, and it consists of keeping the Coun- L'autre tache de la commission s'appuie sur
cil informed. Here, as I said just now, it is not l'Article 34: c'est celle a laquelle je viens de faire
a question of recommendations but of the Secu- allusion et qui consiste a informer le Conseil. A
rity Council's power of decision; but this power cet egard, comme je le rappelais tout a l'heure,
of decision must be based on Article 34 and can il ne s'agit pas de recommandations,il s'agit du
therefore be brought into action only in accord~. pouvoir de decision du Conseil de securite; mais
ance with the terms of that Article. Consequently ce pouvoir de decision doit avoir son fondement
it may be advisable to state that the commission dans l'Article 34; il ne peut done etre mis en
can act in the capacity of a commission of inves- jeu que suivant les termes de l'Article 34. En
tigation only with a view to giving the Security consequence, il peut etre utile de preciser que
Council information.
la commission ne pOllrra agir en qualite de commission d'enquete que dans l'intention d'informer, de renseigner le Conseil de securite.

A distinction therefore has to be made between the application of recommendations and
the mere provision of information to the Security
Council.

11 importe done de distinguer ce qui est application de recommandations et ce qui est simple
information du Conseil de securite.

We have prepared a modified text of the
amendment submitted by the French delegation;
the object of this modification is the necessity of
more precision in the legal aspect of the text.
The new version will be circulated in a moment;
but I will read the corrected paragraph which
is as follows:

Nous avons prepare un texte modifie de
l'amendement presente par la delegation franctaise; cette modification a pour objet de tenir
compte de la necessite de preciser davantage
l'aspect juridique du texte. La nouvelle redaction sera distribuee dans un instant, mais je
donne lecture du paragraphe rectifie qui est ainsi
libelle:

"In order to keep the Security Council informed, the commission shall :

"En vue de tenir informe le Conseil de securite, la commission:

" (a) Whenever it may deem useful, investigate any frontier violation reported to it;

"a) Enquetera dans tous les cas ou elle le
jugera utile sur toutes violations de frontiere
qui lui auraient cte signalees;

... (b) Investigate the fact~ of the frontier situation on the complaint of any of the Governments concerned, whenever it considers these
facts likely to lead to an aggravation of the
situation."

"b) Enquetera sur les faits relatifs a la situation sur la frontiere ayant fait l'objet d'une
plainte de la part de l'un des Gouvernements
interesses, chaque fois qu'elle jugera ces faits
susceptibles d'amener une aggravation .de la
situation."

.This draft could be discussed, and perhaps
improved in its details; its purpose is to make it
clear that the Security Council should be kept
informed, and thus to make a clearer distinction
than the first text did between the function of

Oette redaction pourra etre discutee et, peutetre, amelioree dans les details; elle a pOUf objet
de preciser qu'il s'agit de tenir le Conseil de
securite informc, par consequent de distinguer
plus clairement que ne le faisait le premier texte

1556
good offices, which derives from the Council's
recommendations, and the power of investigation with a view to informing the Security Council, which comes from its power of decision.

ce qui est fonction de bons offices, relevant de
recommandations au Conseil, et ce qui est pouvoir d'enquete et d'instruction en vue d'informer
le Conseil de securite, relevant du pouvoir de
decision de celui-ci.

Mr. President, I have finished the comments
which I wished to make on the legal plane, but
I may ask to speak later on the other aspects of
the question. It appeared to me necessary, however, that this question should be taken up again
as a whole, and that, so far as the French delegation is concerned, our point of view should be
set forth in a coherent manner.

Monsier le President, j'ai termine les observations que je voulais presenter sur le plan juridique. J e me reserve de vous demander a nouveau la parole ulterieurement sur les autres
aspects de la question. Mais il me paraissait
necessaire que cette question fUt reprise dans
son ensemble et que, en ce qui conc.erne la delegation fran<;aise, notre manihe de l'envisager
ait ete reprise et exposee d'une fa~on coherente.

Mr.. LAwFoRD (United Kingdom): Much of
our time at the hundred and sixty-seventh meeting was taken up by a discussion of the interesting, but perhaps not as yet wholly relevant,
question whether a decision by the Council to
establish a commission of investigation would be
binding on the Governments of the four countries concerned. Various views were expressed on
that point; they ranged from Mr. Gromyko's
interpretation, as I understood it, of action under
Article 34 of the Charter as a decision with the
force of a recommendation and therefore not
binding under Article 25, to the contrary interpretation as a decision in the sense of Article 25
and one which is therefore binding.

M. LAWFORD (Royaume-Uni) (traduit de
l'anglais): La plus grande partie de la cent-

seance a ete consacree a la
discussion de la question, interessante mais peutetre prematuree, de savoir si une decision de
creer une commission d'enquete prise par le
CODseil lierait les Gouvernements des q uatre
pays interesses. Differentes opinions ant ete exprimees a ce sujet, all ant de l'interpretation
donnee par M. Gromyko, qui, si j'ai bien compris, estime que les mesures prises en vertu de
l'Article 34 de la Charte ont le caractere de
recommandations et ne sont, par consequent, pas
visees par l'obligation prevue a I'Article 25, a
l'interpretation opposee seIon laquelle ces mesures sont des decisions au sens de I'Article 25, et
qui, par consequent, ont un caractere obligatoire.
soi~ante-septieme

I do not propose to enter. into a discussion of
this particular question since, if I may say so,
I find myself in agreement with the President's
statement that both recommendations and decisions are morally binding, whatever the legal
position may be. That statement seems to me to
be most apropos.

Je n'ai pas l'intention de discuter ce point particulier puisque, s'il m'est permis de le dire, je
partage l'opinion du President selon laquelle
les recommandations, comme les decisions, engagent moralement les parties interessees, quel
que soit l'aspect juridique de la question. Cette
opinion me semble parfaitement justifiee.

However, the Council has not as yet, of
course, taken such a decision or made such a
recommendation, in whatever way one may look
at the matter; and then, this question must at
the present time give way to the more immediate
question whether the Council actually has the
right to investigate.

Cependant, le Conseil n'a pas encore pris
semblable decision ou formule semblable recommandation, cela est clair de que1que fa~on que
l'on considere la question; et, dans ce cas, le
point dont il s'agit doit, pour le moment, s'effacer devant un probleme plus immediat, qui
consiste a savoir si le Conseil a reellement le
droit d'effectuer une enquete.

I admit that I was forced to admire the skilful
manner in which the representative of Yugoslavia conducted his case against the validity of
a Council decision to take action in this matter
under Article 34. If I remember aright, he spoke
at first of the principle of national sovereignty,
which apparently would make it impossible for
the Council to take action under Chapter VI
without the express approval of all the Governments concerned. Much has been said of late
about this principle, but of course it is nothing
new. Indeed, when I was a boy at school in the
idealistic 1920's, I think that everyone in my
country was beginning to believe that it was so
old as to be almost worn out. However, we were
evidently too idealistic.

Je reconnais que l'habilete avec laquelle le
representant de la Yougoslavie a fait valoir
qu'une decision prise a cet egard par le Conseil
en vertu de l'Article 34 ne serait pas valable, a
force mon admiration. Si j'ai bonne memoire,
il a invoque en premier lieu le principe de la
souverainete nationale qui empecherait apparemment le Conseil de prendre des mesures en
vertu du Chapitre VI sans l'accord formel de
tous les Gouvernements interesses. On a beaucoup parIe ces derniers temps de cc principe,
mais il ne presente evidemment aucun caractere
de nouveaute. En verite, je crois que, lorsque
j'etais ecolier, au cours des annees 1920, si marquees d'idealisme, chacun, dans mon pays, commen~ait deja a croire que ce principe etait vieux
au point d'etre presque perime. Mais il s'est
avere que nous etions trop idealistes.

1557
The representative of Yugoslavia s.upported
his argument about national soverclgnty, of
course, by a reference to Article ~, paragrap~ 7,
of the Charter, according t.o which ~he Umted
Nations has no right to mterfcre 111 matters
which are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of a State. If I may say so, I think this
argument was demolished ,for all prac~ical purposes by those repres~ntatJ.ves who pomted out
that it would mean, m effect, that thcre w:re
fifty-five vetoes, instead of five, to any effective
action by the Council under Chapter VI,

Le ~epI'esentant de la Yougoslavie a naturelIemen! 1ll~oqu~ it l'appui de sa these sur la souvcramete natlOnale le paragraphe 7 de l'Article 2
de ~e Chart~, d'apres lequel l'Organisation des
Nations Umcs n'a pas le droit d'intervenir dans
des affaires qui relevent essentiellement de la
co.mpctenct; nationale d'Ull Etat. S'il m'est permls d'expnmer une opinion, je dirai que cette
thc?e a ete ba~tue en breche, suffisamment au
mainS pour qu elle perde toute portee pratique
par les r7pr.esentan~ qui ont,fait observer qU'ell~
se trad.U1rmt, en fait, par I opposition de quaran~~-cmq vetos au lieu de cinq a toute mesure
poslt.lVe. que le Conseil pourrait prendre en
applicatIOn du Chapitre VI.

The Yugoslav representative subSCqUCI~t1y de~
fended his thesis on the ground that Article 34,
in any case, refers only to investigation for the
purpose of determining whether the continuance
of a dispute or a situation is likely to endanger
the maintenance of intcrnational peace and security. In this case, he maintained, the im:esti~a­
tion had already taken place; the determmatIon
had already been made. What, then, he asked,
was the justification for this investigation?

Le representant de la Yougoslavie a ensuite
~erendu Son poi~t de vue en affirmant que I'Artlcle 34 ne sauraIt en aucun cas viser autre chose
que des enq uetes ayant pour objet de determiner si la prolongation d'un differend ou d'une
situation semble devoir menacer le maintien de
la paix et de la securite internationales. Dans
le cas present, d'apres lui, l'enquete a deja eu
lieu, la determination a deja ete faite. Dans
ces conditions, a-t-il demande, comment cette
enqucte se justifierait-elle?

If I were to try to answer that question, I
Si je devais repondre a sa question, je crois
think I should recall that under Article 24 of the que je rappellerais que, en vertu de l'Article 24
Charter the Security Council has the primary de la Charte, le Conseil de securite a la responsaresponsibility for the maintenance of interna- bilit6 principale du maintien de la paix et de
tional peace and security. A di1>pllte ha.,,; been la sceuritc internationales. L'attention du Conseil
brought to its attention under Article 35. In ac- a cte attirce sur un differend en vertu de l' Arcordance with the Charter, a decision was taken ticle 35. Conformement a la Charte, le Conseil
by the Council last December to make nn inves- a pris, en decembre dernier, la decision d'effectigation under Article 34· in order to discover tuer, en vertu de l'Article 34, une enquete pour
whether a continuance of the dispute wa.<; likely determiner si la prolongation du differcnd
to endanger the maintenance of int<~mationa1 semble devoir menacer le maintien de la paix
et de la securite internationales.
peace and security.
Now a report has been made and a large
majority of the Council, if I undcrRtrmd the situation correctly, has found that a db;pute exists,
the continuance of which is likely to endanger
international peace and security. In this case,
what is the duty of the Security Council in order
effectively to carry out its rcsponsibilitks? It
seems likely that the majority of the Council, if
I am not mistaken, wishes to cl'tablish a commission to aid in maintaining international pea.ce
and security in the area concerned which, in the
majority's view, is likely to bt: enda.ngered by the
continuance of this dispute.

A l'hcure actuelle un rapport a ete redige et,
si je comprends bien la situation, les membres
du Conscil ant, en grande majorite, estimc qu'il
existe un diffcrend, dont la prolongation semble
devoir menacer la paix et la securite internationalcs. Dans ce cas, quel est le devoir du
Conseil s'il veut s'acquitter de ses obligations
de manii'~re efficace? Si je ne m'abuse, il semble
probable quc la majorite des membres du
Conseil desire creer une commission chargee
de contribuer au maintien, dans la region dont
il s'agit, de la paix et de la securite internationales, qui, de l'avis de la majoritc, semblent devoir ctre menacees par la prolongation de ce
diffCrend,

~t seems to mc, also, that there is reaSDn to
believe that the dispute is in fact continuing.
The French representative, with juridical knowledge to which I can lay no claim at all, has
a}ready spoken on the lega.l aspect of this queshon. I would only ask: Is it rt~ally the intention
of, the Charter that wc shall be unable to fulfil
thIS task for,the very reason that \VC have already
found that If the dISpute continues it is likely to
endanger peace and securitv? Tha.t would seem
to be absurd. If that were 'the correct position,
then all the Security Council could do in a ca.'iC
of this kind would be to find that there was

Il m'apparatt egalement qu'il y a toute raison
de croire qu'en fait le differend se prolonge. Le
representant de la France a deja parle de l'aspeet juridiquc de cctte question avec une competence a laquelle je ne saurais ~rete,ndre, Je
desire seulcmcnt demander: est-il reellement
conforme a l'esprit de la Charte que nous nous
trouvions dans l'impossibilite de remplir ce~~~
tache pour la raison mcme que nous av~ns, deja
dctcnnine quc la prolongatIOn de ce ~Ifferend
scmble devoir mcttre en danger la palx et la
sccuritC? Cela serait absurde. S'it en etait reellement ainsi, le Conseil de securite ne pourrait,

1558

likelihood of a dangerous situation arising and
then sit back and admit there was really nothing
that could be done about it.

dans un cas de ce genre, faire autre chose que
de constater qu'une situation dangereuse semble
devoir se presenter, puis admettre avec serenite
que rien ne peut etre fait a ce sujet.

En toute logique, il semble evident que, apres
In all common sense, it seems clear that it
would be the duty of the Council-having made avoir arrete ses conclusions, le Conseil aurait
its findings-in the first place, to propose such pour devoir, en premier lieu, de proposer les
measures of conciliation as might seem to be mesures de conciliation qui semblent approappropriate, and, in the second place, to con- priees, et, en second lieu, de continuer a suivre
tinue to watch over the dispute in order to keep le differend afin de se tenir au courant de tous
itself informed of any developments which might les faits nouveaux qui pourraient representer une
constitute a deterioration of the situation and aggravation de la situation et constituer, de ce
thereby endanger peace. Only thus, in any case, fait, un danger pour la paix. C'est, en tout cas,
de cette fa~on seulement que le Conseil pourcan it fulfil its primary responsibility.
rait s'acquitter de son devoir primordial.
There is certainly a clear distinction between
the functions of conciliation and of investigation.
However I wonder whether there can be any
just or effective measures of conciliation without
the right also to investigate-that is to say, not
to snoop around gratuitously, but to inform oneself on the spot as to what is actuall~ ~oing on.
It is for that reason that the comnusslOn must
have both functions, if it is to be able to carry
out its task.

Il existe incontestablement une nette distinction entre les fonctions de conciliation et les
fonctions d'enquete. Cependant, je doute que
l'on puisse prendre des mesures de conciliation
equitables ou efficaces si 1'on ne dispose pas
egalement du droit de proceder a une enquete,
c'est-a-dire, non pas d'effectuer des recherchcs
sans methode, mais de s'informer sur place de
ce qui se passe reellement. C'est pour cette raison que la commission doit. disposer de ces deux
pouvoirs pour etre en mesure de remplir sa
tache.

If legalistic arguments drawn from a rather
narrow interpretation of certain Articles of the
Charter are used to deny these rights to the commission, I should like to recall the words which
I think were uttered by Mr. Vyshinsky at an
earlier meeting of the Council, when he said that
the Charter must be read in the light of logic
and common sense. If we sincerely wish to settle
this dispute and not to prolong it, the logical
course would, in the view of my delegation, be
to vest the commission with the functions of conciliation and investigation.

Si l'on invoque des arguments d'ordre juridique fondes sur une interpretation assez etroite
de certains Articles de la Charte pour refuser
ces pouvoirs a la commission, je pourrais evoquer les paroles qui, je crois, ont ete prononcees
a une precedente seance du Conseil par
M. Vychinsky pour rappeler que la logique et le
bon sens doivent presider a la lecture de la
Charte. Si nous desirons sincerement regler ce
differend et non pas le prolonger, la delegation
du Royaume-Uni estime qu'il serait logiquc
d'investir la commission du pouvoir de conciliation et du pouvoir d'enquete.

J'ai deja dit que j'etais plein d'admiration
I said earlier that I was filled with admiration
by the manner in which the Yugoslav representa- pour la fa~on dont le representant de la Youtive put his case that the Security Council had goslavie a presente la these selon laquelle le
no right to do this. But I was also forced to Conseil de securite n'avait pas le droit de prenwonder why he expended so much energy and dre ces mesures, mais j'ai egalement Cte oblige
so much skill on such a thesis. With all respect de me demander pourquoi il consacrait tant
and with absolutely no desire to cavil or cast d'energie et tant d'habilete pour soutenir une
aspersions, I still do not understand why the telle these. Avec tous les egards que je leut' dois
representatives of the three northern neighbours et sans avoir la moindre intention de me livrcr
of Greece, supported by the representative of the a des critiques injustifiees ou de formuler de
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, raised such fausses imputations, je dois dire que je ne comstrong objections-legal, procedural or otherwise prends toujours pas pourquoi les representants
-to the functioning of such a commission on des trois voisins septentrionaux de la Grece, aptheir territory, if they do sincerely desire-as I puyes par le representant de l'Union des Repumust conclude that they do--that this dangerous bliques socialistes soviHiques, soulevent de si
situation should not be aggravated, but, on the fortes objections, qu'elles aient un caracter(~
contrary, settled once for all by means of con· juridique, qu'elles aient trait a la procedure au
ciliation and investigation carried out on behalf qu'elles soient d'autre nature, contre le fonctionof the body charged with the primary responsi. nement d'une telle commission sur leuT terribility for maintaining peace.
toire, s'ils desirent sincerement, comme je doi:s
le croire, que cette situation dangereuse ne s'a~­
grave pas, mais qu'au contraire elle soit rcglec.
une fois pour toutes, grace a des enquetes et ~,
une action de conciliation entreprises au nom de
l'organe auquel appartient la responsabilite prineipale du maintien de la paix.

1559
National sovereignty apart-and I cannot
La question de la souverainete nationale mise
honestly attach very great importance to indi- a part - et, en toute justice, je ne puis attacher
vidual national pride on a matter of such gen- une tres grande importance a la fierte nationale
eral interest as this-I do not know, and I des differents pays lorsque, comme dans le cas
can not guess, why this should be such hard present, l'interet general est en jeu dans une
medicine to swallow for those who really wish mesure ~ussi grandc: - je ne sais pas et je ne puis
to get. rid of the disease. I know that the repre- conceVOlr pourquOl ces mesures constitueraient
sentatIVes concerned have given some explana- un remede si difficile a accepter pour ceux qui
tion of their attitude in this regard but I am d~sirent reellement se debarrasser de ce mal. Je
still genuinely puzzled.
'
salS que les representants interesses ont donne
certaines explications sur leur attitude dans ceUe
question; cependant, je reste reellement deconcerte.
There is, of course, the theory that the disease
does not exist, or that it is a different disease,
requiring different treatment. The Bulgarian
representative, whose speeches always charm me,
told us a folk story about camels and other
mammals, the purpose of which-if I am correct
-was to compare the discomfort of investigation
with that of castration. He implied that in
neither case was the operation desirable, because
so far as the investigation was concerned the
four Balkan countries would get along very nicely
if only the Security Council would leave them
alone. I must confess to my Bulgarian colleague
that when I heard that, I felt rather like Candide walking with Dr. Pangloss and listening to
his assurances that everything was for the best
in the best of all possible worlds. Unfortunately
for this philosophy, the majority of the members
of the Security Council do not share its optimism.
I cannot, therefore, avoid an uncomfortable
suspicion that in this case Dr. Pangloss was taksuspicion that in this case Dr. Pangloss was
taking Candide not so much for a walk as for a
ride.

11 existe, certes, une these selon laquelle ce
mal n'existe pas ou est d'une autre nature et
demande un traitement different. Le representant de la Bulgarie, dont je goute toujours beaucoup les interventions, nOUS a conte une histoire
populaire ou il etait question de chameaux et
d'autres mammiferes et dont l'objet etait, si je
ne m'abuse, de compareI' les inconvenients de
l'enquete avec ceux d'une castration. n donnait
a entendre que, dans un cas comme dans l'autre, l'operation n'etait pas a souhaiter, car, en
ce qui Concerne l'enquete, les quatre pays balkaniques s'entendraient parfaitement si le
Conseil de securite voulait bien les laisser en
paix. Je dois avouer a mon collegue bulgare
que, lorsque j'ai entendu cela, j'ai eu quelque
peu l'impression d'etre dans la situation de Candide se promenant avec le docteur Pangloss et
ecoutant ses assurances que tout etait pour le
mieux dans le meilleur des mondes possible.
Malheureusement pour cette these, la majorite
des membres du Conseil de securite ne partage
pas cet optimisme. C'est pourquoi je ne puis
m'empecher de soup~onner qu'en l'occurrence
le docteur Pangloss desirait moins emmener
Candide en promenade que le faire marcher.

I must apologize for detaining the Council
for so long a time, and I will not detain it much
longer. I have already spoken of the need for
common sense, and I only wish to end by
speaking, if I may, of the need for co-operation
and good will. I have previously hesitated to
harangue my eminent colleagues at any length,
because, I think, I am the youngest and certainly
the least experienced of the representatives on
this. Council at this time. However, it is my
privilege and my burden to represent a permanent member, a great Power with-whatever
its enemies may sometimes have said-a long
and not entirely dishonourable association with
the principles of tolerance, free exchange of ideas
and settlement by agreement.

Je dois m'excuser d'avoir retenu l'attention
du Conseil si longtemps et je n'en abuserai plus
que pour quelques instants. J'ai deja dit qu'il
etait necessaire d'avoir du bon sens, et je desire,
pour terminer, dire quelques mots sur la necessite de la collaboration et de la bonne volonte.
J'ai d'abord hesite a parler un peu longuement
devant mes eminents collegues, car je crois etre
le plus jeune et je suis certainement le moins
experimente des representants qui siegent actuellement a ce Consei1. Cependant, j'ai le privilege et la charge de representer un membrc
permanent, une grande Puissance, qui, quoi que
ses ennemis aient pu parfois dire, est familiarisee depuis longtemps, ce qui n'est pas entierement deshonorant, avec les principes de la
tolerance, du libre echange des idees, et du
reglement des differends par voie d'accord.

It is sometimes alleged-at other times implied
On pretend parfois, ou encore on laisse enor assumed-that the United Kingdom is in tendre ou l'on presume, que le Royaume-Uni
some way a protagonist in this dispute, since it est en quelque manic.re partie a ce differc~d,
has a special interest in Greek affairs, which is car il s'interesse partlcuhcrement aux affaIres
interpreted-and I am never quite sure why- grecques, et cela est interprete, je ne sais jamais
as something sinister and disreputable. It is quite exactement pourquoi, comme quelque c~ose de
true that my country is vitally interested in redoutable et d'infamant. Il est parfaltement
Greece. There are, as everyone knows, historical, . exact que mon pays s'interesse a la Grec~ d: la
sentimental and intellectual reasons for this, of fagon la plus vive. Comme chacun le sart, I1 y

1560
which we for our part 'are proud. There is the
. tie, in particular, forged by our partnership in
the common and somewhat lonely struggle of
Greece and the British Commonwealth of Nations in the war against foreign tyranny in 1940
and 1941. However, the really vital interest we
have in. Greece today is that peace should be
maintained there. There is nothing sinister or
disreputable about that. That is precisely why
we are so anxious that the Security Council
should be enabled to carry out unobstructedly
in that area the functions which, without any
shadow of a doubt, the framers of our Charter
intended that it should perform. For that reason,
I wish to support this part of the United States
resolution as amended today by the representative of France.

a pour cela des raisons d'ordre historique, sentimental et intellectuel, et, quant a nous, nous
en sommes fiers. En particulier, il existe le lien
forge au cours de notre association dans la lutte
commune et quelque peu solitaire que la Grece
et le Commonwealth des nations britanniques
ont soutenue contre la tyrannie etrangere, en
1940 et en 1941.Cependant, ce qui nous interesse essentiellement en Grece, aujourd'hui, c'est
le maintien de la paix dans ce pays. 11 n'y a
rien de redoutable ou d'infamant a cela. C'est
precisement la raison pour laqueUe nous desirons tant que le Conseil de securite puisse, dans
cette zone, remplir sans entrave les fonctions
que, sans l'ombre d'un doute, les auteurs de
notre Charte ont voulu qu'il remplisse. Pour
cette raison, je desire appuyer la partie de la
resolution presentee par les Etats-Unis que nous
exarninons dans la forme OU eUe a ete amendee
aujourd'hui par le representant de la France.

The PRESIDENT: I think that all the representatives have had a chance to express their
views 011 the legal questions before us. I think it
is advisable that we should pass on to a discussion of the specific amendments to paragraph 3
(b) in the United States resolution. I want to
remind the members of the Council that the
French amendment (document S/430) consists
of six points. Of these six points, the first five
have been accepted by the representative of the
United States. They are all before you; therefore
I shall not read them.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Je crois
que tous les representants ont eu la possibilite
d'exprimer leur opinion sur les questions d'ordre
juridique dont nous sommes saisis. Je crois qu'il
conviendrait d'aborder la discussion des differents amendernents au paragraphe 3 b) de la
resolution des Etats-Unis. Je desire rappeler aux
membres du Conseil que l'arnendernent de la
France (document S/ 430) comporte six points.
Sur ces six points, les cinq premiers ont ete
acceptes par le representant des Etats-Dnis.
Vous les avez tous sous les yeux; il est inutile
que je les lise.

I want to know if there are any comments
with regard to these first five points. I shall consider separately the sixth point of the French
amendment, which was changed by the French
representative a short while ago. In order to proceed expeditiously, I shall ask if any member
wishes to make any comments on paragraphs
( 1), (2), etc.

Je desire savoir si ces cinq premiers points
appellent des observations. J e prendrai separement le sixierne point de l'amendement fran~ais,
qui vient d'etre modifie par le representant de la
France i1 y a un instant. Afin de proceder rapidement, je demande si quelqu'un veut prendre la
parole au sujet des paragraphes 1), 2), etc.

Colonel HODGSON (Australia): I understood
from the statement made by the representative
of France that he reserved his right to speak on
the amendments before we considered them in
detail. As far as my delegation is concerned, we
should like to hear the views of the French representative on his amendments. Perhaps it might
be more useful to the Council if we proceeded
in that way.

Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
l'anglais): Je crois que, dans sa declaration, le
representant de la France s'est reserve le droit
de prendre la parole sur ces amendements avant
que nous ne les examinions en detail. La delegation australienne serait heureuse d'entendre
l'expose du representant de la France sur les
amendements qu'il presente. Le Conseil aurait
peut-etre interet a proceder de cette fa~on.

Mr. PARODl (France) (translated from
French): I have but little to add to what I said
just now. Since the Australian representative
asks me to do so, I would simply recall that the
object of the amendments which we propose in
regard to the first five paragraphs is to define the
element of conciliation and good offices in the
commission's fu.nctions. The commission's powers
of investigation, and hence the legal difficulties
upon which I endeavoured to throw a little light
just now by setting forth our point of view, do
not make their appearance until paragraph (6).

M. PARonI (France): Je n'ai que peu de
chose a ajouter a ce que j'ai dit tout a l'heure.
Puisque le representant de l'Australie m'y invite, je voudrais simplement rappeler que les
amendements que nous proposons en ce qui
concerne les cinq premiers paragraphes ont pour
objet de preciser tout ce qui, dans les fonctions de la commission, est ceuvre de conciliation et de bons offices. C'est seulement avec le
paragraphe 6) qu'apparaissent les pouvoirs
d'enquete de la commission et, par consequent,
les difficultes juridiqueS'sur lesquelles je me suis
efforce tout a l'heure de projeter un peu de
lumiere en exposant notre maniere de voir.

I repeat, in the first five paragraphs we are . Je le repete, avec les cinq premiers paraentirely concerned with conciliation, and I do . graphes nous sommes entierement sur le terrain

1561

not think that any of the difficulties raised applies to any of these paragraphs, at least in law.

de la condliation et il me semble qu'aucune des
difficultes soulevees ne s'applique a l'un de ces
cinq premiers paragraphes, en droit tout au
moins.

The PRESIDENT: Does any representative wish
to speak on paragraphs (1), (2) or (3)?

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais); D'autres representants desirent-ils prendre la parole
au sujet des paragraphes 1), 2) ou 3)?

Mr. LoPEZ (Colombia); We are not in complete agreement with paragraph (3). We should
like to reserve our opinion until paragraph (6)
is discussed, in order to make some remarks, if
we find them necessary.

M. LOPEz ( Colombie) (traduit de l'anglais): N ous ne sommes pas entierement d'accord sur le paragraphe 3). Naus desirons reserver
notre opinion jusqu'a la discussion du paragraphe 6) afin de pouvoir presenter des observations si nous le jugeons opportun.
.

The PRESIDENT; The representative of Co·
lombia reserves the right to discuss paragraph (3)
later in our debate.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Le
representant de la Colombie se reserve le droit
de discuter le paragraphe 3) Et un moment ulterieur de nos debats.

Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America) :
May I ask if paragraph 3 of the original United
States resolution or paragraph (3) of the French
amendment is the one to which reference is
made?

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais): Puis-je demander s'il s'agit
du paragraphe 3 de la resolution primitive des
Etats-Unis ou du paragraphe 3) de l'amendement fran~ais?

The PRESIDENT:
French amendment.

of the

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l' anglais): Il s'agit
du paragraphe 3) de l'amendement fran~ais.

Does any representative wish to make any
comments on paragraphs (4) or (5)?

Quelqu'un desire-toil prendre la parole au
sujet des paragraphes 4) ou 5) ?

Colonel KERENXHI (Albania) ( translated
from French): I should like to submit a few
comments on both paragraph (3) and paragraph (4).

Le colonel KERENXHI (Albanie); Je desire
presenter quelques observations, a la fois sur
le paragraphe 3) et sur le paragraphe 4) .

These tW9 paragraphs deal with the functions
of the commission in regard to refugees and the
transfer of minorities. These very important
questions were not examined during the discussion at a previous meeting of the amendments
proposed by the United Kingdom representative.
I think, however, that the Security Council could
examine them today.

Ces deux paragraphes ont trait a. la partie
de la mission de la commission concernant les
refugies et le transfert des minorites. Ces questions, tres importantes d'ailleurs, n'ont pas ete
examinees lors de la discussion qui a eu lieu Et
une seance anterieure au sujet des amendements
proposes par le representant du Royaume-Uni.
Mais je pense que le Conseil de securite pourrait les examiner aujourd'hui meme.

The refugee problem cannot be solved unless
the nature of these refugees is taken into account.
It is proposed, however, to solve it with the sole
concern of taking steps to prevent the refugees
engaging in political activity or taking steps to
ensure their repatriation.

Le problcme des refugies ne peut ctre resolu
sans que l'on tienne compte de la nature de ces
refugies. Or, on se propose de le resoudre en
ayant seulement le soud de prendre des mesures pour empecher les refugies de mener aucune
activite politique ou des mesures tendant a assurer leur rapatriement.

If the nature of these refugees is examined,
it will be found that on the one hand there are
democratic refugees-women, children and old
people chased from their homeland by the terrorism exercised against them-whilst on the other
~here are war criminals and collaborators. Light
lS shed upon this immense difference between the
two categories of refugees in the report of the
Commission of Investigation. It is very clear that
measures taken to solvethe refugee question cannot be the same for these two categories. On the
one hand, I repeat, there are innocent victims;
on the other hand war criminals wanted by our
G?vernments in application of the principles
lard down by the Allies.

Si l'on examine la nature de ces refugies, on
constate que, d'un cote, i1 se trouve des r6fugies
democrates, des femmes, des enfants, des vieillards eloignes de leur pays par la terreur qui
y est exercee contre eux, alors que, de l'autre
cote, il y a des erimine1s de guerre et des col1aborateurs. Cette immense difference entre les
deux categories de refugies est mise en lumiere
par le rapport de la Commission d'enquete. n
est bien evident que les mesures prises pour
resoudre la question des refugies ne peuvent
ctre les memes en ce qui concerne ces deux categories. D'un cote, je le repete, i1 y a des victimes
innocentcs, de l'autre, des criminels de guerre
recherchCs par nos Gouvernements en application des principes d6finis par les Allies.

Paragraph ( 3)

1562
The question cannot therefore be solved by
confining ourselves to prohibiting refugees from
engaging in any political activity. Such a procedure would be tantamount to examining the
question from one side only and would not
enable us to reach a solution. Such a method
affords no assistance to the refugee victims in our
countries; it carries with it no condemnation,
and does not even indicate the causes of the
policy of terrorism exercised against these victims. A draft resolution in this sense therefore
does nothing new to ensure the refugees in our
territories a possibility of returning home. Instead of assisting the return of these refugees to
Greece, we shall see a new influx of refugees
into the neighbouring countries, since there will
be no direct relation between the measures taken
and the causes forcing Greek refugees to leave
their country.

On ne peut donc resoudre la question en se
contenant d'interdire aux refugies de mener aucune activite politique. Proceder ainsi equivaudrait a n'examiner la question que d'un seul
cote et ne permettrait pas d'arriver a une solution. Dne telle methode ne comporte aucune
aide pour les victimes refugiees dans nos pays;
elle ne comporte aucune condamnation et eUe
n'indique meme pas les causes de la politique
de terreur exercee contre ces victimes. Vne projet de resolution dans ce sens n'apporte donc
rien de nouveau pour assurer aux refugies qui
se trouvent sur le territoire de nos pays la possibilite de retourner chez eux. Au lieu que l'on
assiste au retour en Grece de ces refugies, on
vena de nouveaux re£ugies grecs affluer dans les
pays voisins, puisqu'il n'y aura aucune relation
directe entre les mesures qui seront prises et les
causes qui obligent les refugies grecs a quitter
leur pays.

There will thus be no return of refugees to
Greece until they are assured of a tolerable life
there, and until measures are taken not only to
suppress terrorism but also to assist them to
restore their economic situation. That is very important. Consider the 23,000 Cham refugees at
present in Albania. They took nothing with them
on leaving their homes. Their possessions have
been stolen, their homes burnt to the ground.
Their landed property has in many cases been
split up and divided among the Greeks. Under
these conditions, how can these refugees return
home? It is easy to say that the problem of the
refugees can be solved simply by repatriating
them. But it is extremely difficult to carry out
this repatriation if measures are not taken to
ensure their livelihood in Greece, from both the
political and the economic point of view.

Ainsi done, i1 n'y aura pas de retour des dfugies en Grece tant qu'on ne leur assurera pas
dans ce pays une vie possible, tant qu'on ne .
prendra pas de mesures, non seulement pour
supprimer la terreur, mais encore pour les aider
a retablir leur situation economique. Ce1a est
tres important. Imaginez les 23.000 rCfugies
tchamouriotes qui se trouvent actueUement en
Albanie: en quittant leur foyer, ils n'ont rien
pris avec eux. Leurs biens ont ete voles, Ieurs
habitations brUlees. Leurs proprietes foncieres
ont cte, dans plusieurs cas, divisees et l'epartics
entre des Grecs. Comment, dans ces conditions,
ces refugies pourraient-ils retourner chez eux?
Il est facile de declarer tout simplement que,
pour resoudre le probleme des refugies, il suffit
de proceder a. leur rapatriement. Mais il est extremement difficile d'effectuer ce rapatriement
si on ne prend des mesures qui assureront leur
vie en Grece, tant du point de vue politique que
du point de vue economique.

The draft resolution on this question makes
no mention of these problems, although they are
essential ones. Instead of aiming at their repatriation, it is proposed to segregate the refugees in
camps under international control. Instead of
seeking an equitable solution to the question,
efforts are being made to prolong the existing
situation by the actual creation of camps under
international control. The proposed methods,
however, are in contradiction with the interests
of the refugees, who wish to return home as soon
as possible and do not want camps under international control. To solve the question in this
manner would be to detract from the prestige of
our Governments by subjecting them to control,
by imposing institutions upon them to which
they would be subordinated. In addition to this,
our Governments are to be asked to set up camps
as far as possible from the frontier, whereas up
to the present they have done their best to place
these refugees in regions where the economic
conditions were most favourable. There are, as
you see, a number of considerations which you
must take into account. Finally, it may be asked
whether our countries are responsible for the
terrorism which forced the refugees to leave

La proposition de resolution conccrnant cette
question ne porte pas mention de ces problemes,
qu'il est pourtant indispensable d'envisager. Au
lieu d'envisager leur rapatriement, on songe a
isoler les refugies dans des camps qui seraient
places sous un contrClle international. Au lieu
de chercher a. resoudre equitablement la question, on cherche a prolonger la situation existante par la creation meme de ces camps qui
seraient places sous controle international. Or,
les methodes proposees vont a l'encontre meme
de l'interet des refugies, qui veulent retourner
chez eux le plus vite possible et ne veulent pas
de camps sous controle international. Resoudre la question de cette fa<.;on serait porter atteinte au prestige de nos Gouvernements en les
soumettant a un contrOle, en leur imposant des
institutions placees au-dessus d'eux. Ajoutons a
cela que nos Gouvernements devraient proccder
a la creation de camps situcs le plus loin possible de la frontiere, alors que jusqu'a present
ils avaient fait ce qu'ils pouvaient pour placer
ces refugies dans des regions all les possibilites
economiques etaient les plus favorables. 11 y a
la, vous le voyez, une quantite de preoccupations dont vous devez tenir compte. Enfin, on

1563
their own country, 'and whether it is therefore
right that we should bear the resultant new
burdens, detractions from our prestige and limi.
tations on our freedom.

peut se demander si nos pays sont responsables
de la terreur qui a oblige les refugies a quitter
leur propre pays, et si nous devons supporter
de ce fait de nouvelles preoccupations, des at·
teintes a notre prestige et l'assujetissement a un
controle.

No. Up to the present we have fulfilled our
Non. Nous avons, jusqu'a maintenant, rempli
humanitarian duty towards these refugees, and nos devoirs humanitaires envers ces refugies et
we cannot admit the justice of the measures you nous ne pouvons admettre comme justes les mepropose to recommend to us. Greek Government sures que vous vous proposez de 00 us recomcircles are alone responsible, and it would be mander. Les milieux gouvernementaux grecs
unjust if Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia were sont les seuls responsables et i1 serait injuste que
treated on the same footing as Greece by the l'Albanie, la Bulgarie, la Yougoslavie soient tourecommendations.
chees par les reconunandations dans la meme
mesure que la Grece.
It is said that the presence of refugees on
either side constitutes a disturbing factor for the
future. I say that the presence of Cham refugees
in Albania is an obstacle to the establishment of
good relations between our countries and Greece,
and will continue to be so until serious measures
are taken to ensure their return to their homes,
to guarantee them normal living conditions and
to compensate them for the losses they have
suffered.

On dit que la presence des refugies, de part
et d'autre, constitue un facteur de troubles pour
l'avenir. le declare que la presence des refugies
tchamouriotes en Albanie constitue un obstacle
a l'etablissement de bonnes relations entre nos
pays et la Grece, et continuerad'cn constituer
un tant que l'on ne prendra pas des mesures
serieuses pour assurer leur retour dans leurs
foyers, pour leur garantir des conditions de vie
normales et pour les dedommager des pcrtes
qu'ils ont subies.

I also say that the presenc,e of Albanian war
criminal refugees in Greece constitutes a disturbing factor. The Commission of Investigation
found that these war criminals were engaging in
political activity directed against our country.
The recommendations which you propose mak·
ing to Greece, however, are not in conformity
either with the Allied principles of war or with
the attitude which should be adopted towards
war criminals. According to these principles,
these criminals should simply be handed over to
us in order that they may pay for the acts which
they committed against our people and the
Allies.

.le dis egalement que l'existence des refugies
criminels de guerre albanais en Grece constitue
un facteur de troubles. La Commission 'd'enq uete a constate que ces criminels de guerre
menent une activite politique dirigee contre notre pays. Mais les recommandations que vous
vous proposez de faire a la Grece ne sont aucunement en rapport avec les principes de guerre
des Allies, ni avec 1'attitude qu'on doit adopter
envers les criminels de guerre. SeIon ces prin.
cipes, on devrait tout simplement nous remettre
ces crimine1s afin qu'ils paient pour les actes
q u'ils ont perpetres contre notre peuple et contre
les Allies.

This should be borne well in mind in tackling
the refugee question.

Voila ce que 1'011 doit avoir bien en vue
lorsque l'on aborde la question des refugies.

I repeat once more that if, in solving thiB
problem, the proposal contained in the United
States resolution were followed, there would be
a risk of confusing matters and rendering a solution still more difficult.

Je rcpete encore une fois que si, pour resoudre ce probleme, on suivait la proposition contenue dans la resolution des Etats-Unis, on risquerait d'embrouil1er les choses et de rendre leur
solution encore plus difficile.

The same errors are repeated in regard to the
question of the transfer of minorities.

On retrouve les memes erreurs lorsqu'il s'agit
de la question du transfert des minorites.

I can state with assurance that there was not
a single occasion during the work of the Commission of Investigation when it was faced with
the necessity of envisaging a transfer of minorities. It is difficult to understand how this transfer
came to be inserted in the Commission's proposals (document S/360, Volume I, page 251)
and in those now before you. What has such a
recommendation to do with the question which
you are endeavouring to solve?

le declare fermcment que) durant les travaux de la Commission d'enqu€te, on ne s'est
pas une seule fois trouve devant la necessite
d'envisager un transfert de minorites. 11 est difficile de comprendre comment on en est arrive
a ce transfert dans les propositions· de la Commission (document S/360, volume 1, page 261 )
et dans celles qui vons sont actuellement soumises. Qu'est-ce qu'une telle recommandation
vient faire dans la question que vous vous cfforcezde resoudre?

The Greek Government authorities have
wiped out our minority in Greece; they have
committed crimes which are condemned by
human law and by the justice of all countries.

Les autorites gouvernementales grecques ont
aneanti notre minorite en Grece; elles ont commis des crimes qui sont condamnes par le droit
humain et par la justice de taus les pays. Mais

1564
But this does not mean that, in order to find a
solution of the question, recourse must be had to
the transfer of minorities. On the contrary, it
would be entirely just and essential to assist the
return to Greece of thousands of Cham and
Macedonian refugees by assuring them a normal
life from both the political and the economic
point of view.

cela ne veut pas dire du tout que, pour trouver
une solution a la question, on doive recourir
au transfert des minorites. Au contraire, il serait
absolument juste et indispensable de contribuer
au retour en Grece de milliers de refugies tchamouriotes et macedoniens en leur assurant une
vie normale tant du point de vue politique que
du point de vue economique.

Mr. VILFAN (Yugoslavia) (translated from
French): I should merely like to associate myself
with the Albanian representative's statement.

M. VILFAN (Yougoslavie): Je voudrais simplement m'associer a la declaration du representant de l'Albanie.

I would recall that, in our second statement,
we dealt at length with the question: We emphasized that it would be unjust to place the
democratic elements that sought refuge in the
three Balkan countries on the same footing as
the traitors and "quislings" who fled to escape
from their Governments. We further emphasized
that, in our opinion, a recommendation to transfer minorities would be a sanction of the practices of extermination hitherto pursued by the
Greek Government against the Macedonian and
Cham minorities.

Je rappelIe que, dans notre deuxieme expose,
nous avons longuement traite de la question'.
Nous avons insiste sur le fait qu'il serait injuste
de mettre sur le meme pied les elements democrates qui ont cherche refuge dans les trois pays
balkaniques et les traitres et "quislings" qui se
sont enfuis pour se soustraire a leurs Gouvernements. Nous avons souligne ensuite que, a notre
avis, une recommandation visant au transfert
des minorites serait une consecration des pratiques d'extermination appliquees jusqu'ici par
la Gouvernement grec contre les minorites macedoniennes et tchamouriotes.

M. LOPEz (Colombie) (traduit de ['anMr. LOPEZ (Colombia): The Colombian
delegation entertains very serious doubts as re- glais): La delegation de la Colombie doute
gards the advisability of giving the commission beaucoup qu'il sdit opportun de donner a la
some of the powers mentioned in paragraph (3), commission certains pouvoirs mentionnes au
which seems to us to be a kind of police power. paragraphe 3) qui nous semblent avoir le caractere de pouvoirs de police.
According to our view, we believe it would be
more advisable for the Security Council to make
one paragraph of paragraphs (3) and (4), and
we would suggest for paragraph (4): "To assist
the above-mentioned Governments in the negotiation and conclusion of arrangements for the
transfer of refugees and minorities,"

A notre avis, il serait preferable que le Conseil
de securite fondit en un seulles paragraphes 3)
et 4), et nous proposons pour le paragraphe 4)
la redaction suivante: "Aider les Gouvernements susmentionnes a negocier et a conclure
des accords pour le transfert de refugies et de
minorites."

As it stands now, paragraph (4) provides that
the commission should assist the Governments
in the negotiation and conclusion of arrangements for the transfer of minorities. Instead of
making a similar provision for refugees, paragraph (3) says: "To assist in the implementation of the recommendations made to the four
Governments under this resolution with respect
to refugees; to receive reports from the four
Governments with respect to persons who may
cross or have crossed from the territory of any
one of such countries to any of the others; to
maintain a register for its confidential use of all
such persons and to assist in the repatriation of
those who wish to return to their homes .. ,"

Dans sa redaction actuelle, le paragraphe 4)
prevoit que la commission aidera les Gouvernements it negocier et a conclure des accords pour
le transfert des minorites. Au lieu de prevoir des
dispositions analogues pour les refugies, le paragraphe 3) est ainsi con«,;u: "Aider a la mise en
ceuvre des recommandations faites dans la presente resolution aux quatre Gouvernements interesses en ce qui concerne les refugies; recevoir
de ccs Gouvernements des informations au sujet
des personnes qui passent ou sont passees du territoire de l'un de ccs pays dans celui d'un autre;
tenir un registre confidentiel de ces personnes et
aider au rapatriement de celIes d'entre elles qui
le desirent ..."

Si la commission doit etre pourvue de tout le
We submit that, if the commission is to be
provided with all the staff necessary to discharge personnel necessaire pour lui permettre de s'acits duties, including persons able to act as border quitter de sa tache, y compris les personnes pouobservers and to report on the observance of vant faire fonction d'observateurs aux frontieres
the frontier conventions recommended under et de nous rendre compte de la fa~on dont les
this resolution, on the state of the frontier conventions de frontiere recommandees par cette
area and cognate matters, it would seem to us 'resolution sont respectees, de la situation qui
that it would be better to omit the police regne le long de la frontiere, et des questions
powers that are given to the commission under connexes, il nous semble qu'il serait preferable
1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 59.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite, Deuxieme Annec, No 59.

1565
paragraph (3). Then, as we would have it, the
functions of the commission would be:

de supprimer les pouvoirs de police conferes a
la commission par le paragraphe 3). Dans ce
cas, les fanctions de la commission prevues par
ce paragraphe seraient les suivantes:

First, to assist in the negotiation and conclusion of the frontier conventions recommended;

En premier lieu, aider les Gouvernements a
negocier et a condure les conventions de fronticre recommandees;

Secondly, to study and make recommendations
En second lieu, etudier la possibilite d'accords
to the Governments concerned with respect to bilateraux supplementaires susceptibles cl'aider
additional bilateral agreements for the pacific au reglement pacifique des differends et faire
settlement of disputes;
des recommandations dans ce sens aux Gouvernements interesses;
En troisieme lieu, preter ses bons offices pour
Thirdly, to use its good offices for the pacific
settlement of controversies arising from frontier le reglement pacifique des litiges resultant de
violations, controversies connected with the ap- violations de fronticre, des litiges se rapportant
plication of the frontier conventions, and com- a l'application des conventions de fronticre et
plaints regarding the conditions on the borders; des plaintes concernant la situation a la frontiere;
and
En quatrieme lieu, aider les Gouvernements a
Fourthly, to assist the Governments in the
negotiation and conclusion of arrangements for negocier et a condure des accords pour le trans·
fert des refugies et des minorites.
the transfer of refugees and minorities.
Je crois que ce texte serait preferable et plus
I think that wording would be better and
more consistent; it would be more in keeping logique; d'autre part, la commission servirait
with the prestige and the standing of the com- mieux son prestige et agirait de fa~on plus
mission as a subsidiary organ of the Security conforme a son role d'organe subsidiaire du
Council not to undertake such police powers as Conseil de securite en n'utilisant pas les pouare provided for in paragraph (3) of the amend· voirs de police prevus au paragraphe 3) des
amendements que nous diseutons.
ments which we are discussing.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'ang1ais): Le reThe PRESIDENT: The representative of Colombia has made a concrete suggestion. If I presentant de la Colombie a fait une proposiunderstand it, it would be equivalent to deleting tion concrete. Si je comprends bien, dIe tenthe last portion of paragraph (3), after the first drait a la suppression de la derniere partie du
paragraphe 3) a partir du premier point-virgule.
semicolon.
Mr. LOPEz (Colombia): To make my point . M. L6PEZ (Colombie) (traduit de 1'anclearer, it would be equivalent to striking out glais): Pour m'exprimer plus clairement, ma
paragraph (3) and then having paragraph (4) proposition tend a supprimer le paragraphe 3)
read: "To assist the Governments concerned in et a rediger le paragraphe 4) comme suit:
the negotiation and conclusion of arrangements "Aider les Gouvernements interesses a negocier
for the transfer of refugees and minorities." Thus et a condure des accords pour le transfert de
we could have the provisions necessary for the refugies et de minorites." Nous pourrions ainsi
transfer of both refugees and minorities without prevoir les dispositions necessaires pour le tran~­
fert des refugies et des minorites, sans les faire
bringing them into the resolution.
figurer dans la resolution.
The PRESIDENT: May I ask the representative
of the United States what his reaction is to this
question?

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'ang1ais): Puis-je
demander au representant des Etats-Unis queUe
est son opinion a ce sujet?

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traMr. JOHNSON (United States of America) : I
regret to say that my delegation cannot accept duit de l' anglais): J e regrette de devoir dire
this suggestion made by the representative of que ma delegation ne peut pas accepter la proColombia. We have accepted the text as it stands position faite par le representant de la Colombie.
in the French amendment and we feel that we Nous avons accepte le texte qui figure dans
l'amendement fran~ais, et nous estimons devoir
must stand by that.
nous y tenir.
In our opinion, some system for the control
of refugees is essential to the effective working
of the commission and to the objectives of
restoring and maintaining peace in that region.
Minorities are only a related question. The problem is quite different. That obviously must be a
voluntary arrangement, by agreement among the
countries and also agreement with the minorities
concerned. It is a recommendation; nothing
more than that. But the control of the refugee

A notre avis, un systeme de controle des reIugies est indispensable pour que le travail de la
commission soit efficace et pour que la paix soit
retablie et maintenue dans ceUe region. La
question des minorites n'est qu'une question
connexe. Le probleme est tout a fait different.
Il est evident que la solution doit en etre cherchee dans un accord librement conclu entre les
divers pays avec le consentement des minorites
interessees. 11 ne s'agit que d'une recommanda-

l::>bb

problem is essential to the effective functioning
of this commission if it is to carry out its purpose.

tion et de rien d'autre. Toutefois, si la commis·
sion doit s'acquitter de sa tache, eUe ne peut pas
fonctionner efficacement sans un contr6le de la
question des refugies.

The United States delegation would much
prefer to see the text remain as it is worded in
the French amendment.

La delegation des Etats-Unis prefererait de
beaucoup que le texte reste celui qui figure dans
l'amendement fran~ais.

Mr. DENDRAMIS (Greece) (translated from
French): The allegations of the Albanian and
Yugoslav representatives were the subject of long
discussion before the Commission of Investigation. Replies were given by the Greek liaison
representative. I see no purpose in reopening the
discussion, and I consider it preferable not to
prolong this debate.

M. DENDRAMIS (Grece): Les allegations des
representants de l'Albanie et de la Yougoslavie
ont fait l'objet de longues discussions devant la
Commission d'enquete. Les reponses ont ete
donnees par l'agent de liaison grec. Je crois inutile de rouvrir la discussion et je juge preferable
de ne pas prolonger ce debat.

Mr. LOPEZ (Colombia) : I should like to point
out that in paragraph 4 of the amendment presented by the United Kingdom delegation" there
is a recommendation to the following effect:

M. LOPEz (Colombie) (traduit de l'anglais): Je voudrais faire observer que le para·
graphe 4 de l'amendement presente par la dele·
gation du Royaume-Uni' recommande ce qui
suit:

"As the presence of refugees in any of the
four countries is a disturbing factor, the Security
Council recommends to the Governments of
Albania, Bulgaria, Greece and Yugoslavia that
they:

"Etant donne que la presence de refugies dans
l'un quelconque de ces quatre pays constitue un
facteur de trouble, le Conseil de sccurite recom·
mande aux Gouvernements de l'Albanie, de la
Bulgarie, de la Grece et de la Yougoslavie :

"1. Remove such refugees as far from the

"1. D' eloigner les refugies le pIus possible de
la frontiere de leur pays d'origine;

country from which they came as is practically
possible;
"2. Segregate them in camps or otherwise;

"2. De les isoler dans des camps ou de toute
.
autre maniere;

"3. Take effective measures to prevent their
"3. De prendre des mesures efficaces pour
participation in any political or military activity.. les empecher de participer a toute activite polio
tique ou militaire.
"Le Conseil de securite recommande de pla"The Security Council recommends that such.
camps be placed under the supervision of some cer ces camps sous le controle d'un organisme
international body authorized by the United international charge par les Nations Unies de
Nations to undertake the task."
remplir cette mission."
That is why it seems to us repetitious to say
in this paragraph:

11 nous semble donc superflu de preciser dans
le paragraphe que nous examinons:

•"To assist in the implementation of the recommendations made to the four Governments
under this resolution with respect to refugees; to
receive reports from the four Governments with
respect to persons who may cross or have crossed
from the territory of anyone of such countries
to any of the others; to maintain a register for
its confidential use ..."

"Aider a la mise en reuvre des recommandations faites dans la presente resolution aux
quatre Gouvernements interesses en ce qui
concerne les refugies; recevoir de ces Gouvernements des informations au subjet des personnes
qui passent ou sont passees du territoire de l'uD
de ces pays dans celui d'un autre; tenir un registre confidentiel de ces personnes ..."

The resolution here very specifically provides
for the control of refugees. That is why we
thought that it would not detract from the
effectiveness and strength of the resolution if we
left out the question of the confidential register.
However, I do not want to press my point. I
simply want to say that our suggestion is in keeping with the spirit of our other recommendations.

La resolution prevoit id tres clairement le
contrOle des re£ugies. C'est pourquoi nons pen·
sons que le fait d'omettre la question du registre confidentiel n'enleverait rien a l'efficacite
et a la force de la resolution. Cependant, je ne
desire pas insister. Je veux simplement dire que
notre proposition est conforme a l'esprit de nos
autres recommandations.

Mr. JOI-INSON (United States of America): I
very much regret to find myself in disagreement
with the representative of Colombia, whose ideas
are so constructive and who has been so very

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais): Je regrette beaucoup de me
trouver en desaccord avec le representant de la
Colombie dont les idees sont si constructives et

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 61.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de secI/o
rite, Deuxieme Ann6e, No. 61.

1567
helpful throughout this long discussion. I hope,
however, that the Council will decide to retain
in this resolution the provisions regarding refugees.
We are faced with a quite exceptional situation in so far as political conditions in that part
of the world are concerned. The paragraph (4)
to which the representative of Colombia first
referred consists of a set of recommendations. We
hope that the countries concerned, if this resolu. tion passes, will accept the recommendations of
the Council in the spirit in which they are made.
The other operative paragraph, which the representative of Colombia would now like to suppress, supplements the first paragraph (4), if
those countries accept the recommendationsand we are assuming that they will.

The paragraph is really designed to protect
the rights of the refugees as much as to help
stabilize the situation. The keeping of. a confidential register will be a very effective check on
persons who may attempt to recross the frontier
for illegal purposes. Some sort of control under
the United Nations for a time-and, we hope,
a short time-is essential. There are various types
of refugees. This system, we hope, will protect
the innocent. However, those who are not innocent are among the chief troublemakers, and
they should be under some measure of control
by the international body. I do not think that
any fundamental human right is being impaired
by this resolution. The refugees also are protected, in that it is stipulated that they shall not
be returned to the country of their origin without suitable arrangements. The country returning them could exact guarantees for personal
safety. Every possible safeguard for the rights of
the individual is preserved in this text.

qui nous a apporte une aide si considerable au
cours de nos longs debats. J'espere cependant
que le Conseil decidera de maintenir dans la
resolution les dispositions concernant les reIugies.
Nous nous trouvons devant une situation tout

a fait exceptionnelle du point de vue des condi-

tions politiques regnant dans cette partie du
monde. Le paragraphe 4) auquel le representant de la Colombie a tout d'abord fait allusion
comporte une serie de recommandations. Nous
esperons que, si cette resolution est adoptee, les
pays'interesses accepteront les recommandations
du Conseil et comprendront l'esprit dans lequel
elles auront ete faites. Un autre paragraphe de
la resolution proprement dite, paragraphe que
le representant de la Colombie voudrait supprimer, completera le paragraphe 4) primitif si
ces pays acceptent les recommandations, et nous
! Jpposons qu'ils le feront.
En rcalite; ce paragraphe a autant pour objet
de proteger les droits des refugies que d'aider a
stabiliser la situation. La tenue d'un registre
confidentiel fournira un controle tres efficace
des personnes qui pourront essayer de retraverser la frontiere a des fins illegales. n est indispensable d'instituer une certaine forme de
controle sous les auspices des Nations Unies,
pour une periode limitce, que nous spuhaitons
de courte duree. 11 existe differents genres de
refugies. Nous esperons que ce systeme protegera
les innocents. Cependant, ceux qui ne sont pas
innocents figurent parmi les principaux fauteurs
de troubles, et il faut les soumettre a certaines
mesures de controle de la part de l'organisme
international. Je ne pense pas que cette resolution porte atteinte a aucun des droits fondamentaux de l'homme. Les refugies sont egalement
proteges par la disposition prcvoyant q u'ils ne
seront pas renvoyes dans leur pays d'origine sans
arrangements appropries. Le pays qui les renvoie
peut exiger des garanties pour leur securite personnelle. Le texte prevoit toute la protection possible des droits des individus.

J'admets qu'un systeme de controle, par un
I admit that a system of control, by an international body, of persons passing across frontiers organisme international, des personnes traveris certainly not a normal condition. However, , sant les frontieres ne represente certainement pas
we are not dealing with a normal condition. une situation normale. Cependant, dans le cas
The Council hopes to prevent any outbreak present, nous ne nous trouvons pas devant une
against international peace in this region. I situation normale. Le Conseil espere prevenir
therefore hope that the representative of Co- dans cette region tout acte mena9ant la paix
lombia will consent not to press his suggestion. internationale. C'est pourquoi j'espere que le
I regret that my delegation cannot agree with representant de la Colombie consentira a ne pas
his view.
insister sur sa proposition. Je regrette que la
delegation des Etats-U nis ne puisse pas accepter
son point de vue.
The PRESIDENT: The representative of the
United States has accepted points (1), (2),
(3), (4) and (5) of amendment 3 submitted by
the French delegation. As I understand it, the
representative of Colombia does not intend to
make any formal proposal. I therefore declare
points (1), (2), (3), (4) and (5) of amendment 3 to be part of the United States resolution,

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de IJanglais): Le representant des Etats-Unis a accepte les points
1), 2·), 3), 4) et 5) de l'amendement No 3
soumis par la delegation fran~aise. Si je comprends bien, le representant de la C010mbie ne
desire pas presenter de proposition forme1le. Je
declare par consequent que les points 1), 2), 3),
4) et 5) de l' amendement No 3 sont incorpores

1568
and I instruct the Secretariat to prepare the text
accordingly.

a la resolution presentee par la delegation des
Etats-Unis et je prescris au Secretariat de preparer un texte en consequence.

We shall now pass on to point (6) of amendment 3 submitted by the French delegation. The
representative of France has submitted a new
text, which has been distributed to the members
of the Council. To begin the discussion of this
item, I shall ask the representative of the United
States for his reaction.
Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America).:
The text submitted by the French delegation,
which is now before us, is satisfactory to my
delegation.

Nous passons maintenant au point 6) de
l'amendement fran~ais No 3. Le representant de
la France a soumis un nauveau texte qui a ete
distribue aux membres du Conseil. Nous abordons la discussion de ce point et je demanderai
l'opinion du representant des Etats-Unis.

The PRESIDENT: As there are no other comments on point (6) of amendment 3, I shall
instruct the Secretariat to include that paragraph
in the final text of the United States resolution.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l' anglais): Puisqu'il n'y a pas d'autres observations au sujet du
point 6) de l'amendement No 3, je prescris au
Secretariat d'incorporer ce paragraphe au texte
definitif de la resolution des Etats-Unis.

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l' anglais): La delegation des Etats-U nis
peut accepter le texte soumis par la delegation
fran<;aise dont nous sommes maintenant saisis.

Mr. LOPEZ (Colombia): In the first place,
M. LOPEZ (Colombie ) (traduit de lJanI should like to say that the powers of the Secu- glais): J e voudrais dire en premier lieu que les
rity Council to investigate are very clear under pouvoirs d'enquete du Conseil de securite sont
Article 34. Chapter VI as a whole has been dis- nettement etabIis a I'Article 34. Au cours de nos
cussed during the course of our meetings on this seances consacrees a cette question, la discussion
question, and I should like to add that few a porte sur l'ensemble du Chapitre VI, et je
provisions of the Charter are as clear to us as the puis ajouter que peu de dispositions de la Charte
provisions contained in Chapter VI. There is nous semblent aussi claires que ceIles du Chapino doubt of the legality, under Chapter VI, of tre VI. Il n'est pas douteux que le Chapitre VI
the action we wish to take. However, in our autorise les mesures que nous voulons prendre.
approach to this problem, we have been more in Cependant, lorsque nous avons examine ce profavour of enumerating the commission's func- bleme, nous avons prefere enumerer les fonctions of conciliation; only after that do we come tions de conciliation de la commission, et ce
to the powers of investigation, which are con- n'est qu'apres l'avoir fait que nous avons envitained in paragraph IX of the Colombian sug- sage Ies pouvoirs d'enquete qui sont mentionnes
gestions, as given in the Press Division Release au paragraphe IX des propositions faites par la
PM/443. That paragraph reads as follows:
Colombie, reproduites dans le communique de
presse PM/443. Le texte de ce paragraphe est
le suivant:
"The commission shall have the staff neces"La commission sera pourvue du personnel
sary to discharge its duties, including persons necessaire pour lui permettre de s'acquiUer de
able to act as border observers and to report on sa tache, y compris les personnes pouvant faire
the observance of the frontier conventions re- fonction d'observateurs aux frontieres et de rencommended under this resolution, the state of the dre compte de la fa<;on dont les conventions de
frontier area and cognate matters. The commis- frontiere recommandees par ceUe resolution
sion shall perform its tasks on either side of the sont respectees, de la situation qui regne le long
Greek borders with the co-operation of the offi- de la frontiere, et des questions connexes. La
cials and nationals of the four Governments con- commission accomplira ses fanctions de part et
cerned. In case the commission finds it necessary d'autre des frontieres grecques, en cooperation
to make investigations in order to carry out the avec Ies fonctionnaires et les ressortissants des
functions herein enumerated, it shall have the quatre Gouvernements interesses. Au cas ou la
same authority as the Commission established commission estimerait necessaire de proceder a
under resolution of the Security Council' dated une enquete afin d'accomplir les fonctions enu19 December 1946."
merees ci-dessus, eIle aura les memes pouvoirs
que la Commission creee par la resolution du
ConseiI de securite' en date du 19 decembre
1946."
It seems to us that in this way it is stated more
II nous semble que ceci constitue un expose
clearly what the commission will or will not do plus clair de ce que la commission fera ou ne
first. First, it will approach the problem as a fera pas en premier lieu. ElIe considerera
commission of conciliation, having, however, all d'abord le probleme en tant que commission de
t~e ~ecessary powers to ca;ry out any investiga- conciliation, disposant cependant de tous les
tIOn If the need should arIse-that is, the same pouvoirs necessaires pour mener toute enquete
powers that were granted to the Commission dont le besoin se ferait sentir, c'est-a-dire des
'See Official Records of the Security Council, First
Year, Second Series, No. 28.

'Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite, Premiere Annee, Deuxieme S6rie, No 28.

1569
established by the resolution of 19 December memes pouvoirs que ceux qui ant ete donnes a
1946. In this way, perhaps, the proposal would la Commission creee par la resolution (iu 19 debe more acceptable or might obtain more co- cembre 1946. De eette fa~on, la proposition
operation from the four Governments concerned. serait peut-etre plus facilement acceptee ou obThe French amendment which we are now dis- tiendrait peut-etre une plus grande cooperation
cussing provides that the commission: "In order de la part des quatre Gouvernements interesses.
to keep the Security Council informed, shall,
L'amendement frangais que nous discutons
maintenant prevoit que: "En vue de tenir informe le Conseil de securite, la commission

"( a) Whenever it may deem it useful, investigate any alleged frontier violations;

"a) Enquetera, dans tous les cas ou. elle le
jugera utile, sur toute violation de frontiere qui
lui aura ete signalee;

" ( b) Investigate complaints by any of the
"b) Enquetera sur les faits relatifs a la situaGovernments concerned with respect to the con- tion sur la frontiere et ayant fait l'objet d'une
ditions on the border whenever, in its opinion, plainte de la part de l'un des Gouvernements
these conditions are likely to lead to a deteriora- interesses, chaque fois qu'elle jugera ces faits
tion of the situation. Its authority with respect susceptibles d'amener une aggravation de la
to investigation shall be identical to that vested situation. La commission sera alors investie de
in the Commission established under the resolu- pouvoirs identiques a ceux de la Commission
tion of the Security Council of 19 December d'enq uete instituee par la resolution du Conseil
1946."
de securitc en date du 19 decembre 1946."
It seems to us that again we are repeating here
something for which we have already made provision. Paragraph (6), sub-paragraph (b)
quoted above states: "Investigate complaints by
any of the Governments concerned with respect
to conditions on the border whenever, in its
opinion, these conditions are likely to lead to a
deterioration of the situation." Paragraph (5)
already states: "To use its good offices for the
settlement, by the means mentioned in Article
33 of the Charter, of: ... (c) Complaints regarding conditions on the border which may be
brought to the attention of the commission by
one Government against another". This, it
seems to us, is substantially the same. Therefore,
we would respectfully suggest that the powers of
investigation should be granted in case the need
for them should arise while the commission is
performing its task. The paragraph we have suggested reads very clearly: "In case the commission finds it necessary to make investigations in
order to carry out the functions herein enumerated ..." This is really broader in a certain sense
than the French amendment; but it provides
that the powers are to be granted and exercised
if and when they are found necessary in carrying
out the functions enumerated in the resolution,
and it does not set up the commission as a commission of investigation. The commission would
have the power to investigate but it would not
be constituted as a commission of conciliation
and investigation.

11 nous semble qu'il y a id repetition de ce
qui a deja ete prevu. L'alinca b) du paragraphe 6) mentionne ci·dessus specifie que la
Commission: "Enquetera sur les faits relatifs
a la situation sur la frontiere et ayant fait I'objet
d'une plainte de la part de 1'un des Gouvernements interesses, chaque fois qu'elle jugera ces
faits susceptibles d'amcner une aggravation de
la situation." Or, le paragraphe 5) stipule deja:
"Preter ses bons offices pour le reglement, par les
moycns mentionnes a l' Article 33 de la Charte:
... c) des plaintes qui pourraient etre portees
par un Gouvernement contre un autre, dont la
commission serait saisie concernant la situation
sur la frontiere." A notre avis, cela revient essentiellement au meme. C'est pourquoi nous
proposons que la commission regoive des pouvoirs d'enquete qu'elle utiliserait si la necessite
s'en faisait sentir pendant qu'elle accomplira sa
tache. Le paragraphe que nous avons propose
stipule tres clairement: "Au cas ou la Commission estimerait necessaire de proceder a une
enquete afin d'accomplir les fonctions enumerees ci-dessus . . ." En realite, ce texte est, en
un certain sens, plus general que ce1ui de
l'amendement frangais, mais il prevoit que les
pouvoirs sont accordes et exerces lorsque ce1a
est juge necessaire pour rempEr les fonctions
enumerees dans la resolution et il n'institlle pas
la commission comme commission d'enquete. La
commission aura le pouvoir cl' enqucte mais ne
sera pas constituee en commission de conciliation et d'enquete.

Mr. PAROD! (France) (translated from
French): I should like to submit a remark on
what the Colombian representative said just
now. I have no author's vanity in regard to the
amendment which we proposed, and, if modifications appear desirable to the Council, I for
my part will not oppose them. I should like,
however, to point out-and this was the sense
of the legal comments which I submitted at the
beginning of this meeting-that the specific object of the last text we submitted was to distinguish in the Commission's task between its duties

M. PARODI (France): J e voudrais presenter
une observation sur ce que vient de dire le representant de la Colombie. Je n'ai aucun amourpropre d'auteur en ce qui concerne l'amendement que nous avons propose et si des modifications paraissent desirables au Conseil, pour ma
part je ne m'y opposerai pas. Je desire faire
observer cependant, et c'etait le sens des observations de droit que j'ai presentees au debut de
cette seance, que le dernier texte que nous avons
soumis avait precisement pour objet de distinguer entre ce qui, dans la mission de la com-

1570
under Article 34 and its purely conciliatory functions. I still think that it would be difficult to say
that the powers of investigation as provided by
our resolution of December' were intended to
constitute the commission's entire task, including
its task of conciliation. The two aspects of this
task must be distinguished.

Mr. VILFAN (Yugoslavia) (translated from
French): I do not wish to enter upon a legal
discussion, for the characteristic of such discussions is that usually, after they have taken place,
everyone maintains his position.
To my great regret, I am obliged to say that
the French representative's arguments have not
convinced me.
The point I should like to stress is that for us
the question is not a purely legal or theoretical
one, and that the legal objections we have submitted should be considered together with our
observations on the substance of the question.
Our views regarding the commission are not
determined only by legal considerations but also
by our past experience. I think I said, in my preliminary statement, that if the objections we
raised were not discussed, we should end by
asking ourselves what use it was having recourse
to such a commission.

There are questions we raised in the Commission and have raised again before you, to which
we have received no answer. Our feeling can be
put very simply: if the objections we submit are
not going to be discussed, even when supported
by valid arguments, we really see no possibility
of collaborating with such a commission.

I venture to recall yet another argument
which is not mine but which I merely saw in the
newspapers. Recently, our Government did not
agree that the Subsidiary Group should enter
Yugoslavia and undertake investigations there.
As an argument in support of its attitude, it said:
We have quoted a certain number of frontier
incidents provoked by Greece and the Commission has not examined a single one. Only three
or four weeks ago, Yugoslavia informed the
Security Council of a very serious incident; it
has not been examined by the Subsidiary Group
which, on the other hand, never fails to examine
incidents reported by the Greek Government.

Our arguments and legal objections are not
submitted, and should not be examined, separately. For us this is not a theoretical or academic question; what we are doing is to support
by legal arguments a thesis based on facts and
on our experience of the past.
1 See Official Records of the Security
Council, First
Year, Second Series, No. 28.

mission, est relatif a l'Article 34 et ce qui est
fonction de pure conciliation. Je continue a
penser qu'il serait difficile de dire que les pouvoirs d'enqucte tels qu'ils avaient ete prevus
par notre resolution du mois de decembre pourraient s'appliquer a l'ensemble de la tache de
la commission, y compris sa tache de conciliation. 11 est necessaire de distinguer entre les
deux aspects de cette tache. .
M. VILFAN (Yougoslavie): Je ne voudrais
pas entrer dans une discussion juridique, car le
propre des discussions de cette nature est que
d'ordinaire, apres qu'elles ont eu lieu, chacun
reste sur sa position.
A man grand regret, je suis oblige de dire
que les arguments du representant de la France
ne m'ont pas convaincu.
Le point sur lequel je voudrais insister, c'est
qu'il ne s'agit pas pour nous d'une question
purement juridique ou tbeorique et que les objections juridiques que nous avons presentees
doivent ctre coi1siderees conjointement avec nos
observations de fond. Notre point de vue relativement a la commission n'est pas determine
seulement par des considerations juridiques,
mais aussi par notre experience du passe. Je
crois avoir dit, au cours de mon expose preliminaire, que, si l'on ne discutait pas les objections
presentees par nous, nous finirions par nous
poser cette question: a quoi bon le recours a
une telle commission?
11 y a des questions que nous avions posees
devant la Commission et que nous avans posees
a nouveau devant vous, et sur lesquelles nous
n'avons pas rec;u de reponse. Notre sentiment se
traduit d'une fac;on trcs simple: si l'on ne veut
pas discuter les objections que nous presentons,
meme lorsqu'elles sont etayees par des arguments valables, nous ne voyons vraiment pas la
possibilite de collaborer avec une telle commission.
Je me permettrai de rappeler encore un argument qui n'est pas de moi, mais que j'ai vu
simplement dans les journaux. Recemment, notre
Gouvernement n'a pas ete d'accord pour que
le groupe subsidiaire penetre en Yougoslavie et
y opere des recherches. Comme argument a l'appui de son attitude, il a dit: N ous avons cite
un certain nombre d'incidents de frontiere provoques par la Grece et la Commission n'en a
pas examine un seuI. Il y a seulement trois ou
quatre semaines, la Yougoslavie a avise le Conscil
de securite d'un tres grave incident; ce dernicr n'a pas ete examine par le Groupe subsidiaire, qui, en revanche, ne manque jamais de
proceder a l'examcn des incidents presentes par
le Gouvernement grec.
Nos arguments, nos objections juridiques ne
sont pas presentes et ne doivent pas ctre examines isolement. Il ne s'agit pas pour nous d'unc
question theorique ou academique, il s'agit pour
nous d'appuyer par des arguments juridiques
une these fondee sur des realites et sur notre
experience du passe.
1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du C071seil de secl/rite, Premiere Annee, Seconde S6rie, No 28.

1571
The PRESIDENT: The United States delega~
tion has declared its acceptance of paragraph (6)
of the French amendment. The representative
of Colombia has made a suggestion concerning
it, and I wonder what the United States representative's reaction to that is.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de 1)anglais): La
delegation des Etats-Dnis a declare qu'el1e accepte le paragraphe 6) de l'amendement fran~ais. Le representant de la Colombie a fait une
proposition a ce sujet et je voudrais connaitre
l'opinion du representant des Etats-Unis,

Mr. ]OHNSON (United States of America);
M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traMy delegation will have to stand on the text of duit de l'anglais): Ma delegation s'en tiendra
the French amendment. I should just like to say au texte de l'amendement fran~ais. Je vouthat the French text is agreeable to my delega- drais simplement ajouter que ma delegation
tion for the reasons set out by the representative approuve ce texte pour les raisons exposees dans
la derniere declaration du representant de la
of France in his last statement.
France.
The PRESIDENT: As there are no further comments on paragraph (6), I shall instruct the
Secretariat to include it in the text of the United
States resolution.

Le PRESIDENT (tradttit de l'anglais): Puisque perso~ne ne presente plus d'observations
sur le paragraphe 6), je prescris au Secretariat
de l'incorporer dans le texte de la resolution des
Etats-Unis.

We now have before us four additional
amendments presented by the representative of
France. Amendment 4: refers to paragraph 3 (c)
and (d) of the United States resolution. For the
information of the Council, I wish to mention
that we have not settled paragraph 3 (a). However, in conformity with the wishes of the representative of the United States, I shall leave this
to the very end of our discussion; that may serve
to accelerate the proceedings.

Nous sommes maintenant saisis de quatre
amendements supplementaires presentes par le
representant de la France, L'arnendement No 4
se rapporte aux alineas c) et d) du paragraphe 3 de la resolution des Etats-Unis. A titre
d'information, je voudrais dire que nollS n'avons
pas encore termine la discussion du paragraphe 3 a). Cependant, pour me conformer aux
desirs du representant des Etats-Unis, je reserverai cette question pour la fin de notre discussion, ce qui pourrait accelerer nos debats.

In reference to amendment 4:, I should like
first to have the reaction of the United States
representative.

Au sujet de l'amendement No 4 je voudrais
avoir tout d'abord l'opinion du representant des
Btats-Unis. .

Mr. ]OHNSON (United States of America):
This amendment of the French delegation is
acceptable to my delegation. I should like to
make clear, however, just"what the amendment
is, as we see it, because the actual text of the
French amendment in document 8/430 seems to
refer to a paper in which the lining and pagination are not the same as in document S/391.

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (tradttit de ranglais): La delegation des Btats-Dnis
peut accepter cetamendement fran<;ais, Je YOUdrais cependant preciseI' le sens de cet amendement, tel qu'i! nous est presente, car le texte de
l'amendement fran<;ais qui figure dans le document S/430 semble se rcUrer a un document
dont la pagination et la disposition ne correspondent pas a ceUes du document 8/391.

Amendment 4 states: "Replace the last two
lines of paragraph (c) .. ." In our resolution,
document 8/391, paragraph (c) consists of only
two lines. Therefore, as I understand it, the representative of France is proposing that paragraph (c) should read: "The commission shall
have its headquarters in Salonika." The remainder of that paragraph is to be suppressed. That is
the way the amendment is supposed to read.
However, if it is ready literally, it would mean
the suppression of the entire paragraph, if the
document of reference is the one which we have
before us. That is not what was intended.

L'amendement 4 dit: "Remplacer les deux
dernieres lignes de l'alinea c) .. ." Dans notre
resolution (document 8/391 ), le paragraphe c)
ne comporte que deux lignes. Par consequent, si
je comprends bien, le representant de la France
propose que l'alinea c) deviennc: "La commission aura son siege a Salonique", le reste
de cet alinea etant supprime. C'est ainsi qu'il
faut comprendre l'amendement. Ccpcndant,
dans son sens litteral, il signifierait que tout
l'alinea doit etre supprimc, si le document auquel il se rapporte est bien celui que nous avons
sous les yeux. Ce n'est pas ce qui a ete envisage.

The remainder of the wording is entirely acceptable. I should merely like to have the representative of France confirm that what I have
just said is correct.

Les autres parties de ce texte sont parfaitement acceptables. Je voudrais seulement que le
representant de la France confirme si ce que j'ai
dit est exact.

M. PAR-OPI (France): L'interpretation corMr. PARODI (France) (translated from
French): The interpretation of the text of our recte du texte de notre amendement est bien
amendment just given by the United States re- celle que vient d'indiquer le representant des
presentative is correct. The drafting of our text is Etats-Unis. La redaction de notre texte n'est
not sufficiently precise on this point. The amend- pas. assez precise sur cc point. L'amende~ent
ment does not refer to the clause concerning the vise, non pas le membre de phrase relatif au

1572
headquarters of the commission, but only to
what follows.

siege de la commission, mais seulement cc qui
suit.

Mr. LOPEZ (Colombia): Although it is clear
M. LOPEZ (Colombie) (traduit de l'anthat the majority of the Commission is definitely glais): Bien qu'il soit evident que la majorite
in favour of having the headquarters of the du Conseil desire nettement etablir a Salonique
commission in Salonika, I wish to say that we le siege de la commission, je voudrais dire que
believe it would be more advisable to have the nous estimons preferable que la commission
proposed commission meet first in Geneva, proposee se reunisse d'abord en Suisse, a
Switzerland, but be authorized to move its head. Geneve. Elle devrait cependant etre autorisee a
quarters to any other place if it deems it advis: transferer son siege en tout autre lieu, si elle
able to do so. We favour having the commission jugeait opportun de le faire. NailS prefererions
start work in some place removed from the que la commission commence ses travaux a un
frontier area, such as Geneva; then if it finds it endroit qui, comme Geneve, est eloigne de la
necessary to move its headquarters, it may do zone frontiere. Si, par la suite, elle estimait
so, and it may go to whatever place it deems necessaire de transferer son siege, elle pourrait
le faire et se fixer en tout lieu qu'elle estimerait
advisable.
approprie.
Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America):
The possibility of the commission's having its
permanent headquarters in some place other
than the region concerned has been the subject
of much friendly discussion and comment
amongst all the representatives. The United
States delegation believes that the commission
should have its seat in the region affected, and
that Salonika is the only practicable spot. The
commission would have full authority, under
other terms of the resolution, to move when it
deems fit, and to visit the capitals of the other
countries in connexion with the various tasks
which have been assigned to it.

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (tra.
duit de l'anglais): La possibilite de fixer le
siege permanent de la Commission en un lieu
qui ne serait pas situe dans la region interessee
a fait l'objet de beaucoup de discussions amicales et de critiques de la part des differents
representants., La delegation des Etats-U nis croh
que la commission doit avoir son siege dans la
region interessee et que Salonique est le seul
endroit pratique. La commission aura parfaitement le droit, en vertu d'autres dispositions de
la resolution, de se deplacer lorsqu'elle l'estimera
necessaire et de visiter les capitales d'autres
pays pour remplir les differentes taches qui lui
ont ete assignees.

Si la commission avait son siege a Geneve, jc
If the commission sits in Geneva, I do not
believe it will have the feel of the situation, ne crois pas qu'elle se rendrait parfaitement
which would be possible if it were in the troubled compte de la situation comme eUe pourrait le
region. My delegation feels strongly that Salonika faire si elle se trouvait dans la region des troushould be designated as the central headquarters bles. La delegation des Etats-Unis croit fermement que Salonique doit etre designee comme
of this commission.
siege central de cette commission.
Mr. PARODI (France) (translated from
French) : The views expressed by the Colombian
representative were at one time those of the
French delegation. I now, however, support the
idea of establishing the commission on the spot,
largely on account of the news which we have
received during recent weeks, and which we
thought for some time was going to influence our
discussions.

M. PAROD! (France): les vues exprimees par
le representant de la Colombie ont ete, pendant
un temps, celle de la delegation fran~aise. Mais
je me rallie actuellement a l'idee de l'installation
de la commission sur place, en grande partie
en raison des nouvelles que nous avons re~ues
au cours des dernieres semaines et dont nous
avons pense, pendant un certain temps, qu'elles
allaient avoir une influence sur nos deliberations.

Whether the news was correct or exaggerated,
it would be useful to have a body on the spot
capable of giving us prompt information. However we may interpret the news-and for my
part I think we were right not to precipitate our
discussions as a result of newspaper reports-it
. seems to me that what has happened proves the
necessity of having such a body on the spot.

Que ces nouvelles aient ete exactes ou qu'eUes
aient ete grossies, dans l'un comme dans l'autre
cas, il est utile qu'll y ait sur place un organisme en etat de nous renseigner rapidement.
Il nous semble donc que ce qui s'est passe quelle que soit la maniere dont on l'interprete
et je pense, pour ma part, que nous avons eu
raison de ne pas precipiter nos discussions en
fonction des nouvelles parues dans la presse nous clemontre la necessite d'avoir sur place
un tel organisme.

I should like to add that the part of the resolution regarding the headquarters of the commission being fixed at Salonika in no way detracts
from our desire that the commission should

Je voudrais ajouter que la partie de la resolution relative au siege de la commission a fixer
a Salonique n'enleve rien a notre saud d'envisager la commission· tout d'abord comme une

1573
be primarily a commission of conciliation. I am
confident that, in its functions of conciliation, the
Commission will do good work which will prob.
ably involve moving from one capital to another, and that the position of its headquarters,
wherever this may be, will have no influence on
its conciliatory tasks.

commission de conciliation. J'exprime avec
confiance le souhait que, dans ses fonctions de
rapprochement, la commission fera un travail
suffisant, qui probablement la conduira a se
deplacer d'une capitale a l'autre et que le lieu
ou eIle siegera, quel qu'il soit, n'influera pas
sur sa tache de rapprochement.

The PRESIDENT: The representative of Colombia has not made any formal proposal, and
consequently, I shall instruct the Secretariat to
include the French amendment in the text of the
United States resolution.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Comme
le representant de la Colombie n'a pas fait de
proposition formeIle, je prescris au Secretariat
d'inserer l' amendement fran<;ais dans le texte
de la resolution presentee par les Etats-Unis.

We now have points (e) and (f) of paraNous passons maintenant aux alineas e) et
graph 3 of the United States resolution, which f) du paragraphe 3 de la resolution des Etatsconcern the rules of procedure and the quarterly Dnis qui ant trait an reglement interieur de la
reports of the commission. There are no amend- commission et aux raports trimestriels que cellements to these points, and I should just like to ci doit presenter. Aucun amendement n'a ete
ask whether anyone wishes to make a comment propose sur ces points, et je desire savoir si
quelqu'un desire presenter des observations ou
or any proposals on this subject.
faire des propositions sur ce sujet.
As there are no comments, 1 shall pass to the
next French amendment, which is number 5.
This is an amendment to paragraph 3 (h) of
the United States resolution. There is also another French amendment, number 6, which is
an amendment to paragraph 3 (g) of the
United States resolution. I will follow the order
of the French proposals, and we will consider
first the fifth French amendment, which refers
to paragraph 3 (h). The text is before you. I
should like to ask the representative of the
United States whether he has any comments to
make.

Puisque personne ne demande la parole, je
passe a l'amendement franc;ais suivant, qui
porte le numero 5. Cet amendement se rapporte
a l'alinea h) du paragraphe 3 de la resolution
des Etats-Unis. 11 existe egalement un autre
amendement fran~ais, qui parte le numero 6
et a trait
l'alinea g) du paragraphe 3 de la
resolution des Etats-Unis. le respecterai l'ordre
suivi dans la proposition fran~aise, et nous considererons d'abord l'amendement fran~ais No 5
se rapport ant a l'alinea h) du paragraphe 3.
Vous ~tes en possession du texte. Je voudrais
savoir si le representant des Etats-Unis desire
presenter des observations sur cet amendement.

Mr. lmrNsoN (United States of America):
The United States delegation accepts that
amendment.

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais): La delegation des Etats-Unis

a

accepte cet amendement.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): PuisThe PRESIDENT: As there is no further comment, I shall instruct the Secretariat to add the qu'it n'y a pas d'autres observations, je prescris
amendment to the text of the United States au Secretariat d'inserer cet amendement dans
resolution.
•
le texte de la resolution des Etats-Unis.
Mr. LoPEZ (Colombia): With regard to
amendment 6, I do not see any very good reason
why the commission should remain in existence
until a certain definite date, such as 31 August
1949, as stipulated here. That is two years
hence. It seems to me that, rather than fix a
specific date, it would be more aqvisable to suggest that the commission should remain in existence until the Security Council, by affirmative
action, decides otherwise. The commission would
thus remain in existence for as long a time as
might be necessary.

M. L6PEZ (Colombie) (traduit de l' anglais): En ce qui concerne l'amendement No 6,

The PRESIDENT: I understand that there are
no more comments on French amendment 5.
The question raised by the representative of
Colombia concerns amendment 6 submitted by
the French delegation, which refers to paragraph
3 (g) in the United States resolution concerning
the dates set for the existence of the commission.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): le crois
que personne ne desire prendre la parole au
sujet de !'amendement franc;ais No 5. La question soulevee par le representant de la Colombie
concerne l'amendement No 6 qui a trait a l'alinea g) du paragraphe 3 de la resolution des
Etats-Unis, ou est prevue la periode pendant
laquelle fonctionnera la Commission.

Mr. PAROD! (France) (translated from
French): The remark just made by the Colom-

M. PARODl (France): L'observation que vient
de faire le representant de la Colombie est

je ne vois aucune raison valable pour que la
commission reste en fonctions jusqu'a une date
precise, par exemple ceIle du 31 aout 1949 qui
est indiquee dans le texte. Cela nous reporte a
deux ans. Il me semble qu'il serait preferable
de proposer que la commission restera en foncdons aussi longtemps que le Conseil de securite
n'en aura pas decide autrement par un acte
positif, au lieu de fixer une date precise. La
commission subsisterait ainsi aussi longtemps
que son existence serait necessaire.

1574
bian representative is in conformity with our
original intention in drafting the amendment. It
has been pointed out to us, however, that the
wording which has just been proposed might be
understood as fixing an unlimited life for the
commission, and that it would be preferable to
have some limit, it being understood that the
Council could always put an end to the functions
of the commission before that limit was reached.
The representatives of the States concerned
might tell us which wording they prefer.

conforme a ce qui avait ete notre intention
premiere en redigeant l'amendement. Mais il
nous avait ete fait observer que la formule qui
vient d'etre proposee pourrait avoir l'inconvenient d'etre comprise comme prevoyant une
duree illimitee de la commission, et qu'il etait
preferable de fixer une limite, etant entendu
que le Conseil pourra toujours mettre fin aux
fonctions de la commission avant que cette
limite ne soit atteinte. Les representants des
Etats interesses pourraient d'ailleurs nous dire
quelle est la formule qu'ils preferent.
Ma seconde remarque s'adressera particuliereMy second remark is directed especially to the
United States representative. In regard to para~ ment au representant des Etats-Unis. Apropos
graph (4), the United States representative du paragraphe 4), le representant des Etatsasked a moment ago if the amendment retained Unis a demande, il y a un instant, si cet amenthe phrase saying that the commission would dement laissait subsister la phrase disant que la
have its headquarters at Salonika. As a matter commission aurait son siege a Salonique. En
of fact, we had intended to go back to this ques- realite, nous avions pense reprendre cette question in paragraph (6), which states that the tion au paragraphe 6), qui stipule que la
commission will begin its work at Salonika commission commencera ses travaux a Saloni.
within 30 days. This is a wider formula which que dans un delai de trente jours; ceci est une
would allow the commi'Ssion to move its head- formule plus large qui permettrait a la commission, si la situation se detendait, de transporter
quarters if the situation eased.
son siege ailleurs.
Si le representant des Etats-Unis acceptait
If the representative of the United States
would accept this in the sense I have indicated cette formule avec le sens que je viens d'indiquer
-for it is a question of substance-perhaps the - car il y a la une question de fond - peutamendment could be left as it is, and the refer- etre pourrait-on alors laisser l'amendement tel
ences covered by amendment No. 4 could be qu'il est et supprimer, dans les paragraphes c)
et d), les references qui sont visees par l'amendeleted in paragraphs (c) and (d).
dement No 4.
Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
Colonel HODGSON (Australia): The recommendations of the Commission of Investigation l'anglais): Les recommandations de la Comwere very precise on the point of two years, and mission d'enquete etaient tres precises en ce qui
I should be glad to know why that precision concerne la periode de deux ans et je voudrais
has not been retained. It does not seem to me savoir pourquoi cette precision n'a pas ete
that the proposal is in conformity with the actual conservee. 11 me semble que la proposition n'est
recommendation, which states that the body shall pas conforme a cette recommandation dans
be established for a period of at least two years. laquelle il est dit que l'organe en question
"Established", to my mind, must mean estab-. devrait etre etabli pour une periode de deux ans
lished and ready to commence its functions at au moins. A mon avis, "etabli" signifie etabli
Salonika. In view of the time that may elapse et pret a commencer ses travaux a Salonique.
before these resolutions are approved, Govern- Si 1'0n considere le temps que pourront necesments appoint their representatives, a staff is siter I'approbation de ces resolutions, la desiorganized and arrangements are made for mat- gnation par les differents Gouvernements de
ters such as transportation and office accommo- leurs representants, la reunion du personnel
dation, it may well be some months before the necessaire et les dispositions appropriees relacommission gets into operation. In the meantime, tives aux questions telles que celle des moyens
however, the Subsidiary Group can, if this Coun- de transport et celle des locaux administratifs,
cil so decides, continue its investigations. In plusieurs mois pourront s'ecouler avant que la
accordance with the resolution as it now stands, commission ne' commence a exercer ses foncthe commission would cease to exist, failing a tions. Toutefois, le Groupe sub~idiaire pourra
decision to the contrary, on 31 August 1949. entre temps, si le Conseil en deeide.ainsi, cantiIf we assume that the commission will not be nuer ses travaux d'enquete. Conformement au
ready to function until perhaps October or texte actuelde la resolution, la commission cesNovember, then it would exist less than the two serait d'existcr le 31 aout 1949, a moins que le
years recommended by the Commission of In- Conseil n'en decide autrement. Si nous admetvestigation. I should therefore prefer that the tons que la commission ne pourra peut-etre pas
sentence read: "The commission shall com- commencer a fonctionner avant octobre ou
mence its work as soon as practicable and shall novembre, elle existera pendant une periode
remain in existence for two years after its estab- inferieure aux deux ans recommandes par la
Commission d'enquete. C'est pourquoi je pre£elishment at Salonika ..."
rerais que le texte de cette phrase soit le suivant: "la commission commencera ses travaux
aussitot que possible et e1le restera en fonctions
pendant deux ans a compter du moment Oll eUe .
aura ete etablie a Salonique ..."

1575
I should like to say that my delegation has no
knowledge of the actual reason why the Commission of Investigation specified a definitive
time such as two years. We personally do not
know the reason, although I should like to know
it; but, generally speaking, I think that, if this
Council is getting periodic and constant reports,
it will be in a position to determine how long the
commission should last. For that reason we
should be prepared to support the Colombian
proposal. It may be that the commission should
exist for more than two years, for example; in
that case we would not have to take the decision
which is now necessary under the resolution.

J~ desire declarer que la delegation de l'Austrahe ne c~n~ait pas la vraie raison pour laquelle
la Comffilsslon d'enquete a fixe une pcriode
precise de deux ans. Personnellement, nous en
19norons le motif, bien que nous soyons desireux
de le ~onnaltre; mais, parlant d'une fa~on generale, Je pense que, si le Conseil re~oit des rapports periodiques reguliers, il sera en mesure
de determiner combien de temps devra durer
l'existence de la commission. C'est pourquoi
nous sommes disposes a appuyer la proposition
de la Colombie. 11 peut, par exemple, se faire
que la commission doive exister pendant plus
de deux ans; dans ce cas, nous ne serions pas
obliges de prendre une decision speciale comme
cela serait necessaire si nous conservions la resolution dans sa forme actuelle.

Mr. JOHN SON (United States of America):
The United States delegation really prefers its
original text to that submitted in the French
amendment. The period of two years is the time
mentioned in the report itself. However, my
delegation would have no objection to accepting
the Colombian representative's proposal, if it
met the views of the majority of the Council. If I
understood that proposal correctly, it is that the
Council may, by affirmative action, either prolong or shorten the life of the commission according to necessity. I do not recall the exact formulation. However, I should prefer the original
text, which states that the commission should
commence its work as soon as practicable, instead of within thirty days, as the latter would
be a very difficult mandate to carry out. For
practical reasons, it would not be easy. If any
term is to be set to the life of the commission, it
should not be in excess of two years, unless the
Council shall have decided to extend it beyond
that time.

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l' anglais): La delegation des EtatsUnis pre£ere certainement son texte prirnitif a
ce1ui qui figure dans l'amendement fran~ais. La
periode de deux ans est celle qui est mentionnee
dans le rapport lui-meme. Toutefois, la delegation
des Etats-Unis pourrait accepter la proposition
du representant de la Colombie au cas OU la
majorite du Conseil 1'approuverait. Si rai bien
compris cette proposition, elle prevoit que le
Conseil pourra, suivant les necessites, soit prolonger, soit diminuer, par une action positive,
la d1,1ree de l'existence de la commission. Je ne me
rappelle pas les termes exacts. Cependant, je
prefererais le texte primitif, selon lequella commission devait commencer ses travaux aussitot
que possible, et non pas dans les trente jours,
car cette derniere condition serait tres difficile
a realiser. Pour des raisons d'ordre pratique,
cela ne serait pas facile. Si la dun~e de l'existence de la commission doit faire l'objet d'une
limitation, elle ne devrait pas depasser deux
ans, a moins que le Conseil ne decide de la
prolonger au deIa de cette periode.
Je profite de l'occasion pour formuler une
remarque au sujet de la proposition faite par
le representant de la France. La delegation des
Etats-Unis ne voudrait pas que la disposition
fixant Salonique comme siege principal de la
commission soit supprimee de la resolution. S'il
faut supprimer quelque chose, je prCfererais q~e
cela soit fait dans le paragraphe que nous dlscutons en ce moment. 11 nous suffit' de mentionner Salonique une seule fois. Permettons a
la commission de se reunir ou illui plaira pour
creer son organisation initiale, mais c,eci a co.n di•
tion qu'elle commence ses travaux a Salomque
aussitot que possible et qu'elle y etablisse son
siege principal. Ce1a ne signifie pas qu'elle devra
y rester en permanence. EIle ~ra .la OU ses fonctions pourront l'appe1er. MalS 11 ~o~s semble
qu'il doit exister pour une commlSs~on ~.e ce
genre un lieu dont tout ~e mond~ salt q~ il eS,t
son siege central. 11 dOlt y avorr un lieu ou
ran saura que se situe le siege central de la
commission et ou celle-ci aura un bureau central.

I may take this occasion to make a comment
on the suggestion made by the representative of
France. My delegation would not be willing to
have the provision that Salonika should be the
principal headquarters of the commission deleted from the resolution. If any deletion is to
be made, I should prefer that it were made in
the paragraph we have under discussion now.
We have to mention Salonika only once. Let the
commission meet where it pleases to form its
initial organization, provided it begins work as
soon as practicable in Salonika and organizes its
principal headquarters at that base. It does not
mean that it will have to stay there always. It
will go wherever its duties may call. But any
commission of this nature, it seems to us, should
have a place which is generally known as its
central headquarters. There should be some one
spot that is known to be the central headquarters,
where the commission will have a central bureau.

I

M. PARODI (France): Si le r~present~nt des
Mr. PAROD! (France) (translated fr~m
Etats-Unis
n'accepte pas que SOlt suppnmee la
French): If the United States representatIVe
fixation
du
siege de la commission a Salonique
does not accept the deletion of the statement that

1576
the commission's headquarters will be at Salonika from what used to be our amendment No. 4,
there is of course no point in retaining the reference to Salonika here. So far as I am concerned
I would also agree to revert to the original text
of the United States resolution by deleting the
mention of the thirty-day period.

dans ce qui constituait notre amendement
No 4, il n'y a pas lieu, en effet, de maintenir
ici la reference a Salonique. D'autre part je
suis d'ad~ord, en ce qui me concerne, pour r~ve­
nir au texte primitif de la resolution des EtatsDnis en supprimant la mention du delai de
trente jours.

In regard to the deletion of the date of
31 August 1949, I also willingly agree to the
Colombian proposal, if the countries concerned
have no comments. I give it an optimistic interpretation, considering it to mean that the commission will perform its task with sufficient
energy and good fortune as to render its maintenance until 31 August 1949 unnecessary.

Quant a la suppression de la date du 31 aoilt
1949, je me rallie volontiers egalement a la
proposition colombienne, s'il n'y a pas d'observation de la part des pays interesses. Dans mon
esprit, je l'entends sous une forme optimiste,
considerant qu'elle signifie que la commission
aura rempli sa tache avec suffiBamment d'activite et de bonheur pour qu'il ne soit pas necessaire de la maintenir jusqu'au 31 aoilt 1949.

Mr. L6PEZ (Colombia): I believe the logical
thing to do is to provide that the commission
shall remain in existence for as long a time as
the Security Council may find it necessary; and
that it will stop functioning when the Security
Council, by affirmative action, so decides. There
is no need to fix any date for the termination of
the functions of the commission. What I do believe is necessary is to set a date for the beginning
of the work of the commission.

M. LOPEZ (Colombie ) (traduit de l'anglais): J e crois qu'il serait logique de decider
que la commission restera en fonctions aussi
longtemps que le Conseil de securite le jugera
necessaire et qu'elle cessera son activite lorsque
le Conseil de securite en decidera ainsi par un
acte positif. Il n'est pas necessaire de preciseI' la date a laque11e cesseront les fonctions
de la commission. A mon avis, ce qu'il importe
de faire, c'est de fixer une date pour le debut
des travaux de la commission.

I could also add that omitting any mention of
two years' duration would, I think, indicate a
more hopeful approach to the problem, and the
commission would seem more like a conunission
of conciliation. That would seem more optimistic
than to decide beforehand. that the commission
is to function for two entire years.

Je pourrais egalement ajouter que, si nous
ne mentionnons pas la periode de deux ans, cela
signifiera, je pense, que nous considerons le probleme avec plus de confiance, et la commission
aura davantage le caractere d'une commission
de conciliation. Cela semblera plus optimiste
que de decider a l'avance que la commission
devra exister pendant deux annees entieres.

The PRESIDENT: While not expressing any
views of my own on the point under discussion,
I should like to draw the attention of the members of the Council to a certain implication in
the proposal of the representative of Colombia:
namely, that if a date is fixed for the termination of the commission, as is done in the original
United States and French proposals, a special
decision of the Council would be necessary to
alter that date. Now, if, as proposed by the representative of Colombia, there is no time-limit
set, a positive decision of the Council would be
required in order to dissolve the commission. I
should like to draw the attention of the Council
to the fact that in such a case, any pennanent
member of the Council could, by a negative
vote, prevent the dissolution of the commission.
Whatever the decision of the Council may be,
I think it should be made in full consciousness
of this implication.

Le PRl1SIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Sans
exprimer d'opinion personnelle sur le point en
discussion, je voudrais attirer l'attention des
membres du Conseil sur un des resuItats implicites de la proposition du representant de la
Colombie, qui est le suivant: si l'on fixe une
date a laquelle prendront fin les fonctions de la
commission, comme le prevoient la proposition
primitive des Etats-Unis et la proposition fran~aise, le Conseil devra prendre une decision
speciale pour modifier cette date. Cependant, si,
comme le propose le representant de la Colom~
bie, l'on ne fixe pas de date, le Conseil devra
prendre une decision positive pour dissoudre la
commission. Je desire attirer l'attention du
Conseil sur le fait que, dans ce cas, tout membre permanent du Conseil pourra, en votant
contre, empecher la dissolution de la commission. Quelle que puisse ~tre la decision du
Conseil, je pense qu'elle doit etre prise en
connaissance de cause.

Mr. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgium) (translated"
from French): The question formulated by the
Colombian representative appears to contain an
interesting point in regard to the beginning of
the work of the new commission.
The English text of this proposal provides in
particular:
"The commission shall commence its work as
soon as practicable and shall supersede the Corn-

M. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgique): La question formuIee par le representant de la Colombie
contient, semble-t-il, une indication interessante
en ce qui concerne le debut des travaux de la
nouvclle commission.
Le texte anglais de cette proposition prevoit
notamment:
((The commission shall commence its work as
soon as practicable and shall supersede the

1577
mission of Investigation established by resolution
dated 19 December 1946 ..."

Commission of Investigation established by
resolution dated December 19J 1946 ..."

This text appears to avoid an interruption in
the work of the two commissions, whilst there is
no indication of this in the amendment proposed
by the French delegation. Is there not a gap
here?

Ce texte parait de nature a eviter une solution de continuite entre les travaux des deux
commissions, tandis qu'on ne voit aucune indication a cet egard dans l'amendement propose
par la delegation fran~aise. N'y a-toil pas dans
ce dernier une lacune?

The PRESIDENT: Various views have been
expressed on this matter. I should now like to
hear the final reaction of the representative of
the United States.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais ): Differentes opinions ont ete exprimees sur cette question. J e desire maintenant ·connaitre l' opinion
definitive du representant des Etats-Unis.

Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America):
On the matter immediately at issue, the United
States delegation would be glad to express its
agreement with whatever may be the wish of
the majority of the Council. I think that it would
be desirable to have an approximate date fixed
for the beginning of the commission's work; in
that regard, I agree with the representative of
Colombia. However, I think it is difficult to say
that the commission must meet in Salonika
within thirty days.

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais): Sur la question que nous
discutons pour le moment, la delegation des
Etats-Unis serait heureuse de se rallier au
desir exprime par la majorite du Conseil,
quel qu'il soit. Je pense qu'il serait desirable de fixer une date approximative pour
le debut des travaux de la commission; en ceci,
je suis d'accord avec le representant de la
Colombie. Cependant, je pense qu'll est difficile
de dire que la commission devra se reunir a
Salonique dans les trente jours.

I would suggest a wording to the effect that
the commission should meet and commence its
work by 1 September, or as soon thereafter as
possible. That would leave a little leeway and
make allowance for unavoidable difficulties and
accidents.
The suggestion made by the representative of
Colombia that, in the absence of affirmative
action by the Council, the life of the commission
should be indefinite, would be agreeable to the
United States delegation. I think the Council
can always take cognizance of any improvement
in the situation and decide whether or not there
is need for the commission to function any
longer. However, the technical difficulty pointed
out by the President certainly exists; there is no
question about that.

Je propose d'adopter un texte prevoyant que
la commission devra se reunir et commencer ses
travaux pour le ler septembre ou aussitot que
possible apres cette date. Cda Iui laisserait une
certaine latitude et tiendrait compte des difficultes et des incidents inevitables.
La delegation des Etats-Unis accepterait
volontiers la proposition bite par le representant de la Colombie seIon laquelle l'existence
de la commission se prolongerait indefiniment
si le Conseil ne prend pas de decision positive.
Je pense que le Conseil pourra toujours prendre
connaissance d'une amelioration de la situation
et decider s'il est encore necessaire que la commission continue ses travaux. Cependant, les
difficultes d'ordre technique indiquees par le
President existent certainement, cda n'est pas
douteux.
C'est pourquoi la delegation des Etats-Unis
estime qu'il serait peut-etre preferable de
conserver les termes generaux de la recommandation contenue dans le rapport meme, a savoir
que la duree de l'existence de la commission
serait fixee provisoirement It deux ans et que, a
la fin de cette periode ou un peu avant, le
Conseil examinerait a nouveau la situation afin
de determiner si la commission doit continuer a
fonctionner pendant une periode supplementaire. Cela semblerait correspondre aux necessites pratiques devant lesquelles la commission
se trouvera placce. Vne periode inferieurc a
deux ans semblerait insuffisante pour accomplir
quelque chose d'utile. Cependant, si nous adoptons la recommandation contenue dans le rapport, nous pourrons prevoir que la commission
cessera definitivement d'exister dans deux aus,
a condition qu'a ce moment la situation justifie une telle mesure.

The United States delegation therefore thinks
it might be preferable to retain the general language of the recommendation in the report
itself: that the life of the commission should be
fixed tentatively at two years; and that, at the
end of that time or shortly before, the Council
should review the situation in order to determine
whether the commission should be continued for
any additional length of time. That would seem
to meet the practical requirements of the com~
mission. A term of less than two years would not
seem to be long enough to accomplish anything
useful. However, if we adopt the recommendation in the report, we can look forward to the
possibility that the commission will be definitely
terminated within two years provided that con~
ditions at that time justify such a measure.

Mr. LOPEZ (Colombia): It might be a simple
matter to amend our suggestion in accordance
with the remarks made by the representative of

M. LOPEZ (Colombie) (traduit de l'anglais) :
Il seraitfacile de modifier notre proposition en
tenant compte des remarques faites par le repre-

1578
the United States. Our original suggestion reads:
"The commission shall commence its work as
soon as practicable and shall supersede the Commission of Investigation established by resolution
dated 19 December 1946 . . ." It might be
amended to read: "The commission shall com'mence its work as soon as practicable after
1 September ..." I am wondering whether that
change would be satisfactory to the United States
delegation.

sentant des Etats-Unis. Le texte de notre proposition primitive etait le suivant: "La commission commencera ses travaux aussit6t que possible et remplacera la Commission d'enquete
etablie par la resolution du 19 decembre
1946 . . ."On pourrait le modifier de la
fa~on suivante: "La commission commencera
ses travaux aussit6t que possible apres le 1er
septembre ... " Je me demande si ceUe modi.
fication pourrait donner satisfaction a la delegation des Etats-Unis.

The PRESIDENT:' I should like to ask the representative of the United States whether he
wishes to accept that suggestion. Then, too, I
think we have to settle the question whether the
termination date should remain 31 August 1949
or whether some change should be made in that
regard.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I'anglais): Je
desire savoir si le representant des Etats-Unis
desire accepter cette proposition. J e pense egalement que nous devons decider si les fonctions
de la Commission doivent toujours cesser le
31 aout 1949 ou si cette date doit etre modifiee.

Mr. jOHNsoN (United States of America): I
have no objection to any language which would
make the life of the commission approximately
two years, and which would provide that, in
accordance with the suggestion made by the representative of Colombia in his paragraph Xwhich is a very valuable one-it would take
over from the previous Commission, and that the
Subsidiary Group should remain in being and
deliver over its functions to the succeeding commission. There would be a hiatus of some two or
three weeks, or possibly a month, but not more.
That would be a most practicable arrangement.

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais): Je ne souleverai pas d'objections contre tout texte fixant approximativement
a deux ans l'existence de la commission et indiquant, conformement a la proposition faite par
le representant de la Colombie au paragraphe
X de son texte - proposition qui a une grande
valeur - que la nouvelle commission remplacera l'ancienne et que le Groupe subsidiaire
restera en fonctions et transmettra ses pouvoirs
a la commission qui lui succedera. 11 y aura une
interruption de deux ou trois semaines, d'un
mois peut-etre au maximum. Cela constituera
une formule tres pratique.

Mr. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgium) (translated
from French): I would ask the French and
United States representatives if they would agree
to insert, after the sentence dealing with the
beginning of the commission's work, a sentence
on the following lines: "The beginning of its
activities will put an end to the activities of the
Commission of Investigation and of the Subsidiary Group".

M. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgique) : Je
demande au representant de la France et au
representant des Etats-Unis s'il5 accepteraient,
apres la phrase visant l'entree en fonctions de
la commission, l'insertion d'une autre phrase qui
pourrait etre conc;ue en ces termes: "Son entree
en fonctions mettra fin aux activites de la Commission d'enquete et du Groupe subsidiaire."

Mr. jOHNSON (United States of America) :
That formula is agreeable to my delegation.

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de fanglais): La delegation des Etats-Unis
accepte cette formule.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de f anglais): Je presThe PRESIDENT: I shall ask the Secretariat to
include that sentence when it prepares the full cris au Secretariat d'inserer cette phrase dans
le texte complet lorsque celui-ci sera prepare.
text.
Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
Colonel HODGSON (Australia): I should be
l'anglais)
: Je desire que l'on relise la proposition
obliged if you would read the whole proposal
dans son ensemble.
again.
Mr. KERNO (Assistant Secretary-General):
"The commission shall commence its work as
soon as practicable after 1 September 1947. It
shall remain in existence until 31 August 1949.
The beginning of the activities of the commission
will put an end to the activities of the Commission of Investigation established by resolution
dated 19 December 1946 and the Subsidiary
Group thereof established by resolution' dated
18 April 1947."

.M. KERNO (Secretaire general adjoint)
(traduit de l' anglais): La commission commencera ses travaux aussit6t que possible apres
le 1er septembre 1947. Elle restera en fonction
jusqu'au 31 aout 1949. Le. debut de l'activite
de la commission mettra fin a l'existence de la
Commission d'enquete etablie par la resolution
du 19 decembre 1946 et du Groupe subsidiaire
etablipar la resolution! du 18 avril 1947."

Colonel HODGSON (Australia): It was that
Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
last sentence which I wanted especially to hear. l'anglais): C'est cette derniere phrase que je
1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 37.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de sicurite, Deuxierne Annee, No 37.

1579
To my mind it is not sufficiently precise. It says desirais specialement entendre. A man avis, elle
"The beginning of the activities of the commis- n' est pas suffisamment precise. EUe stipule: "Le
sion". That might be in New York; it might be debut de l'activite de la commission." Cela peut
on a ship going over to Salonika; it might be etre a New-York; cela peut etre a bord d'un
anywhere. Why not say "The establishment of navire se dirigeant vers Salonique; cela peut
the commission"? We know where it will be. We etre n'importe oU. Pourquoi ne pas dire "L'etahave to give it a chance, as Mr. Johnson sug- blissement de la commission"? Nous savons ou
gests, to take over the archives and the records dIe sera etablie. Nous devons lui donner lapossiof the Subsidiary Group.
bilite, comrne M. Johnson l'a propose, de
reprendre les archives et les fiches du Groupe
subsidiaire.
Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America):
That is agreeable to me.

M. JOHNSON (Etats~Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais): Cela me convient.

Mr. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgium) (translated
M. VAN LANGENHOVE '(Belgique): En franfrom French): In French, I think the establish- ~ais, je crois que l'etablissement de la commisment of the commission would take place on the sion aura lieu lors de l'adoption de la resolution
adoption of the resolution creating it. If we qui la creera. Si nous prenons cette resolution
adopt this resolution in three days' time, the dans trois jours, c'est dans trois jours que la
commission will be established in three days' commission sera etablie. Mais je ne crois pas que
time. But that does not seem to be the Australian teUe soit la conception du representant de l'Australie.
representative's understanding.
The PRESIDENT: We shall ask the Secretariat
to study the French translation carefully.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Nous
demanderons au Secretariat d'examiner soigneusement la traduction fran~aise,

Mr. ]OHNSON (United States of America):
In order to make the meaning of this perfectly
clear, I should like to say a few words. As I
understand it, the intention of the representative
of Australia is that when this commission starts
to work in the area where its duties lie, and
actually begins to function, it will take over from
the Subsidiary Group. At that moment the
earlier Commission and Subsidiary Group will
cease to exist.

M. ]OHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais): Je voudrais dire quelques
mots pour preciser ce point. A mon sens, le
representant de l'Australie envisage que la commission remplacera le Groupe susbsidiaire au
moment ou elle commencera ses travaux dans
la region ou eUe est appe1ee ales effectuer, c'esta-dire lorsqu'elle entrera reellement en fanctions.
A ce moment, la Commission precedente et le
Groupe subsidiaire cesseront d'exister.

The PRESIDENT: The Assistant SecretaryGeneral suggests that the words "establislunent
of the commission in Salonika" will remove any
doubts.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Le
Secretaire general adjoint estime que les mots
"etablissement de la commission a Salonique"
supprimeront tout doute possible.

Colonel HODGSON (Australia): That was my
intention.

Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
l'anglais): Telle etait mon intention.

The PRESIDENT: Since that is accepted, I
shall instruct the Secretariat to write the proposal
that way.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Puisque cela est accepte, je prescris au Secretariat
de rediger la proposition de ceUe fa~on,

Before we adjourn, perhaps we can clear up
French amendment 7. It simply suggests the
addition of a final paragraph to the United
States resolution. If this is acceptable to the representative of the United States, no further
discussion on the subject will be necessary.

Avant d'ajourner la seance, nous pourrions
peut-etre examiner l'amendement fran~ais No 7.
11 a simplement pour objet d'ajouter un paragraphe final a la resolution des Etats-Unis. Si le
representant des Etats-Unis peut l'accepter, il
sera inutile de poursuivre la discussion de la
question.

Mr. ]OHNSON (United States of America) :
The United States delegation will be glad to
accept this amendment.

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de 1) anglais): La delegation des EtatsUnis est heureuse d'accepter cet amendement.

Mr. PARODI (France) (translated from
French): I should merely like to suggest a very
slight modification to the amendriJ.ent which I
myself proposed. I submit it in particular to the
United States representative, who will be able
to tell us this evening or tomorrow whether he
accepts it.

M. PAROD! (France): Je voudrais simplement suggerer une tres Iegere modi:6cation a
l'amendement que j'ai moi-meme propose. Je
la soumets notamment au representant des
Etats-U nis, qui pourra nous dire ce soir ou
demain s'il l'accepte.

The text of our amendment No. 4 is as follows: "The Security Council, conscious of the

Le texte de notre amendement No 4 est le
suivant: "Le Conseil de securite, conscient de

1580

gravity of the situation as revealed in the report la gravite de la situation telle qu'elle ressort du
of the Commission of Investigation, appeals, rapport de la Commission d'enquete, fait appel,
etc. . . ." I propose to delete the phrase: "as etc." Je propose de supprimer le membre de
revealed in the report of the Commission of phrase: "telle qu'elle ressort du rapport de la
Investigation". The amendment would there- Commission d'enquete". L'amendement se lirait
fore read: "The Security Council, conscious of donc ainsi: "Le Conseil de securite, conscient
the gravity of the situation, appeals, etc...." de la gravite de la situation, fait appel, etc." En
The words I propose to delete add nothing to the efIet, les mots dont je propose la suppression
text since its purpose is to appeal for conciliation n'ajoutent rien au texte, puisqu'il s'agit la d'un
and not the adoption of the report's conclusions. appel a la conciliation et non pas de l'adoption
The reference to the report might therefore be des conclusions du rapport. On pourrait done
deleted.
supprimer la reference a ce rapport.
Mr. ]OHr'fSON (United States of America): I
should be glad to accept that amendment.

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais): Je serais heureux d'accepter
cet amendement.

Mr. KERNO (Assistant Secretary-General): It
M. KERNO (Secretalre general adjoint)
seems to me that at this stage of the discussion (traduit de l'anglais): I1 me semble que, au
it might be useful for the Security Council to point ou en sont les debats, il pourrait etre utile
have the new text of the amended draft resolu- que le Conseil de securite dispose demain du
tion tomorrow. The Secretariat will be able to nouveau texte du projet de resolution amende.
prepare this text, with the exception of para- Le Secretariat pourra preparer ce texte, a
graph 3 (a) of the United States resolution, l'exception de l'alinea a) du paragraphe 3 de
which refers to the composition of the proposed la resolution des Etats-Unis, paragraphe qui a
commission. I do not know whether it is intended trait a la composition de la future commission.
that this commission should consist of one mem- Je ne sais pas si l'on se propose de prevoir pour
ber or eleven members. However, we could cette commission une composition de un ou de
simply say at that point "The commission shall onze membres. Cependant, nous pouvons ecrire
be composed of ...", and leave the rest blank. simplement a cet endroit "La Commission sera
Then it would be very easy to put into the blank composee de . . . " et laisser un espace. 11 seralt
whatever the Security Council decides on. With alors facile d'inscrire a cet endroit ce que le
that exception, I think we shall be able to pre- Conseil de securite decidera. A cette exception
pare the new text.
pres, je pense que nous pourrons preparer le
nouveau texte.
I should like to say that I understand that the
Je desire ajouter que, a mon avis, c'est intenFrench delegation purposely changed the order tionnellement que la delegation fran<;aise a
of paragraphs (g) and (h) because it seemed modifie l'ordre des alineas g) et h); il lui a
to them-this point may be argued of course- sans doute paru plus logique - mais on peut
that it was more logical to put first all the contester ce point de vue - de prendre d'abord
administrative details, and to mention at the end les dispositions relatives aux details administrathe beginning and the end of the work of the tifs, puis de mentionner quand commenceront
commission. I think that the French representa- et £iniront les travaux de la commission. Je
tive agrees with that.
pense que le representant de la France est
d'accord sur ce point.
On the other hand, in point 4 of the French
amendment I understood that the reference to
the headquarters at Salonika remains.

D'autre part, si j'ai bien compris, la mention
du fait que le siege est fixe a Salonique subsiste
au point 4 de l'amendement fran~ais.

Mr. ]OHNSON (United States of America): I
should like to take one moment of the Council's
time to refer to a comment made by the representative of Yugoslavia, in which he complained
that neither the Commission nor the Subsidiary
Group now existing, had complied with any of
the requests for investigation made to them by
the Government of Yugoslavia.

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l' anglais): J e desire retenir un instant
l'attention du Conseil pour relever une remarque faite par le representant de la Yougoslavie,
qui s'est plaint que, ni la Commission, ni le
Groupe subsidiaire existant actuellement n'ont
pris en consideration aucune des demandes
d'enquete formulees par le 'Gouvernement de la
Yougoslavie.

As far as the United States Government is
Le Gouvernement des Etats-Unis, donnerait
concerned, we would gladly give the commission volontiers, en ce qui le concerne, les instructions
instructions to investigate any incident which necessaires pour que la commission procede
the Government of Yugoslavia might wish to a une enquete sur tout incident sur lequel le
have investigated. I make that statement simply Gouvernement yougosIave desire qu'une enquete
because I know that it is far from the purpose soit faite. Je declare ced uniquement parce que
of the Commission, or of this Council, or of any je sais que ni la commission, ni le Conseil, ni
member of it, to decline deliberately to investi- aucun des membres de celui-ci n'entendent refugate any incident referred to it by Yugoslavia, ser deliberement de mener une enquete sur un
and then to demand investigation of incidents at incident signale a son attention par la Yougoslavie

1581
the request of Greece. That is so misleading that
I feel it necessary to correct it. I am not prepared now to go into any discussion of the reason
why Yugoslav complaints were not acted on
immediately, but we have ample information to
show that there have been positive requests by
Yugoslavia for investigation, and that at the
same time Yugoslavia was refusing facilities to
the Commission to investigate other incidents.

et de proposer que l'on fasse droit a une
demande d'enquete sur des incidents, presentee
par la Grece. Cette supposition serait si loin de la
verite que j'estime necessaire de la rectifier. Je ne
desire pas engager maintenant une controverse
sur les raisons pour lesquelles les plaintes yougoslaves n'ont pas ete immediatement prises en
consideration, mais nosu sommes suffisamment
renseignes sur le fait que, au moment DU la Yougoslavie forrnulait des demandes precises d'enquete, ce pays refusait a la Commission les
facilites necessaires pour mener une enquete
sur d'autres incidents.

Mr. VILFAN (Yugoslavia) (translated from
M. VILFAN (Yougoslavie): Je desirerais seuFrench): I should merely like to make a cor- lement apporter une correction au point de vue
rection from the point of view of the facts. So des faits. Pour autant que je sache, nous avons
far as I know, we submitted our request to the presente notre demande au Conseil de securite
Security Council about 20 June; the Subsidiary aux environs du 20 juin; le Groupe subsidiaire
Group approached our Government towards the s'est adresse a notre Gouvernement vers la fin
end of June.
du mois de juin.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
July?

Le PRESIDENT: Juillet?

Mr. VILFAN (Yugoslavia) (translated from
French): No, June. Our request was first submitted to the Security Council; and it was not
until 28 or 29 June that our Govemment
rejected the request of the Subsidiary Group to
enter Yugoslavia.

M. VILFAN (Yougoslavie): Non, juin. Notre
demande a d'abord ete presentee au. Conseil de
securite; et ce n'est que le 28 ou le 29 juin
que notre Gouvernement a rejete la demande
du Groupe subsidiaire d'entrer en Yougoslavie.

Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America): I
would infer from that comment that the reason
why the Yugoslav Government refused to cooperate with the Commission or the Subsidiary
Group on the express request of the latter was
that its own request for investigation had not
been carried out. I would understand from the
remark of the Yugoslav representative that that
was why his Government refused its co-operation.

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l' anglais): Je deduirai de cette observation que, si le Gouvernement yougoslave a
refuse de collaborer avec la Commission ou le
Groupe subsidiaire, a la demande expresse de
ce dernier, c'est parce que sa propre demande
d'enquete n'avait pas regu satisfaction. La
remarque faite par le representant yougoslave
me fait comprendre que c'est pour cette raison
que la Yougoslavie a refuse sa collaboration.

Mr. VILFAN (Yugoslavia) (translated from
French): The fact that the Subsidiary Group
did not examine the gravest incident in recent
times, namely the incident of 12 or 13 June, is
the best illustration of the general attitude of
the Commission of Investigation and of the
Subsidiary Group. I quote this case as an illustration, but it is not the only reason for our
attitude.

M. VILFAN (Yougoslavie): Le fait que le
Groupe subsidiaire n'a pas examine I'incident le
plus grave de ces temps derniers, a savoir I'inci·
dent du 12 ou du 13 juin, illustre le mieux l'attitude de la Commission d'enquete et du Groupe
subsidiaire en general. J e cite ce cas a titre
d'illustration, mais ce n'est pas lit la seule raison
de notre attitude.

J e le repete, je n'ai pas encore le texte de la
I repeat, I am not yet in possession of the text
oE my Government's note; for the moment the note de mon Gouvernement; les journaux consnewspapers are my only source of information. tituent, pour le moment, ma seule source d'informations.
Mr. DENDRAMIS (Greece) (translated from
French): To supplement the information given
by the United States representative, I must inform the Security Council that the Yugoslav
Government never requested the Subsidiary
Group to open an enquiry into this incident. It
was the Greek Govemment which, as soon as it
became aware of the incident through the letter
addressed to the Security Council on the subject,
replied with a denial and a request that the
Subsidiary Group should examine the facts and
make an inquiry.

M. DENDRAMIS (Grece): Pour completer les
informations donnees par le representant des
Etats-Unis, je dais informer le COl1seil, de: sec~­
rite que le Gouvernement yougoslave n a JamaJS
demande au Groupe subsidiaire d'ouvrir une
enquete au sujet de cet incident. C'est le Gouvernement grec qui, des qu'il a eu connaissan.ce
de cet incident par la lettre adressee a ce sUJet
au Conseil de securite, a repondu en donnant
un dementi a cet incident et en demandant que
le Groupe subsidiaire examine les faits et procede a une enquete.

1582
The PRESIDENT: The Council will hold two
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Le
meetings tomorrow. The morning meeting is Conseil tiendra deux seances demain. La seance
scheduled for 10.30.
du matin est fixee a 10 h. 30.
The meeting rose at 6.35 p.m.

La seance est levee

a 18 h. 35.
