United Nations

S/PV.6187

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6187th meeting
Monday, 14 September 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Rice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Du Xiaocong
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Skračić
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Heller
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Sir John Sawers
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung

Agenda
The situation in Sierra Leone
Third report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (S/2009/438)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-51020 (E)

*0951020*

S/PV.6187

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Sierra Leone
Third report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Sierra Leone (S/2009/438)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Sierra Leone, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Touray
(Sierra Leone) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Michael von der
Schulenburg, Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. von der Schulenburg to take a seat at
the Council table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. John McNee, Chairperson of the Sierra
Leone configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
and Permanent Representative of Canada.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. McNee to take a seat at the Council
table.

2

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
I wish to draw the attention of participants to
document S/2009/438, containing the third report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Michael von der Schulenburg,
Executive Representative of the Secretary-General and
head of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Sierra Leone, and His Excellency Mr. John
McNee, Chairperson of the Sierra Leone configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission and Permanent
Representative of Canada. I now give the floor to
Mr. Michael von der Schulenburg.
Mr. Von der Schulenburg: I thank the members
of the Security Council for the opportunity to present
the third report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra
Leone (UNIPSIL) (S/2009/438).
Today is a day of national mourning in Sierra
Leone, following the death of approximately 100
people, who perished in the sea near Freetown when
their ferry capsized. Most of the victims were
schoolchildren. We in the United Nations country team
have worked with the Government over the past
several days to help recover the bodies and to provide
immediate assistance to the survivors. Let me here
express my condolences to the bereaved families. This
incident is a reminder to all of us of the fragility of
Sierra Leone’s infrastructure and of how difficult life
remains for the average Sierra Leonean.
At the end of this month, UNIPSIL will complete
its first year of operations, and the Security Council
will consider the Secretary-General’s recommendation
that it be extended for one year. The SecretaryGeneral’s report before members outlines the progress
made in the implementation of UNIPSIL’s mandate and
the remaining challenges to peace and security in
Sierra Leone. Let me therefore take this opportunity to
go beyond the report and raise three general issues and
make one more specific point.
As a first issue, I would like to highlight the
magnitude and the uniqueness, from a historical
perspective, of the task that Sierra Leone is trying to

09-51020

S/PV.6187

accomplish. Since the end of the civil war seven years
ago, Sierra Leone has embarked on a remarkable
journey towards becoming a stable, peaceful and
democratic country. During that short time, Sierra
Leone has not only left behind the horrors of the civil
war, but has also started to build a new national
identity and create State institutions that will turn
Sierra Leone into a functioning democratic society.
Even more important, Sierra Leone wants to do so by
maintaining its internal peace, promoting the rule of
law, observing democratic processes and creating
economic prosperity for its people. By any standard,
that is a colossal task, especially within the short time
frame within which we all want it to be achieved.
If history is anything to go by, there are very few —
if any — examples in the past in which nation- and
State-building have been a peaceful and democratic
affair. Democracy came to many countries only after a
certain level of economic prosperity had been achieved
and only after a strong and educated middle class had
developed. Economic prosperity was gained through
long and difficult processes that too often were
interrupted by economic crisis and misery. And, above
all, the process of building nations and of creating
functioning State institutions had taken most modern
nations centuries to accomplish.
We now expect Sierra Leone to make an
enormous historic leap forward by achieving peace,
democracy and prosperity — and this within a short
time span of only a few years. But Sierra Leone is one
of the poorest countries in the world. It does not have a
large educated middle class, and more than 70 per cent
of its population remains illiterate. Also, more than
70 per cent of its young people remain unemployed, its
child mortality rate is among the highest in the world
and its State institutions remain weak. Sierra Leone’s
ethnic and linguistic diversity competes with its
national identity, and traditional forms of governance
compete with emerging modern Government
institutions. The challenges that need to be addressed
are therefore enormous. The question is how a poor
country such as Sierra Leone can achieve peace,
democracy and prosperity — something that most other
countries could not easily achieve under much better
circumstances.
I am raising this historical comparison because I
feel that we all have to recognize the magnitude and
uniqueness of what countries such as Sierra Leone are
trying to achieve. We must pay tribute to the political

09-51020

leadership both in the Government and in the
opposition, as well as to Sierra Leone’s civil and
religious society, for their efforts, their courage and
their vision in having taken the difficult road towards
peace, democracy and prosperity. The recently
concluded joint communiqué that ended the March
outbreak of violence is proof of the new democratic
credentials of Sierra Leone’s political leadership.
We also have to recognize that the road to peace,
democracy and prosperity for Sierra Leone will be a
bumpy, long and, at times, dangerous one. We must
anticipate derailments and mistakes. There is no magic
switch that can be turned on that would catapult Sierra
Leone into the future. There are no easy benchmarks
that will tell us that Sierra Leone is out of the woods.
What Sierra Leone will need to succeed is time,
patience, determined national leadership and continued
international support.
This brings me to the second issue — Sierra
Leone’s importance in the regional context. Sierra
Leone’s journey towards peace, democracy and
prosperity is taking place in a difficult regional
environment. The political and security situation in
West Africa remains highly precarious, and we are
seeing worrying signs of military coups, ethnic and
interreligious conflicts, and political intolerance
re-emerging. We are also seeing increasing threats from
international crime, illicit drug trafficking, smuggling,
the unfair exploration of natural resources, and illegal
fishing taking hold in West Africa. Given the
interdependence of most countries of the region, that
could ultimately threaten Sierra Leone’s achievements.
On the other hand, a successful and peaceful
Sierra Leone could have a positive influence on
developments in the region. In fact, Sierra Leone,
along with other countries such as Ghana, could
become a model that could be followed by others and
prove that peace and democracy can bring benefits and
create prosperity. If we succeed in Sierra Leone, it
would send a positive message that even one of the
poorest countries in the world — a country that has
gone through 11 years of exceptionally brutal civil war —
can build a functioning democratic State. Sierra Leone
is on the way towards presenting us with such a
success story. Let us not miss this chance. Sierra Leone
will need the international community to continue
providing political, financial and economic support,
but let us not forget that we, too, will need Sierra
Leone to foster regional peace and stability.

3

S/PV.6187

Let me now turn to the third issue — the new role
of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Sierra Leone.
I hope that, over the past year, we have been able
to prove that the new concept of integrated
peacebuilding missions works and that it is possible to
draw down a large and expensive peacekeeping
operation and replace it with a much cheaper and
leaner peacebuilding mission. Let me here summarize
one of the most important points.
First, UNIPSIL today is a much leaner mission
with a light footprint. While at its height the
peacekeeping operation had a staff strength of about
20,000, the new peacebuilding mission is now staffed
by only 73. While the previous mission included
17,000 peacekeepers, the new peacebuilding mission
no longer has any military personnel. The new
peacebuilding mission has also become more national
in character; almost half of its staff are now locally
recruited, and 13 of them are national professionals.
The peacebuilding mission includes more specialists,
nationals and internationals, to develop sound technical
advice, and has considerably fewer administrative and
other support staff.
Second, despite becoming a much leaner
organizational structure, we have been able to maintain
a strong role as a political facilitator in the country, as
demonstrated by UNIPSIL’s role in helping to solve the
recent outbreak of political violence in Sierra Leone
and in bringing about the joint communiqué. And
despite the much smaller staff, we have been able to
maintain a considerable field presence throughout the
country by joining hands with our United Nations
development partner agencies.
Third, we have been able to give the
peacebuilding mission a new orientation. Whereas the
previous peacekeeping mission focused mainly on
security, we are now focusing mainly on development.
For this reason, we have developed a strategy that is
based on integrating the political mandate of UNIPSIL
with the development mandates of members of the
United Nations country team. The result is the Joint
United Nations Vision for Sierra Leone that was
recently endorsed by the Government and the
Peacebuilding Commission. In addition to UNIPSIL,
17 United Nations agencies, funds or programmes have
signed up to the Joint Vision, working together on five
priority areas, a set of joint benchmarks and

4

21 programmes. Let me take this opportunity to thank
in particular the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Lynn Pascoe, for his support in getting the
new strategy accepted within the United Nations.
Fourth, in line with the Secretary-General’s
policy, we have been able to reach an exceptional level
of operational integration between UNIPSIL and the
United Nations country team that includes a joint
strategic unit, a joint multi-donor trust fund, joint
regional field offices, joint outreach initiatives, a joint
medical clinic, joint security services and a joint
vehicle repair shop. Let me take this opportunity to
thank all my colleagues of the United Nations country
team, as well as the World Bank and the African
Development Bank, for their support and enthusiasm in
bringing about a truly integrated peacebuilding
operation. Our integration will be to the benefit of
Sierra Leone and will help to improve aid efficiency.
Fifth, we are now working jointly with the World
Bank and other development partners to improve aid
coordination and increase national ownership, in line
with the Paris Declaration. With the Ministry of
Finance, we are presently finalizing a new and simple
aid coordination structure. I am convinced that better
aid coordination can utilize much more effectively the
dollars that donors have pledged.
Sixth, we have been able to strengthen our
cooperation with the Peacebuilding Commission. The
recent special session was, in my view, an excellent
example of this cooperation between the Commission
in New York and a United Nations peacebuilding
mission in the field. The Peacebuilding Commission
has been and remains important to Sierra Leone. I
would like to take this opportunity to thank especially
Ambassador McNee for his great support and for
bringing the international community behind our
peacebuilding agenda.
Finally, we have been able to set up UNIPSIL in a
way that should make any future transition towards a
normal development presence, with a resident
coordinator system, easy. All programmes are
implemented by United Nations agencies; we share
professional staff with United Nations agencies; most
joint services, such as the regional field offices, are
already managed by different United Nations agencies;
and our new compound has been built with a view to
becoming a future United Nations House. In fact, it is
our integrated strategy, the Joint United Nations

09-51020

S/PV.6187

Vision, that is the conduit for a smooth transition in the
future.
Let me now turn to my last point, about funding.
The success of Sierra Leone’s road towards becoming a
stable democratic country will largely depend on the
level at which the Government will be able to provide
a peace and democracy dividend for all Sierra
Leoneans. This in turn will depend on Sierra Leone’s
ability to rally international financial support for its
Agenda for Change. Also, the credibility of the new
United Nations integrated peacebuilding mission will
depend on our ability to generate resources for the
Joint Vision.
I hope that we will be able to count on the
continuous support of the Security Council, and on the
Peacebuilding Commission to call on Member States to
participate in the forthcoming Consultative Group
meeting in London in November and contribute
towards Sierra Leone’s development. I also hope that
Member States will support the United Nations multidonor trust fund and give our new approach to
peacebuilding the credibility it will need to succeed.
The President: I thank Mr. Von der Schulenburg
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. McNee.
Mr. McNee: It is a great pleasure to participate in
the Security Council’s consultations as chair of the
Peacebuilding
Commission’s
Sierra
Leone
configuration. I last appeared before the Council in this
capacity immediately prior to a high-level special
session of the Sierra Leone configuration on June 10. I
am pleased to report that the session was a clear
success. My co-host, Foreign Minister Bangura of
Sierra Leone, led an impressive delegation that included
representation from the Government, a major
opposition party and civil society. The participation of
such a wide array of national stakeholders, including a
senior representative of the opposition, was testament
to the progress Sierra Leone has made towards
fostering national dialogue and building an inclusive
democratic society. I am also grateful to the SecretaryGeneral’s Executive Representative for providing
insightful opening remarks today.
Beyond demonstrating that the international
community remains committed to Sierra Leone, the
special session also produced significant substantive
outcomes. It welcomed the Government of Sierra

09-51020

Leone’s Agenda for Change, endorsed the innovative
peacebuilding framework proposed by the United
Nations, the United Nations Joint Vision for Sierra
Leone, and launched a new multi-donor trust fund.
These efforts represent an important step towards
rationalizing
peacebuilding
efforts,
enhancing
coordination and improving the effectiveness of
international assistance.
At the special session, the Peacebuilding
Commission also decided to align its future
engagement in Sierra Leone with the Agenda for
Change, in particular focusing on three peacebuilding
priorities: youth unemployment, drug trafficking and
good governance. The Peacebuilding Commission will
continue to advocate for greater subregional
cooperation and the promotion of gender equality and
human rights. This new, lighter form of engagement
reaffirms national ownership and, at the same time,
simplifies the Peacebuilding Commission’s support to
Sierra Leone.
With the strategy now firmly in place, it falls to
Sierra Leone and the international community to
address the remaining peacebuilding challenges. I am
pleased to note that Sierra Leone has remained calm
over the past three months. While the incidents of
political violence in March signalled that the country
remains fragile, the major political parties and the
United Nations family in Sierra Leone are to be
commended for their work on the follow-up to the joint
communiqué. In this respect, efforts to extend these
discussions beyond Freetown and to the youth wings of
the major political parties are particularly welcome. So
too is the establishment of a Commission of Inquiry to
investigate allegations that sexual violence occurred on
16 March during incidents of political violence. I am
also pleased to note that the Peacebuilding Fund has
provided useful support for the follow-up to the joint
communiqué through its emergency facility.
These are all positive developments, but the
international community must not become complacent.
Sierra Leone remains fragile and must consolidate the
progress made so far towards an inclusive, peaceful
and democratic political sphere. Indeed, serious threats
to peace consolidation remain. First, high youth
unemployment continues to pose a latent danger of
instability. While programmes have been initiated to
address this problem, a more coherent and coordinated
strategy is needed. In order to fulfil this role, the
Government of Sierra Leone should establish the

5

S/PV.6187

proposed national youth commission as quickly as
possible. In addition, support for the Agenda for
Change’s strategy with respect to infrastructure and
agricultural development will help to spur economic
growth and job creation for those most at risk.
Secondly, illicit drug trafficking remains a serious
challenge. As it is a regional problem with global
implications, I was particularly pleased to participate
in the July launch of the joint West Africa Coast
Initiative of the United Nations, the Economic
Community of West African States and INTERPOL.
Not only will Sierra Leone directly benefit from this
programme, but it is also receiving similar support
from the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL), the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, INTERPOL and several
key donors to improve the performance of its Joint
Drug Interdiction Task Force. The fact that the Sierra
Leone security agencies have recently destroyed
substantial stocks of cannabis only highlights the need
to address this issue before it creates domestic socioeconomic problems.
Finally, progress is needed to consolidate
democracy and the rule of law. The constitutional
reform process has yet to be completed and capacity in
the justice sector must be enhanced, both in the formal
and traditional sectors. Similarly, the Anti-Corruption
Commission is working valiantly and with some recent
success, but more is needed to combat the culture of
corruption in Sierra Leone. Continuing to implement
the recommendations of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission will also help to demonstrate to the
civilian population that the conflict is truly behind
them.
The Peacebuilding Commission stands ready to
support efforts on each of these core priorities, but
Sierra Leone will not be able to pursue economic
development and meet its peacebuilding challenges
without active support from the international
community. That is particularly true given the
prevailing financial climate. Slower growth and the
effects of significant currency depreciation will affect
both the Government budget and individual Sierra
Leoneans. The Consultative Group meeting scheduled
for November assumes greater importance in this
context. The international community must ensure that
countries at a critical stage in their transition to
permanent peace and stability are not left to suffer the
effects of the financial crisis alone. Adequately funding

6

the Agenda for Change and the United Nations Joint
Vision will be essential.
In concluding, I would like to commend the
excellent work of the Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General, UNIPSIL, and the United Nations
country team in Sierra Leone. Their approach is both
innovative and effective. It is a model to be studied
carefully and replicated wherever possible.
The Peacebuilding Commission remains fully
committed to supporting Sierra Leone. In the coming
months, the Commission will advocate on behalf of
Sierra Leone before the Consultative Group meeting,
monitor progress on the joint communiqué and engage
directly on the three core peacebuilding priorities
identified at the special session. In this effort, we look
forward to the continued strong support of the Security
Council.
The President: I thank Mr. McNee for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Sierra Leone.
Mr. Touray (Sierra Leone): Madam President,
may I extend to you my delegation’s heartiest
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of September.
My delegation’s sincere appreciation also goes to the
Council for the consideration of the SecretaryGeneral’s comprehensive report on the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIPSIL), contained in document S/2009/438, and we
thank the Secretary-General for such a wellaccomplished effort.
Through you, Madam, allow me also to convey
my gratitude to the members of the Sierra Leone
country-specific configuration, and particularly its
Chair, Ambassador John McNee, for his effective
leadership and instructive statement to Council; to the
Executive Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Michael von der Schulenburg, for his very helpful
and insightful briefing today; and to the entire
membership of the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Fund for their tireless efforts in ensuring that the
process remains on course.
Three months ago, we met in this Chamber to
consider the quarterly review of the implementation of
the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone. At today’s

09-51020

S/PV.6187

meeting, we are undertaking another review, which
should lead to an extension of UNIPSIL’s mandate for
the next 12 months.
In retrospect and by way of an attempted
assessment, the Government and the people of Sierra
Leone are convinced that there has been some
significant value added. The rapid and innovative
approach that the UNIPSIL leadership adopted to
address the 16 March skirmishes that were sparked off
between followers of the two main political parties
truly exemplifies the raison d’être of the Office. In this
regard, I am pleased to place on record my appreciation
of the high level of maturity and commitment that the
two main political parties have demonstrated, and
continue so to do, in implementing the joint
communiqué signed on 29 April to foster peaceful
coexistence and responsible dialogue in governance.
Although significant progress is being recorded
in promoting, among other things, inter-party dialogue
and in combating corruption, narcotic drug trafficking
and cross-border organized crime, as well as in
enhancing security across the country, at the same time
the Government is not oblivious to the challenges in
addressing governance, human rights issues and the
youth unemployment situation and its attendant
uncertainties and consequences, and in establishing and
making basic relevant institutional mechanisms and
structures operational.
The economic and financial downturn is no doubt
also negatively impacting the Government’s ability to
address some of the socio-economic challenges
confronting our fragile peace consolidation process. In
an effort to address those challenges, the Foreign
Minister, The Honourable Mrs. Zainab Hawa Bangura,
and the Chair of the Sierra Leone country-specific
configuration, Ambassador John McNee, on 10 June
co-hosted a high-level event to mobilize support and
marshal resources for the Government’s Agenda for
Change and the Joint Vision of the United Nations
country team as a coordination mechanism for partner
collaboration with the Government.
In that respect, I wish to reiterate the need for
support to the projected $350 million multi-donor trust
fund for the implementation of the strategic
frameworks announced at the June high-level event,
due to be formally launched in London in November
this year.
We welcome any resolution of the Council that
extends the mandate of UNIPSIL for a further one year,

09-51020

to be reviewed biannually. On the issue of benchmarks,
we consider that there are already built-in benchmarks
in the implementing and monitoring mechanism of the
United Nations Joint Vision agreed with the
Government and that there is no need for additional
ones that, in any event, would require the further
express support of the Government and all
stakeholders, which may not be readily and timeously
forthcoming.
On an exit strategy and its time frame, much as
Sierra Leone undoubtedly does not wish to remain
indefinitely on the Council’s peacebuilding agenda and
to overstay its welcome, we are however mindful of the
existing and emerging threats and challenges to peace,
security and development confronting the subregion
and of the need to continue monitoring progress
through a UNIPSIL mandate within the framework of
the ongoing strategies now being implemented. We
believe that security within the subregion is still a
considerable challenge and too fragile, considering the
current subregional dynamics, the Yenga issue and the
narcotic drug trafficking and cross-border organized
crime in the West Africa subregion in general and in
the Mano River Basin and Gulf of Guinea in particular,
to warrant any foreseeable safe exit of the muchneeded international presence, assistance and support
that UNIPSIL offers and provides before the 2012
elections in Sierra Leone.
On behalf of the Government and the people of
Sierra Leone, including the opposition, members of
civil society and all vulnerable groups, I would like in
conclusion to reiterate our sincere gratitude to the
Council, the United Nations, our bilateral partners and
the wider international community for their continued
engagement on Sierra Leone for a better and peaceful
transformation and transition and to reassure the
Council again of the Government’s determination to
maintain the momentum towards national recovery and
peace consolidation by striving steadfastly to overcome
the lingering socio-economic problems of the country
and to secure its future development free from want
and fear.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. In accordance with the
understanding reached in the course of the Council’s
prior consultations, I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion of the
subject.
The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.

7
