S/PV.6811

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6811

th meeting
Thursday, 19 July 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Osorio. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Colombia)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Musayev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Bertoux
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Briz Gutiérrez
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Erroja
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Zhukov
Mr. Laher
Mr. M’Beou
Mr. Wilson
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Third report of the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 2001 (2011)
(S/2012/535)

12-42893 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1242893*

S/PV.6811

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
Third report of the Secretary-General pursuant
to resolution 2001 (2011) (S/2012/535)
The President (spoke in Spanish): Under rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Iraq to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Martin Kobler, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2012/535, which contains the third report of
the Secretary-General pursuant resolution 2001 (2011).
I now give the floor to Mr. Kobler.
Mr. Kobler: I am pleased to introduce to the
Council the third report of the Secretary-General
pursuant to resolution 2001 (2011) (S/2012/535) on the
activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI). I will also brief Council members on
the most recent developments in Iraq.
One year ago, my predecessor told Council
members that he was cautiously optimistic about
Iraq’s future. Today, as the Council considers the
renewal of the UNAMI mandate, Iraq has much to
be proud of regarding what it has achieved. With the
final withdrawal of United States troops at the end of
last year, Iraq regained full control over its sovereign
territory.
It has made committed efforts to enforce law and
order across the country. Reclaiming its place at the
diplomatic table, it successfully hosted the twenty-third
Summit of the League of Arab States in March and
talks between Iran and the permanent members of
the Security Council plus Germany in May. Yet, my
predecessor had tempered his cautious optimism with
the caveat that determined leadership would be required
within Iraq for the country to continue to progress.

2

As I sit before the Council today, Iraq is in the
midst of a seven-month-long stalemate between the
political blocs, a situation that continues to hamper
progress in areas essential to Iraq’s development,
including a sustainable solution to the disputed internal
boundaries; the unfinished constitutional agenda; the
adoption of essential outstanding legislation; and the
preparation of next year’s provincial Council elections.
When the Council adopted resolution 1770 (2007),
it gave UNAMI a mandate to advise, support and assist
the Government and the people of Iraq. The question
today is whether crucial obstacles can be overcome in
order for the Iraqi State and society to begin to realize
their full potential. In my assessment, the role of
UNAMI will be more important than ever in supporting
Iraq on its journey towards stability and development.
Since my last briefing to the Council (see
S/PV.6747), I have strengthened my engagement with
political leaders from all sides in Baghdad and in the
Kurdistan region, met with representatives of many of
Iraq’s communities, and listened to the advice of Iraq’s
spiritual leaders, such as Grand Ayatollah Sistani in
Najaf. I have also sought the views of the Governments
of Iran, Kuwait and Turkey on the situation in the
region.
The core of the UNAMI mandate is to support and
to assist the people of Iraq, for it is the people of Iraq
who want the political stalemate to end. It is they who
want to have a life in security and prosperity and a
better future for their children and who long for the day
when the benefits from the natural wealth of the country
will translate into the reliable delivery of electricity and
other public services and economic development.
Almost seven years ago, the Iraqi people laid the
foundations for democracy in their country by adopting
their Constitution. Today, however, key institutions
have yet to be established and fundamental legislation
remains outstanding, including the establishment
of the Federation Council; the strengthening of the
judicial system; the legislation on revenue-sharing
and hydrocarbons; and the protection of minorities, to
mention but a few.
My colleagues and I have made the promotion of
progress in those areas a priority. In particular, the
legal and policy frameworks for sharing revenue need
to be put in place. That would constitute a significant
strengthening of the federal system, improve the
environment for investment, and provide for the agreed

12-42893

S/PV.6811

distribution of national wealth. Revenue-sharing is
vital to helping improve Arab-Kurdish coexistence,
to ensuring that Iraq remains a single federal State,
and, above all, to advancing a solution of the disputed
internal boundaries.
Making progress in unblocking Iraq’s unfinished
legislative agenda, however, requires an agreement
among Iraq’s political leaders that will end the political
stalemate. Such an agreement must be reached through
transparent and inclusive dialogue, in respect of the
Constitution and in a spirit of compromise.
There is no democracy without elections. There
are no credible elections without a strong and truly
independent election commission. As we speak, my
political deputy, Mr. György Busztin, is engaged
in facilitation efforts to bring about the formation
of a new Independent High Electoral Commission
with a membership that is representative of the main
components of Iraq, including women and minorities.
The urgent selection of Commissioners is essential
to ensuring that the Provincial Council elections, due
to take place in March 2013, can be conducted on time.
I am concerned that the ongoing political stalemate
is hindering the process, however. In recent days, I
have discussed with political leaders, including Prime
Minister Nuri al-Maliki, the need for a swift conclusion
of the selection process and the adequate representation
of women and minorities in the Commission. Today, I
would like to reiterate my appeal to all political blocs
to expedite the selection of professional commissioners.
Here, UNAMI stands ready to actively assist.
The number of civilian casualties caused by terrorist
attacks is increasing across Iraq. Since the beginning
of this year, an average of 12 violent incidents per day
have claimed a total of more than 1,300 victims, many
of whom were innocent children and women who were
simply in the wrong place at the wrong time. Each
victim is one too many.
The Iraqi authorities must continue to make every
effort to identify the perpetrators of such acts of violence
and to bring them to justice. The attacks are intended
to ignite further violence. Despite the suffering, Iraqis
from all walks of life and religious backgrounds must
turn their back on past divisions and unite for a peaceful
future.
Human rights are a cornerstone of Iraq’s democratic
future and are at the core of the United Nations mandate

in Iraq. To that end, UNAMI continues to support
the activities of the Ministry of Human Rights in
ensuring that Iraq meets its international human rights
obligations.
As I informed Council members in April, the
Council of Representatives endorsed the appointment
of the Commissioners of Iraq’s first Independent
High Commission for Human Rights. I am pleased to
further report that the Commissioners have now met
and started their work. UNAMI and the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) are supporting the
Commission in that process.
The findings of the 2011 United Nations report on
the human rights situation in Iraq, published in May,
underlined the fragility of the human rights situation
in Iraq. The report’s conclusions largely coincided with
the Ministry of Human Rights’ own findings. While it is
recognized that the Government of Iraq has made some
progress in implementing measures to protect and to
promote human rights, the impact on the overall human
rights situation remains limited. The United Nations is
assisting the Iraqi authorities in strengthening the rule
of law and in boosting protection for human rights in
Iraq in order to bring an end to abuses such as arbitrary
arrests and detentions.
The economic, social and cultural rights of
Iraqis are also matters of real concern. Poverty, high
unemployment, economic stagnation, environmental
degradation and a lack of basic services continue to
affect large sections of the population. It is vital that
Iraqis, in particular vulnerable groups, be provided
with better access to basic services, social welfare
and community development programmes and
opportunities for education. Nothing less is required in
order to provide for the success of future generations.
The rights of all Iraqis, including minorities, must be
protected, as stipulated in the Iraqi Constitution.
Iraq retains the death penalty for a large
number of crimes. I therefore reiterate the call by
the Secretary-General and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights on the Government
of Iraq to establish a moratorium on all executions
with a view to their abolition. I welcome the fact that
the authorities in the Kurdistan region continue to
implement a moratorium on carrying out executions,
which has been in place since 2007.
Let me now turn to some of the recent regional
and international developments pertaining to Iraq. As

12-428933

S/PV.6811

members know, Prime Minister Al-Maliki’s visit to
Kuwait in March was followed by the historic visit of the
Amir of Kuwait to Baghdad to attend the Arab Summit.
Those two visits have markedly improved bilateral
relations between Kuwait and Iraq and facilitated the
resumption of the meetings of the Joint Iraq-Kuwait
Ministerial Committee.
Iraq has also taken decisive steps to finalize
the Iraq-Kuwait boundary maintenance project, in
accordance with resolution 833 (1993). At the request
of both parties, the United Nations is preparing for the
maintenance work to start by 31 October, provided that
key prerequisites, such as the removal of obstacles on
the border, are met. Bringing all Chapter VII obligations
pertaining to Kuwait to a satisfactory close will boost
prospects for bilateral trade, and investment, promote
regional cooperation and lead to the restoration of Iraq’s
rightful standing within the international community.
In this regard, I would also like to take this
opportunity to welcome the adoption on 28 June by
the Council of Representatives of a law ratifying the
Additional Protocol to the Comprehensive Safeguards
Agreement of the International Atomic Energy Agency,
and I encourage the Government of Iraq to take the
remaining steps to ensure its entry into force as soon
as possible.
The intensity and frequency of sand and dust storms,
mainly generated from inside Iraq, have increased in
recent years. They have a significant impact on public
health in Iraq and in the wider region, especially for the
most vulnerable, and they affect transport and trade.
During my visit to Kuwait in June, and following an
offer by the Amir of Kuwait to invest a portion of Iraq’s
outstanding war compensation funds back into Iraq, I
proposed an environmental fund to combat sand and
dust storms. If Iraq and Kuwait agree, the fund could
be used to undertake activities to reduce that health
hazard, which is impeding daily life in the region.
Such activities might include improving water resource
management, anti-desertification, reforestation and
agricultural projects.
Needless to say, the ongoing violence in Syria is
a source of deep concern, given the potential for the
spread of instability and violence, humanitarian fallout
and political repercussions. The United Nations system
in Iraq is putting in place contingency plans for a
possible humanitarian emergency. In this connection, I
recently visited a refugee camp in the Kurdistan region

4

for those displaced by the conflict in Syria. So far,
with 7,000 refugees, their numbers are manageable.
On 10 July, the United Nations and the League of
Arab States Joint Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Kofi
Annan, visited Iraq and met with Prime Minister Nuri
al-Maliki. The Government of Iraq was very clear on
the importance of a political transition that is Syrian-led
and Syrian-owned, and that ensures that the legitimate
and democratic aspirations of the Syrian people are
fully realized.
The United Nations in Iraq also continues to
support the development of effective, accountable
and transparent State institutions. My new Deputy,
and Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator for
Iraq, Ms. Jacqueline Badcock, took up her duties on
13 May. She has already shown her determination and
leadership in coordinating the United Nations country
team to deliver as one. I have asked her to ensure that
the country team strengthens its presence and activities
across the country. That is taking shape in Basra.
There, United Nations agencies, funds and programmes
can assist in bringing the quality of life in that oil-rich
province to the levels found in other oil-rich countries
in the region.
Let me briefly highlight two of the priority areas
with important political, security and development
implications, where the United Nations system in Iraq
is working as one.
Iraq is one of the most youthful countries in the
world, with 50 per cent of the population under the
age of 18. At the same time, the unemployment rate
for youth is more than double the domestic average, at
23 per cent. The United Nations system is supporting
programmes aimed at increasing youth participation
in the social, political and economic spheres. Building
on the International Year of Youth 2011, the United
Nations is supporting civil society groups to strengthen
their role in ensuring democratic space and freedoms.
The third UNDP National Human Development Report
focuses on youth and will be published later this year.
As with youth, women are important actors in
Iraq’s development, yet the illiteracy rate among Iraqi
women is more than double that of Iraqi men. In my
meetings with Iraqi governmental interlocutors, as
well as women’s civil society organizations, I advocate
for the adoption and implementation of the proposed
national strategy on the advancement of women. The
United Nations family is working to support women

12-42893

S/PV.6811

in taking up their role in political and economic life.
The United Nations is also continuing to work to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) and to encourage the
Government to fulfil its commitments in that regard.
Finally, I still remain very concerned by the lack
of progress in resolving the issue of Camp Ashraf.
In the past months, 2,000 residents of Camp Ashraf
have relocated to Camp Hurriya. Approximately 1,200
remain in Camp Ashraf. The several deadlines set by
the Government of Iraq have been extended. I thank the
Government of Iraq for its flexibility in this regard, and
I appeal to the Iraqi authorities to continue the process
to resolve the relocation peacefully. Our commitment
is strictly humanitarian; it is to facilitate a voluntary,
temporary relocation of residents to Camp Hurriya as
a first step of resettlement to countries outside Iraq.
However, the success of a facilitator depends at least on
good will. There can no facilitation without constructive
and practical dialogue.
We are faced with three main challenges. First,
recent weeks have witnessed difficulties in maintaining
dialogue between UNAMI and the residents and
between the residents and the Government of Iraq,
reinforcing a perception that residents lack the genuine
will to participate in the process facilitated by UNAMI.
Secondly, responsibility also falls on the many
international supporters. It is of great importance that
they contribute to positively influence the residents’
positions. Thirdly, to date, almost no Member State has
stepped forward to offer resettlement to eligible former
Ashraf residents.
There must be a way out of Camp Hurriya in the
foreseeable future. Without the prospect of resettlement,
the ongoing process runs the risk of collapsing. The
temporary transit location of Camp Hurriya has the
capacity to accommodate the remaining 1,200 residents
and meet acceptable humanitarian standards. Both
UNAMI and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees have devoted substantial
energy and resources to resolving the issue. More than
100 staff members are dedicated to the project in the
meantime.
I appeal to the Government of Iraq to be generous,
particularly in terms of humanitarian needs like
water and electricity, and to avoid violence under any
circumstances. I also appeal to Camp residents to abide
by Iraqi laws and avoid provocation and violence.
Time for finding a sustainable solution is running out.

The Government’s patience is wearing thin. I would
therefore like to echo the Secretary-General and
urge Camp Ashraf residents to cooperate with Iraqi
authorities and to relocate from Camp Ashraf to Camp
Hurriya. It is also imperative that third countries step
forward to accept eligible residents for resettlement as
soon as possible, without which there can be no durable
solution.
In my introduction, I posed the question of whether
the people of Iraq still need UNAMI. I am convinced
that UNAMI is needed more than ever to help Iraq
complete its transition to a stable and prosperous
democracy. UNAMI has the legitimacy and the standing
to represent the international community in Iraq. Iraqis
from all communities look to UNAMI to protect their
aspirations and to ensure that their needs are met. With
the Security Council’s support, UNAMI will continue
its efforts to address the many outstanding issues
crucial to securing Iraq’s future. The substantial cut of
20 per cent of UNAMI’s budget in 2013 requires that
we do more with less. In that context, the Mission may
need to reconsider some areas of operation.
I should like to sincerely thank the members of the
Council for their continued support, the Government of
Iraq and the wider membership of the United Nations,
as well as the staff of UNAMI, for their unrelenting
commitment and dedication to implementing our
mandate.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Kobler for his comprehensive briefing.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Representative
of Iraq.
Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, and your country on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for this month
and to extend my thanks to the previous President, the
Permanent Representative of the People’s Republic of
China, for his efforts during the month of June.
I also would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Iraq, Mr. Martin Kobler,
and his team in Baghdad and New York for their tireless
efforts to assist the Government and people of Iraq.
Having reviewed the report of the Secretary-General
on UNAMI’s work in Iraq, document (S/2012/535), I
would like to present the following comments.

12-428935

S/PV.6811

On the political and security situation, the Iraqi
people lived for decades under the brutal and dictatorial
regime of Saddam Hussein, which destroyed the
country and had severe and negative effects on the
mentality of the Iraqi people. However, after the fall of
Saddam’s regime in 2003, the Iraqi people decided to go
through the process of building a new Iraq, which is a
constitutional, parliamentary and a federal democracy.
Until today, in Iraq we have faced difficulties, problems
and challenges, many of which are the product of
Saddam’s legacy. Despite the problems among the
political groups in Iraq regarding many important
political issues, it is notable that they have conducted
their differences within peaceful means, as stipulayed
in the Iraqi Constitution for which the Iraqi people
voted.
These political differences have not crossed legal
and constitutional boundaries, and no political party
has threatened to use force or violence to impose its
will and political agenda. Therefore, I can say that
the Iraqi people started to learn to shout at each other
instead of shooting at each other, and to use ballots
rather than bullets to achieve their political objectives
and to express their views.
Iraq’s President, Mr. Jalal Talabani, as a guardian
of the Constitution and within his mission to resolve the
current political situation, which was described by my
friend Mr. Kobler as a stalemate, has made intensive
efforts and held many meetings with senior leaders of
the country, parliamentary blocs and political parties,
in which he called on all parties to put the interests of
the country and its citizens above any other interest or
consideration.
In a statement on 17 May, he called on all political
rivals to stop reciprocal media campaigns, to reject
convulsive speech, to adopt constructive dialogue aimed
at reaching and promoting the commonalities, and not
to deepen and expand their differences. He also called
on them in his statement to consider the Constitution as
their point of reference and to commit themselves to the
basic principle the Government is based on, which is a
true partnership in managing authority and in taking
responsibility.
In that context, during his meeting with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq,
Mr. Martin Kobler, on 12 June, the President affirmed
his ongoing efforts to bring the views of the political
rivals closer together and to prevent the dangers of

6

segregation in the country. He also mentioned that Iraq
is in dire need of political harmony among political
rivals and of achieving a national partnership in
administrating the country.
On the other hand, the Prime Minister, Mr. Nuri
Kamel al-Maliki, issued a press statement on 10 June
in which he called on all political partners to come
at the dialogue table and to be open to discussing all
the differences that have been set out in all papers and
initiatives, in the spirit of national responsibility. He
also called on them to strive to find solutions and move
towards the construction and reconstruction process,
including State-building and establishing State
institutions on a constitutional basis, and to accelerate
the allocation of services to citizens. He affirmed in
another statement, issued on 27 June, his commitment
to developing the political process and enforcing
democracy, and he renewed his call for a dialogue
based on the Constitution and for reforms in all State
institutions.
Within the framework of the intensive efforts
made by the Iraqi Government to grant more authority
to provincial councils, the Prime Minister chaired a
meeting of the regular session of the Council of Ministers
in Dhi Qar province on 12 June. In the meeting, the
Prime Minister renewed his assertion that the purpose
of holding the Council’s meetings in the provinces, as
has been done in Mosul, Kirkuk and Basra provinces,
is to get a closer look at their problems and needs and
to support and help local Governments to improve the
provinces and accelerate services provided to citizens
in all sectors.
The security situation in Iraq has witnessed an
enormous and noticeable improvement. Statistics
provided by the Ministry of Health point to a continuing
decline in the numbers of civilian victims of terrorism
in 2011 as compared to statistics recorded in 2009 and
2010. The number of terrorism victims declined by
20 per cent in 2010, as compared with its level in 2009,
and decreased by 14 per cent in 2011, as compared to
2010. This year, as Mr. Kobler mentioned, there have
been more terrorist attacks, but we hope that for the rest
of the year we will see more and more improvements in
security as the Government is taking all measures to
try to stop the terrorists from achieving their cynical
objectives.
The improved security situation has encouraged
many Iraqi refugees to return to Iraq, and statistics of

12-42893

S/PV.6811

the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees point to the fact that the number of Iraqi
refugees, for example in Syria, has declined to 87,000
this year from 150,000 last year.
On the social and economic situation, the
Government of Iraq has stressed that the duty of
all officials in all Government sectors is to meet
the demands of Iraqi citizens with all its available
resources and to improve services for the Iraqi people.
The Government has called on everyone to cooperate
with it in order to alleviate the suffering of the citizens
and to provide them with all possible services. The
Government of Iraq also affirms its commitment to the
economic openness plan towards all countries of the
world.
In that regard, I would like to point to the increase in
crude oil exports for the month of May and its positive
effect on the economy in Iraq. Total exports reached
76 million barrels in May, with a value of $7,831,000,000
and with an average price of approximately $103 per
barrel.
I would also like to point to the fourth licensing
round in the Ministry of Oil, which granted a consortium
of Kuwait Energy, the Turkish Petroleum Corporation
and the United Arab Emirates Dragon Oil company
with a service and investment contract for exploration
of block 9 in Basra province over an area of 900 square
kilometres with oil potential. This licensing round came
as part of the policy of receiving and opening offers, in a
very transparent way, from international oil companies
that are eligible to compete for service contracts for
exploration areas listed in the fourth licensing round,
which includes 12 locations with six exploration areas
spread over a number of provinces.
The fourth licensing round for the exploration of
oil and gas was opened in the presence of Mr. Hussein
al-Shahristani, Deputy Prime Minister for Energy
Affairs, Mr. Abdul-Kareem Luaibi, Minister of Oil,
and a number of members of Parliament, presidents of
provincial councils, Ambassadors and representatives of
the international oil companies. Forty-seven companies
from Egypt, Kuwait, the United Arab Emirates, the
United Kingdom, Russia, China, France, Italy, Japan,
the Netherlands, Switzerland, Norway, Romania,
Croatia, South Korea, India, Pakistan, Indonesia,
Vietnam, Thailand, Turkey and Angola participated in
this round.

The Ministry of Oil also announced that Iraq’s
oil production for the next 20 years will be 60 billion
barrels, with an estimated value of $5 trillion, based
on estimated price of $85 per barrel. The Ministry is
currently working on constructing four new refineries in
Iraqi provinces through a process of foreign investment.
The establishment of those refineries will have a
positive effect on the Iraqi economy by increasing the
production of oil products, which will reflect positively
on the fuel distribution to Iraqi citizens.
Iraq has started oil production at the new Al-Ahdab
oil field in Wasit province in central Iraq, which is
managed by the Chinese National Petroleum Company
with a production level of 60,000 barrels per day. The
accompanied natural gas from this field will be used
to provide fuel for Al-Kahlaa power station in Misan
province. Through the licensing rounds, Iraq is seeking
to increase its oil production to meet domestic demand
and to export the surplus, in addition to increasing its
oil reserves by new discoveries in the new block offered
to international companies for exploration. Those
steps affirm that, after less than a year and a half of
implementation of the previous round of contracts, Iraq
has been able to increase its oil production by more
than 500,000 barrels of oil a day.
I also would like to point out that an Iraqi delegation
headed by Mr. Hoshyar Zebari, Minister for Foreign
Affairs, signed in Brussels on 11 May the European
Union-Iraq Partnership and Cooperation Agreement.
That agreement is a comprehensive long-term treaty
between parties that believe in the goals and principles
of the United Nations and the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and are committed to the principles
of democracy. During the visit, discussions were held
regarding work procedures that would contribute to the
implementation of the Agreement for joint cooperation
on issues relating to investment and energy. Iraq
and the European Union also touched on the timing
of implementing the most important issues covered
by this Agreement, including political dialogue, in
addition to touching on political issues relating to the
achievement of stability and peace in the Arab region.
I also would like to point to the visit of the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of Sweden, Bulgaria and Poland, as
representatives of the European Union, to Baghdad on
23 June to discuss the implementation mechanism of
the Agreement with Iraqi officials.
With regard to the human rights situation, Iraq is
entering a new era in which the Iraqis are building the

12-428937

S/PV.6811

foundation of democracy and all kinds of freedoms:
freedom of the press, freedom to establish political
parties and freedom of expression, as well as pluralism
and the peaceful transition of power. Iraq has also
continued to move towards deepening the bonds of
friendship and cooperation with neighbouring countries
in order to regain its positive role and live in peace with
its people and neighbours in a way that strengthens the
chances for stability and peace in the region.
Iraq is also committed to abiding by the decisions of
the Human Rights Council and has made considerable
progress and achieved important accomplishments in
protecting and respecting human rights, despite the
challenges and difficulties. It has done so through
the work of the competent institutions specialized in
that field, starting with the Human Rights Committee
in Parliament, the Ministry of Human Rights and its
offices located throughout Baghdad and the provinces,
and human rights committees in the provincial councils,
and ending with the establishment of the Independent
High Commission for Human Rights. Also, many
important regulations have been issued regarding
human rights and several laws and decrees issued by
the former regime that were contrary to the principles
of human rights were either cancelled or amended.
Iraq presented its report during the Universal
Periodic Review of the Human Rights Council in
Geneva and agreed on the Council’s recommendations,
which were formulated with the vision and ideas of the
Ministry of Human Rights within the framework of
the national plan for human rights, which is considered
to be the first plan in the history of the Iraqi State to
become a road map in that field. Iraq also submitted
its report regarding the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict,
and is preparing to welcome the Special Rapporteur on
torture, following an invitation from Iraq.
In this regard, I would like to point to the creation of
the Independent High Commission for Human Rights,
which is a historic achievement for Iraq and a sign of
its true intention to respect and promote human rights
in the country. What makes its creation unique is the
mechanism formulated by the Commission’s Law No. 54
of 2009, which ensures transparency, professionalism,
democracy and the Paris standards in creating an
Independent Commission by the Parliamentary Human
Rights Committee, the Parliamentary Committee of

8

Experts, and the rest of the participants, which was
crowned by the House of Representatives’ approval
of the members of the Board of the Commissioners.
It added an important institution to the process of
building a comprehensive system for promoting human
rights that enjoys the backing and support of the United
Nations and its agencies.
The freedoms of the press and expression are
two of the most important safeguards for an effective
monitoring mechanism for the fourth authority on
the situation of human rights and the rule of law in
Iraq. The Constitution ensures freedom of expression
and opinion by all means and the freedom of the
press, print, advertising, the media and publishing.
Freedom of expression and opinion are centre pillars
in democracy-building, which has continued to evolve
since 2003.
Law No. 22 on protecting journalists was adopted;
the reason stated for its adoption was to respect
freedom of the press and opinion, to guarantee the
rights of journalists and to emphasize their role in
establishing democracy in the new Iraq. The important
role of journalists is to complement the role of human
rights observers. Pursuant to article 2, the law aims to
promote the rights of journalists and provide them with
protection in the Republic. Several items in the law
deal with the legal assurances for journalists to perform
their work with freedom and ease.
I would like to affirm that Iraq has fulfilled its
humanitarian and international obligations towards the
residents of Camp New Iraq, which used to be called
Camp Ashraf. As Mr. Kobler mentioned, the Iraqi
Government has showed flexibility in relocating the
Camp’s residents. Iraq has also collaborated fully with
Special Representative Kobler and with the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in solving the
issue of the Camp and relocating its residents to Camp
Hurriya. The Iraqi Government calls on the members
of the European Union and other countries to facilitate
the process of relocating the Camp’s residents as a final
solution to this problem.
With regard to the regional and international
situation, in accordance with Iraq’s responsibility
towards the region and the world, as a peaceful State
aiming to establish international peace and security
through cooperative work to achieve the goals and aims
of the United Nations Charter, the Iraqi Government,
after hosting the Arab summit in March, worked on

12-42893

S/PV.6811

holding a meeting of the five plus one group (P5+1)
and the European Union with the delegation of the
Islamic Republic of Iran regarding the Iranian nuclear
programme, on 23 and 24 May. The meeting was
held to discuss this important and sensitive issue in
an Arab capital, which reflects the interest of Arab
countries and their people in dealing with that issue
through peaceful means and in taking responsibility
in protecting the region and its people from any war
or conflict. In a statement issued by the P5+1 and
delivered by Ms. Catherine Ashton, European Union
High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, in a press conference on 24 May, she expressed
her thanks to the Iraqi Government, and especially to
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Hoshyar Zebari, for
the exceptional hospitality and organization of those
meetings.
Within the framework of Iraq’s openness to all
countries of the world, Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Hoshyar Zebari visited Moscow on 14 June upon
invitation from his Russian counterpart, Mr. Sergey
Lavrov. During the visit, the two Ministers discussed
the results of the nuclear talks conducted in Baghdad
between the six countries and Iran and the role played
by Iraq in facilitating that meeting as a prelude to the
meeting that followed in Moscow. An agreement was
reached on a protocol for political and diplomatic
collaboration between the Iraqi Ministry for Foreign
Affairs and the Russian Federation. Furthermore, the
work of Russian companies in the oil, gas and electricity
sectors was discussed during the meeting, in addition to
military collaboration and the idea of establishing an
air travel route between Baghdad and Moscow.
I would also like to point to the active role of
Mr. Hoshyar Zebari, Minister for Foreign Affairs, who
headed the Iraqi delegation participating in the meeting
of the international working group on Syria in Geneva
on 30 June and the high-level ministerial meeting held
to prepare the final document that was produced by the
group’s meeting. Iraq offered significant observations
that reflected its position in dealing with the Syrian
crisis, which was agreed in the outcome document.
Iraq’s Minister of Foreign Affairs also participated in
the Syrian opposition conference on 2 July in Cairo in
his capacity as Chair of the League of Arab States.
In the framework of Iraq’s desire to strengthen
its bonds with Arab countries, Mr. Hoshyar Zebari
met with Mr. Mohamed Morsy, President of the Arab
Republic of Egypt. In the meeting, Mr. Zebari conveyed

the greetings and congratulations of President of Iraq
Jalal Talabani, Prime Minister Nuri Al-Maliki and
the Iraqi people upon the election of Mr. Morsy as the
new President. Mr. Zebari stressed the importance of
the bilateral relations between the two countries on the
official and popular levels, and Iraq’s desire to improve
their relations, which would serve the interests of the
two countries.
In the light of implementing Iraq’s obligations
imposed under resolution 1957 (2010) in December 2010,
which lifted the sanctions against Iraq, and following
Iraq’s voluntary implementation of the Additional
Protocol to its Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement
with the International Atomic Energy Agency, the Iraqi
Parliament ratified the Additional Protocol on 28 June.
Concerning the situation between Iraq and
Kuwait, I would like to affirm that Iraq is committed
to resolving all unresolved issues with our neighbour
Kuwait through friendly relations and negotiations.
I also assure the Council that there is positive
collaboration and exchange between the Governments
of Iraq and Kuwait with a view to settling all the
unresolved issues between the two countries resulting
from Saddam’s invasion of Kuwait in 1990. Resolving
these remaining issues is a top priority for us in Iraq.
I affirm my country’s commitment to fulfilling the
remaining obligations within the framework of the
relevant resolutions adopted by the Security Council on
the situation between Iraq and Kuwait.
In this context, the Iraqi Government, in
collaboration with the International Committee of
the Red Cross and with some friendly countries, has
made intensive efforts to locate the remains of missing
Kuwaitis. The Iraqi authorities have searched official
records and mass graves for the purpose of finding the
remains of the missing Kuwaitis. We have achieved
good results in this regard and are pursuing our earnest
efforts to close this file.
In the context of implementing the relevant Security
Council resolutions and of efforts made by the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs to close the file of Kuwaiti property
taken over by the former regime in 1990, on 16 April, in
the headquarters of the Central Bank of Kuwait, paper
notes, metal currency, documents and keys belonging
to the Central Bank of Kuwait were handed over to
the Kuwaiti side. On 17 April, 15 microfilm cassettes
containing the archives of the Kuwaiti newspaper

12-428939

S/PV.6811

Al Anbar were transferred to the Kuwaiti authorities in
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
I would also like to point to the meeting of the joint
Iraqi-Kuwaiti Ministerial Committee that was held
in Baghdad on 29 April, at which a number of issues
were discussed, most importantly Iraq’s obligations
towards international resolutions, land borders,
freedom of navigation in Khor Abdallah, missing Iraqis
and Kuwaitis, Kuwaiti loans to Iraq, compensations,
Kuwait’s new Mubarak Port, the establishment of a Gulf
hunting area, and the opening of a Kuwaiti consulates
in Basra and Erbil.
At the end of the meeting, the following documents
were signed: the minutes of the meeting of the second
session of the High Committee, at which an inventory
of all issues was identified, signed by the Foreign
Ministers of the two countries; the agreement to
establish a joint collaboration committee between Iraq
and Kuwait, signed by the Foreign Ministers of the two
countries; and an agreement between Iraq and Kuwait
regarding the establishment of a joint management
committee to facilitate and organize navigation in Khor
Abdullah, signed by the Transportation Ministers of
the two countries. An agreement was also reached to
sign other accords after concluding the legal steps in
each country during the visit of the Prime Minister of
Kuwait to Baghdad before the end of this year.
A positive environment has prevailed at the
meetings of the committee and sub-committees, as has

10

a common dedication to the importance of achieving
noticeable improvement in Iraqi-Kuwaiti relations.
All these things have been achieved as a result of the
political will of the leaders of the two countries. We
hope that the achievements of the 29 April meeting
will pave the way for Iraq’s exit from the provisions
of Chapter VII, especially when an understanding on
specific mechanisms and joint vision for the future
steps is reached.
In conclusion, I would like to point to the letter
of the Foreign Minister of Iraq, Mr. Hoshyar Zebari,
addressed to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and dated
28 June 2012, which states Iraq’s desire for the mandate
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq to be
extended for a period of 12 months (S/2012/520, annex).
I also affirm my Government’s appreciation for the role
played by UNAMI in Iraq and New York in helping
Iraq, and for the efforts made by Special Representative
Martin Kobler to provide the support requested by the
Iraqi Government in line with the mechanisms agreed
upon between the two sides. I agree with the statement
made by my friend Martin Kobler to the effect that
UNAMI is needed now more than ever in Iraq.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names on the list of speakers.
I now invite members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on this subject.
The meeting rose at 3.55 p.m.

12-42893
