United Nations

A/RES/58/222

General Assembly

Distr.: General
19 February 2004

Fifty-eighth session
Agenda item 98

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 23 December 2003
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/58/488)]

58/222. Implementation of the first United Nations Decade
for the Eradication of Poverty (1997-2006)
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 47/196 of 22 December 1992, 48/183 of 21 December
1993, 50/107 of 20 December 1995, 56/207 of 21 December 2001 and 57/266 of
20 December 2002,
Recalling also the United Nations Millennium Declaration adopted by heads of
State and Government on the occasion of the Millennium Summit, 1 and their
commitment to eradicate extreme poverty and to halve, by 2015, the proportion of
the world’s people whose income is less than one dollar a day and the proportion of
people who suffer from hunger,
Underlining the priority and urgency given by the heads of State and
Government to the eradication of poverty, as expressed in the Monterrey Consensus
of the International Conference on Financing for Development 2 and in the outcomes
of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, 3
Recalling the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits
in the economic and social fields,
Bearing in mind the outcomes of the World Summit for Social Development 4
and the twenty-fourth special session of the General Assembly, 5
Expressing its deep concern that the number of people living in extreme
poverty in many countries continues to increase, with women and children

_______________
1

See resolution 55/2.
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico,
18-22 March 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
3
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa,
26 August-4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I,
resolution 1, annex, and resolution 2, annex.
4
Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6-12 March 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
5
Resolution S-24/2, annex.
2

03 50784

A/RES/58/222

constituting the majority and the most affected groups, in particular in the least
developed countries and in sub-Saharan Africa,
Recognizing that, while the rate of poverty in some countries has been
reduced, some developing countries and disadvantaged groups are being
marginalized and others are at risk of being marginalized and effectively excluded
from the benefits of globalization, resulting in increased income disparity among
and within countries, thereby constraining efforts to eradicate poverty,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; 6

2.
Reiterates that eradicating poverty is the greatest global challenge facing
the world today and an indispensable requirement for sustainable development, in
particular for developing countries, that each country has the primary responsibility
for its own sustainable development and poverty eradication, that the role of
national policies and development strategies cannot be overemphasized and that
concerted and concrete measures are required at all levels to enable developing
countries to eradicate poverty and achieve sustainable development;
Recognizes that, in order for developing countries to reach the targets set
3.
in the context of national development strategies for the achievement of the
internationally agreed development goals, including those contained in the United
Nations Millennium Declaration,1 in particular the goal of the eradication of
poverty, and for such poverty eradication strategies to be effective, it is imperative
that they be integrated into the world economy and share equitably in the benefits of
globalization;
Reaffirms that, within the context of overall action for the eradication of
4.
poverty, special attention should be given to the multidimensional nature of poverty
and the national and international conditions and policies that are conducive to its
eradication, fostering, inter alia, the social and economic integration of people living
in poverty and the promotion and protection of all human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all, including the right to development;
Global response for the eradication of poverty
5.
Stresses the importance of the follow-up to the outcome of the
International Conference on Financing for Development, and calls for the full and
effective implementation of the Monterrey Consensus;2
6.
Reaffirms that good governance at the international level is fundamental
for achieving poverty eradication and sustainable development; in order to ensure a
dynamic and enabling international economic environment, it is important to
promote global economic governance by addressing the international finance, trade,
technology and investment patterns that have an impact on the development
prospects of developing countries; to that end, the international community should
take all necessary and appropriate measures, including ensuring support to structural
and macroeconomic reform, a comprehensive solution to the external debt problem
and increasing market access for developing countries; efforts to reform the
international financial architecture need to be sustained with greater transparency
and with the effective participation of developing countries in decision-making
processes; and that a universal, rule-based, open, non-discriminatory and equitable
multilateral trading system, as well as meaningful trade liberalization, can
_______________
6

2

A/58/179.

A/RES/58/222

substantially stimulate development worldwide, benefiting countries at all stages of
development;
7.
Also reaffirms that good governance at the national level is essential for
poverty eradication and sustainable development, that sound economic policies,
solid democratic institutions responsive to the needs of the people and improved
infrastructure are the basis for sustained economic growth, poverty eradication and
employment creation, and that freedom, peace and security, domestic stability,
respect for human rights, including the right to development, the rule of law, gender
equality, market-oriented policies and an overall commitment to just and democratic
societies are also essential and mutually reinforcing;
Recognizes the major role that trade can play as an engine of growth and
8.
development and in eradicating poverty, regrets that the Fifth Ministerial
Conference of the World Trade Organization, held in Cancún, Mexico, from 10 to
14 September 2003, failed to produce an agreement, 7 and calls for the resumption of
the negotiations and the implementation of the Doha agenda, adopted at the Fourth
Ministerial Conference of the World Trade Organization, held at Doha from 9 to
14 November 2001; 8
9.
Also recognizes the responsibility of all Governments to adopt policies
aimed at preventing and combating corrupt practices at the national and
international levels, and welcomes in this regard the adoption of the United Nations
Convention against Corruption; 9
10. Underlines that, together with coherent and consistent domestic policies,
international cooperation is essential in supplementing and supporting the efforts of
developing countries to utilize their domestic resources for development and
poverty eradication and in ensuring that they will be able to achieve the
development goals as envisioned in the Millennium Declaration;
11. Reiterates that a substantial increase in official development assistance
and other resources will be required if developing countries, in particular the least
developed countries, are to achieve the internationally agreed development goals
and objectives, including those contained in the Millennium Declaration, and that, to
build support for official development assistance, cooperation is necessary to further
improve policies and development strategies to enhance aid effectiveness, both
nationally and internationally, requests, in that regard, those countries that made
announcements of increased official development assistance at the International
Conference on Financing for Development to make those resources available as
soon as possible, and notes in this context the recent upward trend in official
development assistance;
12. Urges developed countries that have not done so to make concrete efforts
to reach the targets of 0.7 per cent of their gross national product as official
development assistance to developing countries and 0.15 to 0.20 per cent of their
gross national product to least developed countries, as reconfirmed at the Third
United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, held in Brussels from
14 to 20 May 2001, 10 encourages developing countries to build on progress achieved
_______________
7
See A/58/15 (Part V), chap. II, sect. B. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly,
Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 15.
8
See A/C.2/56/7, annex.
9
Resolution 58/4, annex.
10
See A/CONF.191/13.

3

A/RES/58/222

in ensuring that official development assistance is used effectively to help achieve
development goals and targets, acknowledges the efforts of all donors, commends
those donors whose official development assistance contributions exceed, reach or
are increasing towards the targets, and underlines the importance of undertaking to
examine the means and time frames for achieving the targets and goals;
13. Recognizes that an enabling domestic environment is vital for mobilizing
domestic resources, increasing productivity, reducing capital flight, encouraging the
private sector and attracting and making effective use of international investment
and assistance, and that efforts to create such an environment should be supported
by the international community;
14. Also recognizes that creditors and debtors must share the responsibility
for preventing and resolving unsustainable debt situations and that debt relief can
play a key role in liberating resources that should be directed towards activities
consistent with attaining poverty eradication, sustainable economic growth,
sustainable development and the achievement of the internationally agreed
development goals, including those contained in the Millennium Declaration, and in
that regard urges countries to direct those resources freed through debt relief, in
particular through debt cancellation and reduction, towards these objectives;
15. Calls upon the developed countries, by means of intensified and effective
cooperation with developing countries, to promote capacity-building and facilitate
access to and transfer of technologies and corresponding knowledge, in particular to
developing countries, on favourable terms, including concessional and preferential
terms, as mutually agreed, taking into account the need to protect intellectual
property rights as well as the special needs of developing countries;
16. Recognizes the crucial role that microcredit and microfinance could play
in the eradication of poverty, the promotion of gender equality, the empowerment of
vulnerable groups and the development of rural communities, encourages
Governments to adopt policies that support access to microcredit as well as the
development of microfinance institutions and their capacities, and calls upon the
international community to support those efforts;
Policies for the eradication of poverty
17. Reaffirms that the eradication of poverty should be addressed in an
integrated way, as set out in the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on
Sustainable Development (“Johannesburg Plan of Implementation”), 11 taking into
account the importance of the need for the empowerment of women and sectoral
strategies in such areas as education, development of human resources, health,
human settlements, rural, local and community development, productive
employment, population, environment and natural resources, water and sanitation,
agriculture, food security, energy and migration, and the specific needs of
disadvantaged and vulnerable groups, in such a way as to increase opportunities and
choices for people living in poverty and to enable them to build and strengthen their
assets so as to achieve development, security and stability, and in that regard
encourages countries to develop their national poverty reduction policies in

_______________
11
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa,
26 August-4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I,
resolution 2, annex.

4

A/RES/58/222

accordance with their national priorities, including, where appropriate, through
poverty reduction strategy papers;
18. Underlines, in this context, the importance of further integration of the
internationally agreed development goals, including those contained in the
Millennium Declaration, in the national development strategies and plans, including
the poverty reduction strategy papers where they exist, and calls upon the
international community to continue to support developing countries in the
implementation of those development strategies and plans;
19. Recognizes the importance of disseminating best practices for the
reduction of poverty in its various dimensions, taking into account the need to adapt
those best practices to suit the social, economic, cultural and historical conditions of
each country;
20. Reaffirms that all Governments and the United Nations system should
promote an active and visible policy of mainstreaming a gender perspective in all
policies and programmes aimed at the eradication of poverty, at both the national
and the international levels, and encourages the use of gender analysis as a tool for
the integration of a gender dimension into planning the implementation of policies,
strategies and programmes for the eradication of poverty;
21. Also reaffirms that poverty eradication, changing unsustainable patterns
of production and consumption and protecting and managing the natural resource
base of economic and social development are overarching objectives of, and
essential requirements for, sustainable development;
22. Emphasizes the critical role of both formal and non-formal education, in
particular basic education and training, especially for girls, in empowering those
living in poverty, reaffirms in that context the Dakar Framework for Action adopted
at the World Education Forum, 12 and recognizes the importance of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization strategy for the
eradication of poverty, especially extreme poverty, in supporting the Education For
All programmes as a tool to achieve the millennium development goal on universal
primary education by 2015;
23. Recognizes the devastating effect of HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis
and other infectious, contagious diseases on human development, economic growth
and poverty reduction efforts in all regions, in particular in sub-Saharan Africa,
urges Governments and the international community to give urgent priority to
combating those diseases, takes note of the convening of the fifteenth International
Conference on HIV/AIDS, to be held in Thailand from 11 to 16 July 2004, and in
that regard welcomes the recent decision adopted by members of the World Trade
Organization on the implementation of paragraph 6 of the Doha Declaration on the
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights and Public
Health; 13
24. Emphasizes the link between poverty eradication and improving access to
safe drinking water, and stresses in this regard the objective to halve, by 2015, the
proportion of people who are unable to reach or to afford safe drinking water and

_______________
12
See United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Final Report of the World
Education Forum, Dakar, Senegal, 26-28 April 2000 (Paris, 2000).
13
WT/L/540. Available from http://docsonline.wto.org.

5

A/RES/58/222

the proportion of people who do not have access to basic sanitation, as reaffirmed in
the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation;
25. Recognizes that the lack of adequate housing remains a pressing
challenge in the fight to eradicate extreme poverty, particularly in the urban areas in
developing countries, expresses its concern at the rapid growth in the number of
slum dwellers in the urban areas of developing countries, particularly in Africa,
stresses that, unless urgent and effective measures and actions are taken at the
national and international levels, the number of slum dwellers, who constitute one
third of the world’s urban population, will continue to increase, and emphasizes the
need for increased efforts, with a view to significantly improving the lives of at least
100 million slum dwellers by 2020;
Specific initiatives in the fight against poverty
26. Also recognizes the important potential contribution of the World
Solidarity Fund to the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals, in
particular the objective to halve, by 2015, the proportion of people living on less
than one dollar a day and the proportion of the people who suffer from hunger;
27. Reiterates its endorsement of the decision of the World Summit on
Sustainable Development to establish the World Solidarity Fund to eradicate poverty
and to promote social and human development in the developing countries, while
stressing the voluntary nature of the contributions and the need to avoid duplication
of existing United Nations funds and encouraging the role of the private sector and
individual citizens relative to Governments in funding the endeavours, as set out in
the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation;
28. Encourages Member States, international organizations, the private
sector, relevant institutions, foundations and individuals to contribute to the World
Solidarity Fund;
29. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme, in that regard, to take further measures to operationalize the World
Solidarity Fund by establishing, on an urgent basis, the high-level committee whose
task it is to define the strategy of the Fund and to mobilize resources to enable it to
start its activities in the field of poverty alleviation;
30. Acknowledges the significance of greater involvement of developing
countries in joint efforts, including those among developing countries, to overcome
extreme poverty, and in this context takes note of the initiatives undertaken by the
developing countries, including those announced at the fifty-eighth session of the
General Assembly;
31. Welcomes the initiatives undertaken by regional and subregional
organizations for overcoming extreme poverty;
Africa, least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small
island developing States
32. Stresses the importance, as recognized in the Millennium Declaration, of
meeting the special needs of Africa, where poverty remains a major challenge and
where most countries have not benefited fully from the opportunities of
globalization, which has further exacerbated the continent’s marginalization;

6

A/RES/58/222

33. Reaffirms its support for the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development, 14 encourages further efforts in the implementation of the
commitments contained therein in the political, economic and social fields, and calls
upon the developed countries and the United Nations system to continue to support
the Partnership, the primary objective of which is to eradicate poverty and promote
sustainable development on the basis of African ownership and leadership and
enhanced partnerships with the international community, in accordance with the
principles, objectives and priorities of the Partnership;
34. Calls upon the Governments of the least developed countries and their
development partners to implement fully the commitments contained in the Brussels
Declaration 15 and the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for
the Decade 2001-2010, 16 adopted at the Third United Nations Conference on the
Least Developed Countries;
35. Stresses the significant challenge to poverty reduction posed by the
geographical disadvantages of landlocked developing countries and the
vulnerabilities of small island developing States, and in this context welcomes the
adoption of the Almaty Programme of Action, at the International Ministerial
Conference of Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries and Donor Countries
and International Financial and Development Institutions on Transit Transport
Cooperation, held in Almaty, Kazakhstan, on 28 and 29 August 2003, 17 and supports
the comprehensive review of the implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, 18 to be held in
Mauritius from 30 August to 3 September 2004;
The United Nations and the fight against poverty
36. Calls for the full implementation of its resolution 57/270 B of 23 June
2003 on the integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the
outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic
and social fields, which provides a comprehensive basis for the follow-up to the
outcomes of those conferences and summits and contributes to the achievement of
the internationally agreed development goals, including those contained in the
Millennium Declaration, in particular the goal of the eradication of poverty and
hunger, and notes in this context the decision to review in 2005 the progress
achieved in implementing all commitments made in the Millennium Declaration and
that there is scope for a major event;
37. Reaffirms the role of United Nations funds and programmes, in particular
the United Nations Development Programme and its associated funds, in assisting
the national efforts of developing countries, inter alia, in the eradication of poverty,
and the need for their funding in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations;

_______________
14

A/57/304, annex.
A/CONF.191/13, chap. I.
16
Ibid., chap. II.
17
Report of the International Ministerial Conference of Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries and
Donor countries and international Financial and Development Institutions on Transit Transport
Cooperation, Almaty, Kazakhstan, 28 and 29 August 2003 (A/CONF.202/30, annex I.
18
Report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States,
Bridgetown, Barbados, 25 April-6 May 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.I.18 and
corrigenda), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
15

7

A/RES/58/222

38. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
fifty-ninth session a report on the implementation of the present resolution;
39. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-ninth session the
item entitled “Implementation of the first United Nations Decade for the Eradication
of Poverty (1997-2006)”.
78th plenary meeting
23 December 2003

8
