37

Resolutions adopted on the repons of the Fourth Commilltee

have been granted, scholarships or fellowships, particularly with regard to facilitating their travel formalities;
4. Requests that applications for scholarships received from inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories should be transmitted simultaneously to the
offering States for consideration and to the Administering Members concerned for information;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its s_eventeenth session a report
on the implementation of the present resolution.

1083rd plenary meeting,
19 December 1961.

1697 (XVI). Preparation and training of indigenous civil and technical cadres in NonSelf-Governing Territories
The General Assemply,
Recalling its resolution 1534 (XV) of 15 December
1%0,
Taking note of the statements made by the Administering Members to the Committee on Information
from Non-Self-Governing Territories at its twelfth
session on the preparation and training of indigenous
civil and technical cadres, 18
Reiterating that the existence of adequate indigenous
civil servants and technical personnel in the Non-SelfGoverning Territories is necessary for the effective implementation of satisfactory plans and programmes of
development in the educational, social and economic
fields,
Noting the observation of the Committee that because
of the lack of information it has not been able fully to
examine the problem of the preparation and training
of indigenous civil servants and technical personnel
in Non-Self-Governing Territories, 14
Considering that, in the light of the Declaration on
the granting of independence to colonial countries and
peoples contained in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14
December 1960, immediate steps shall be taken to transfer all powers to the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories without any conditions or reservations,
Believing that the rapid preparation and training of
indigenous, civil and technical cadres in N on-Self-Governing Territories will help towards the achievement
of the purposes of resolution 1514 (XV),
1. Considers that the situation prevailing in various
dependent territories in respect of the strength, composition and state of training of indigenous civil servants and technicaL personnel is unsatisfactory;
2. Regrets that due attention has not been paid to
that problem ;
3. Urges the Administering Members to take immediately all necessary measµres to increase the
strength of indigenous civil service and technical cadres
and to accelerate their training in public administration
and other essential technical skills ;
4. Further urges the Administering Members to
take more extensive and expeditious measures towards
the replacement of expatriate personnel. by indigenous
11
lbid., Sixteenth Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/4785),
part one, annex IV.
26
Ibid., part one, para. 36.

officers, especially in positions of high administrative
responsibility;
5. Invites once again the Administering Members
to make fuller use of the United Nations technical
assistance programme for training in public administration and related fields;
6. Requests the Administering Members to transmit
complete and detailed information concerning the training facilities for, and current strength, composition and
state of the preparation of, civil and technical services
in the Territories under their administrations, in time
for its careful examination and study by the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories at its next session;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a
special report on that subject, for the consideration of
the General Assembly at its seventeenth session, taking
into account the information submitted by the Administering Members and the observations, recommendations and conclusions thereon of the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories.
·

1083rd plenary meeting,
19 December 1961.

1698 (XVI). Racial discrimination in Non-Self.
Governing Territories
The General Assemvly,
Recalling that, in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14
December 1960 entitled "Declaration on the granting
of independence to colonial countries and peoples", it
expressed the belief that an end must be put to colonialism and all practices of segregation and discrimination associated therewith,
Recalling further its resolution 1536 (XV) of 15
December, 1960,
Noting with deep concern, from the information
contained in the report of the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories,15 that racial
discrimination persists and that the recommendations
of the General Assembly contained in resolution 1536
(XV) have not yet been implemented,
Endorsing the view of the Committee that on no
grounds whatsoever can the existence of racial discrimination in any aspect of life in the Non-Self-Governing Territories be justified,
Considering that racial discrimination and segregation in Non-Self-Governing Territories can be eradicated fully and with the greatest speed by the faithful
implementation of the Declaration on the granting of
independence to colonial countries and peoples, and
that, accordingly, the efforts of the United Nations
should be concentrated on that task,
1. Condemns resolutely the policy and practice of
racial discrimination and segregation in Non-Self-Governing Territories;
2. Urges the Administering Mern!Jers to include,
among the measures that would contribute to the implementation of the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples, steps
to ensure:
(a) The immediate rescinding or revocation of all
laws and regulations which tend to encourage or
115

Ibid., part two, section VIII.
