United Nations

S/PV.6497

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6497th meeting
Thursday, 17 March 2011, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Li Baodong . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ms. Čolaković
Mrs. Dunlop
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri
Ms. Ziade
Mr. Amieyeofori
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Parham
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2011/120)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-26621 (E)

*1126621*

S/PV.6497

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2011/120*)
The President (spoke in Chinese): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I
should like to invite the representatives of Afghanistan,
Australia, Canada, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy,
Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Pakistan and Turkey to
participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, Acting Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/120*, containing the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security;
and document S/2011/118, containing a note verbale
dated 4 March 2011 from the Permanent Mission of
Afghanistan addressed to the Secretary-General,
transmitting a letter dated 1 March 2011 from the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan addressed
to the secretary-General.
I shall now give the floor to Mr. De Mistura.
Mr. De Mistura: I should like to make a special
request. This is the tenth year of heavy engagement of
many States Members of the United Nations in
Afghanistan. In a few days, President Karzai shall
formally announce areas that will be transferred to
Afghan ownership through the transition. It is therefore
time, with the Council’s permission, to pay special
attention to the desire of the Afghan authorities for

2

national sovereignty and to mark it symbolically by
asking all participants in this meeting to facilitate,
assess and promote the transition to full ownership and
leadership by the Afghans. I know this is slightly
irregular but I believe it to be an important symbol, and
I should like to make a special request to you, Sir, and
the members of the Security Council for my friend
Ambassador Tanin to speak before me.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I give the
floor to the representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): I was expecting to
listen to Mr. De Mistura first, but he has made a very
kind gesture to me and my country. My country and the
leadership of Afghanistan admire his role and
leadership. We benefit from his leadership as a leading
international coordinator in Afghanistan and here in
New York.
At the outset, I congratulate you, Sir, on
assuming the presidency of the Council this month. I
also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his report
on the situation in Afghanistan (S/2011/120*) and
extend a warm welcome back to the Council to my
good friend Special Representative Staffan de Mistura.
I also take this opportunity to express, on behalf
of the Government and people of Afghanistan, deepest
sympathies to the people and Government of Japan for
the tragic loss of life and destruction resulting from the
earthquake and tsunami this past week. We stand
beside the friendly people of Japan as they recover
from that tragedy.
As we come together to discuss the situation in
Afghanistan, my country is embarking on the transition
to full Afghan sovereignty, national ownership and
leadership in an effort to realize the noble vision of a
secure, democratic and prosperous nation that is able to
meet the needs of citizens independently. We in
Afghanistan know that transition is no easy task but,
with our full determination and unity and the sincere
support and commitment of the international
community, it is achievable. The logic of transition will
guide the way forward over the next four years.
Afghanistan is determined, during that time, to assume
full responsibility at all levels in order to provide
Afghans with security, opportunities for social and
economic progress and the benefits of a society
governed by the rule of law.

11-26621

S/PV.6497

The role of the international community in
supporting the transition will remain essential for our
success. It London, Kabul and Lisbon, the international
community endorsed and committed to supporting the
transition towards Afghan ownership and leadership.
Over the next four years, the international community’s
role in Afghanistan will revolve around the needs and
requirements of the transition process.
Today’s meeting comes on the eve of the renewal
of the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). As the lead
international civilian coordinator, the role of the United
Nations in Afghanistan over the transition period and
beyond will remain crucial. We would like to convey
our appreciation for the resolute commitment of all
United Nations staff working under difficult conditions
to help to meet the aspirations of the Afghan people. As
we prepare to officially commence the transition
process, on 21 March, we look to the United Nations as
a key partner on the way forward.
Afghanistan cannot stand on its own feet if its
State institutions remain weak and undermined by
various parallel structures and its capacity is not
strengthened. Securing Afghanistan is therefore first
and foremost about Afghan ownership and leadership,
taking responsibility and operating effectively to
achieve sustainable progress. That is our ultimate goal,
to which we are firmly committed.
In the past weeks, we have engaged in
discussions about how UNAMA’s mandate should
evolve in the light of the transition. In that regard, on 1
March, the Foreign Minister of the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan, His Excellency Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, sent
a letter to the Secretary-General on behalf of the
Government of Afghanistan, in which he underscored
three main requests.
The first was a comprehensive review of
UNAMA’s mandate and the role of the United Nations
in Afghanistan, to be conducted within the next six
months in consultation with the relevant stakeholders.
In the subsequent weeks, we agreed that such a review
would be done before the Bonn Conference at the end
of 2011.
The second was greater coherence, coordination
and efficiency in the work of the United Nations funds,
programmes and agencies operating in Afghanistan
towards one United Nations. Such an approach, brining
each of the United Nations entities into synergy, is

11-26621

necessary for an efficient and successful transition in
the country.
The third was the reshaping of this year’s
mandate for UNAMA around the transition. To that
end, the Government of Afghanistan proposed the
following adjustments to the mandate.
First, transition must be the central focus of
UNAMA. A United Nations mandate centred on
transition objectives would facilitate a smooth shift to
Afghan ownership and leadership. The underlying
imperative to transition full responsibility for security,
governance and development to Afghan leadership by
the end of 2014 should guide the work of UNAMA and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
Second, emphasis must be placed on UNAMA’s
responsibility as the co-chair of the Joint Coordination
and Monitoring Board to promote coherence in the
international community’s support for the Afghandefined and Afghan-led development strategy.
Third, we stress the need to increasingly channel
aid through the Afghan budget and to align it with our
Afghan national priority programmes. We are
convinced that this will lead to more effective and
efficient utilization of development assistance.
Fourth, UNAMA plays a crucial role in
improving civil military coordination with the
International Security Assistance Force. However, that
role should be recalibrated to reflect the aim of the
transition process in order to support Afghan-led
stabilization efforts.
Fifth, national ownership of the reintegration and
reconciliation process is necessary. We are reaching out
to all Afghans who are willing to renounce violence
and join the peace process. The peace and
reconciliation process is Afghan-led and could benefit
from the support and good offices of UNAMA, if so
requested by the Afghan Government.
Sixth, the Afghan Government must have
ownership of the election process, based on the clear
requirements of the Afghan Constitution and the
principle of Afghan sovereignty. In line with the Kabul
and London communiqués, the Government of
Afghanistan is fully committed to electoral reform as a
measure to ensure sustainability for the democratic
process — one that is national in nature and is
addressed by the citizens of Afghanistan. We welcome
the availability of UNAMA in helping with capacity

3

S/PV.6497

building and technical assistance with regard to
electoral law, if requested by the Government of
Afghanistan. Last year’s elections in Afghanistan cost
hundreds of millions of dollars, which is not
sustainable for an Afghan-led democratic process over
time. The election process in Afghanistan must be
effective and sustainable. That is only possible through
Afghan ownership.
Seventh, a reassessment of UNAMA’s work
throughout the country is necessary. While the
presence of UNAMA’s offices in eight regional zones
remains important, the number, location and terms of
reference of UNAMA’s offices in other provinces
should be looked at within the comprehensive mandate
review. That will help to encourage Afghan institutions
to end the culture of dependence, avoid unnecessary
security risks for UNAMA staff and streamline funding
for the relevant United Nations agencies in the country.
Eighth, UNAMA’s role in supporting efforts to
enhance governance and the rule of law would be
achieved best through strengthening the efforts of the
Government of Afghanistan, in accordance with the
Kabul process. That is the reason that we request that
all efforts be made towards strengthening the Afghan
Government’s capacity.
Ninth, the coordinating role of UNAMA in
delivering humanitarian assistance in accordance with
humanitarian principles is crucial. However, on the
way forward, the focus must be on strengthening the
central coordinating role of the Government of
Afghanistan, consistent with the goal of Afghan
ownership.
The realization of our requests will not only
facilitate a more efficient United Nations in the years
to come, but also a Government that functions with
greater confidence in its ability to become self-reliant.
Ten years after the Bonn Conference, Afghanistan is
adamant in its decision to take responsibility for its
country and people. That is a process that will not
happen overnight, but over time. Throughout the fouryear transition to Afghan leadership and ownership,
and beyond, the enduring partnership between
Afghanistan and the international community, the
United Nations and other partners will remain crucial.
Transition is not an end to the relationship between
Afghanistan and the international community, but the
beginning of a new chapter in an evolving partnership.

4

We must end the war and violence in
Afghanistan. The time has come to ensure that Afghans
have the chance to live in peace, free from the threat of
violence and suffering they have endured for many
years. The war against terrorism will not be won
without the confidence and support of the Afghan
people. While most civilian casualties are caused by
the Taliban and Al-Qaida, incidents of loss of innocent
life during military operations have increased.
However, our moral obligations place a heavy burden
on us to make the protection of civilian lives our first
priority. Civilian casualties must end and additional
measures must be taken to prevent harm to civilians.
We all have come to realize that war and violence
cannot be ended through military means alone. That is
why we continue to reach out to all those who want to
join the peace process. The support of the international
community and our enduring partnership is essential
for that process and for success in Afghanistan.
Afghans are determined to work towards their own
destiny. Let us renew our efforts to achieve peace and
prosperity in the country through the transition and
beyond.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.
Mr. de Mistura: Thank you, Mr. President, and
all members of the Security Council for giving me the
opportunity to convey some of our comments. I am
very glad to speak after Ambassador Tanin, because we
need to hear the voice of the Afghan Government,
authorities and people, this year in particular.
As today marks a year since I assumed my duties
in Afghanistan, perhaps this is also an opportunity for
me to reflect on the events of the past year and on what
can happen, and perhaps should be happening, over the
course of this year and beyond.
We went from the London Conference to the
Lisbon Summit. We saw those events linked together
with other important events, such as the Peace Jirga,
the Kabul Conference and the parliamentary elections,
all of which have sent a continuous message of an
increased sense of Afghan ownership and transition to
an Afghan-led future. Transition is clearly premised on
sovereignty and the build-up of Government capacity
to manage its own affairs. All of that is also further
grounded on the need for Afghans to articulate and

11-26621

S/PV.6497

execute their own political vision of a stable, sovereign
Islamic constitutional democracy and an Afghanistan at
peace with itself, its neighbours and the international
community.
As we have heard today and seen in the letter (see
S/2011/118, annex) from Foreign Minister Rassoul to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, the Government of
Afghanistan
is
increasingly
and
legitimately
demanding to lead all aspects of governance,
development and efforts to achieve peace. In that
regard, we interpret the recent letter as constructive.
We see the upcoming review of the United Nations
support to Afghanistan and its mandate as a good
opportunity to streamline the activities of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and the United Nations family in a coherent effort to
deliver as one.
The primary focus in the forthcoming months
will be on the transition of security arrangements as the
international forces begin the gradual transition and as
the Afghan security forces assume the leading
responsibility for security. Preparing the Afghan forces
to shoulder an increased responsibility for military and
security operations is a formidable challenge. The
Afghan security forces will be called upon to sustain
the security gains made over the past year. At the same
time, they will need to gain the confidence of the
Afghan people, despite the persistent violence and
intimidation campaign by the insurgents against
communities across the country. The spectacular horror
in the use of attacks will remain, I am afraid, a tactic of
the insurgency for the time being, as will their efforts
to interfere with the current military surge.

Transitioning also requires the existence of
sustainable institutions at the national and subnational
levels that can continue the job. Therefore, sovereignty
comes with increased responsibility and accountability,
and that is why we need to work together.
In that respect, Afghans have made a great deal of
progress this year. Two Afghan independent electoral
bodies have carried out their work with
professionalism and have shown an improved capacity
to take the lead on electoral preparations with the
required technical assistance. Parliament was
inaugurated on 26 January by President Karzai, with all
members in attendance. The election of a minority
candidate as the leader of the Wolesi Jirga shows that,
at the end of the day, Afghans can truly find their own
solutions and meet various ethnic, factional and
regional needs. With an executive board now fully
appointed, we believe that the legislature now has a
chance to embark on its own agenda in Afghanistan.
We recognize the need to support Afghanistan
beyond 2014 in its own efforts to normalize the
country and guarantee long-term Afghan ownership,
backed by capacity-building. For that reason, while we
are keen on supporting the spirit of transition, we are
also available to go beyond that. After all, we have
been there for the past 60 years, and if the Afghan
authorities need us to be there, we will again be
helping the Afghans next year and even beyond the
transition period.

We welcome the transition in security. As the
Council is aware, we have been constructively
supporting that transition as active observers. We
intend to continue following up in that regard, through
our own contribution to the civilian transition in the
areas to be announced by President Karzai, likely on
21 March.

Turning to peace, reintegration and regional
issues, the beginning of the month saw a very
important meeting of the International Contact Group
on Afghanistan, held in Jeddah. The presence of the
High Peace Council representative at that meeting was
a major message to all of us. That meeting endorsed
the High Peace Council, again in line with Afghan
ownership, and called for a Kabul-based approach to
peace and reconciliation initiatives, with the support of
a group of international and regional players that
would meet, and be based in, Kabul.

Transitioning provinces must be given incentives
and be rewarded, and not just neglected after the
transition has taken place. Secretary Clinton’s recent
remarks were clear in that regard: the ongoing military
and civilian surge needs to be matched by an enhanced
diplomatic surge. Frankly, we have also been asking
for a surge to protect civilians owing to the spike in
civilian casualty rates.

On the ground in Afghanistan, UNAMA will
continue to facilitate the work of the High Peace
Council, at its own request, through the Salaam
Support Group. UNAMA will also continue to support
the unfolding of the process led by the Afghanistan
Peace and Reintegration Programme, which continues
to make progress, having reintegrated some 700
individuals to date. Minister Stanekzai recently

11-26621

5

S/PV.6497

requested that UNAMA provide further assistance in
reaching out to the provinces. By according neutrality
to such outreach efforts and having a presence in the
field, we believe that UNAMA can actually assist them
in reaching all segments of Afghan society.
With regard to human rights, humanitarian issues
and Afghan women, civilian casualties are a great
source of concern. A report on the issue was recently
released by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights. We share the concern
of the Government, the International Security
Assistance Force, the international community and the
people of Afghanistan about the huge number of
civilian casualties.
Since 2007, some 9,000 civilians have perished in this
conflict. The greatest number of deaths — 2,777 —
occurred in 2010. Statistics is one thing, but people are
another thing. Every death is one too many. That is
why we will continue to recognize the issue and
advocate for the situation to end.
We hope that there will certainly be a surge to
guard against further civilian casualties. Unfortunately,
as the Council is aware, although we have given
anti-Government elements an opportunity to participate
in the civilian casualties report by contributing their
own data, if they have any, and to make their own
contribution by reducing the number of casualties, we
have not received a response to date.
We should also focus on the increased so-called
conflict-induced humanitarian needs, for which there is
indeed need. It is not only poverty and natural
disasters, but also conflict that results in a great deal of
collateral humanitarian effects. That is why the role of
United Nations agencies in the field is quite important
at this stage.
On the political and socio-economic agenda,
women, girls and boys need to be supported. We are
advocating for that.
With regard to the footprint, civilian transition
per se is both an imperative and an opportunity. We
believe that the United Nations subnational presence in
Afghanistan has been supporting the Government in
many fields — coordination, governance, human
rights, the rule of law and many more areas. There are
30 United Nations agencies and programmes in
Afghanistan, working on the Council’s behalf and
assisting the Government in 34 provinces. To date, they

6

have spent $904 million on humanitarian
development activities in Afghanistan.

and

Millions of Afghans are benefiting from this, but
we do recognize that we need to carry out a review in
order to fine-tune those efforts even further. Let me
recall that the World Food Programme is reaching
approximately 7.3 million vulnerable Afghans every
day of every year. The World Health Organization and
UNICEF have supported the vaccination of 7.5 million
children this year and over the previous two years. The
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees has been assisting Afghan authorities in the
voluntary repatriation of 4.5 million Afghans. The
United Nations Mine Action Coordination Centre has
assisted 2,553 communities to remove, in partnership
with Afghans, 300,000 mines. The United Nations
Development Programme has assisted in more than
7,400 civil service positions and in capacity-building.
There has also been counter-narcotics support,
provided by United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime.
All of these United Nations entities are at the
disposal of Afghan authorities in order to help Afghans
feel that they will not be abandoned once again after
the transition is over and we move towards a more
sovereign and Afghan-led future.
With regard to drugs, that is an issue about which
we are indeed concerned. There is no doubt that drugs
are a threat to both Afghan and international peace and
stability. I have been in Tehran and neighbouring
countries and this issue comes up all the time. The
narcotics issue also warrants shared responsibility
among international stakeholders. The Government has
made progress over recent years, as its neighbours, and
I believe all of us, recognize. However, the situation
remains one of great concern. The facts speak of a
dramatic situation, with addiction both in Afghanistan
and neighbouring countries due to massive production.
While production has decreased, it has recently been
stimulated by increasing prices, which have tripled
during the reporting period. Therefore, the measures
taken must have an impact on the whole chain — from
eradication to crop substitutions, precursors, chemicals
and global demand reduction. I therefore appeal to the
Council to build the counter-narcotics capacity of the
Government of Afghanistan and ensure that we can see
some progress this year.

11-26621

S/PV.6497

In conclusion, this is a crucial year. I know we
have heard this many times. Every year is crucial in
Afghanistan, but some years are more crucial than
others. The year 2011 is one of transition, leading up to
2014. That is why we need to work closely together.
We have heard Ambassador Tanin. We have heard
loud and clear the message from Afghan authorities
about their sovereignty and the fact that we cannot —
none of us, not even the Afghan authorities — work as
if it were business as usual any more. We should
therefore constantly adjust our profile in activities on
the basis of Afghan-led, Afghan-owned priorities. We
must go beyond security and political gains and give
further consideration to development.
As I have said, we have been with the Afghan
people for 60 years. We were there during the Taliban.
I myself was there during the time of Najibullah. And
we are there now. Hopefully, we will be there as long
as the Afghans need us. UNAMA has therefore
positioned itself to be supportive of the Afghan
Government in this period of great transition and
greater responsibility. We would like to continue to do
so.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. de Mistura for his briefing.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): Let me first extend a
particular word of thanks to Special Representative
Staffan de Mistura for his briefing today, and to his
colleagues in the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their dedicated and
outstanding work in fulfilment of the Council’s mandate
and in support of the Afghan Government and people.
Staffan de Mistura and UNAMA are working under
extremely complex and challenging circumstances. I also
thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive and
very timely report (S/2011/120*). My delegation is
grateful to Ambassador Tanin for his welcome remarks
and for the close cooperation we enjoy with him and his
team.
Before I offer some remarks from my national
perspective, let me underline that my Government
aligns itself with the statement to be delivered later by
the representative of the European Union. The
European Union is one of the major supporters of
stabilization in Afghanistan and the region.
Afghanistan is a national foreign policy priority
for the German Government. We consider it an honour

11-26621

to be holding the pen on this important Security
Council dossier for the next two years and we look
forward to working with the Council in support of
Afghanistan. We thank our Turkish predecessors for
their valuable work and their continuous commitment,
in particular in the field of regional cooperation.
My Government will continue to support our
Afghan friends as we enter into a phase of concrete
transition. The Kabul process is essentially an
ambitious agenda for transition towards increasingly
Afghan-led processes. It corresponds to the need for
real Afghan empowerment, based on the rule of law
and national capacities.
Speaking for one of the major donor countries, let
me make on point crystal clear: transition does not
mean reduced international engagement, but rather a
change in our support in and for Afghanistan.
Transition will be gradual and conditions-based. The
character of the international engagement will focus
increasingly on training and capacity-building. Here,
UNAMA will continue to be in a unique position to
contribute to the empowerment of the Afghan people.
My Government shares the view of the SecretaryGeneral that, wherever we have achieved progress,
sustainability must be our key concern. This is of
particular relevance in the areas of good governance,
the rule of law and human rights and freedoms,
including the role of women. We commend the Afghan
Government’s achievements to date and encourage it to
continue to give priority to these policy areas.
In the light of the transition, Germany is
concerned by the fact that the technical capacity for the
successful implementation of the Government’s
national priority programmes is not yet in place
throughout the country. Especially in regions and areas
where early transition is planned, we call on UNAMA
and other partners to redouble their efforts in support
of the Afghan Government.
Sustainability and a successful transition will not
be possible without an inclusive political process.
Germany puts great hopes in the evolving
reconciliation process. We encourage UNAMA to
continue to support the Afghan Government in this
field.
We hope that the ongoing tensions around the
status of the parliament will be resolved soon, as they
are preventing it from effectively discharging its

7

S/PV.6497

functions as set out in the Constitution. The continued
support of the United Nations will also be essential for
further improving the sustainability of the electoral
system.
In a couple of days from now, at Nowruz on
21 March, President Karzai will announce the first
tranche of areas selected for transition to an Afghan
lead in security responsibilities.
Although the overall number of security incidents
remains alarming, Germany is encouraged by the
recent progress in building the necessary strength of
the Afghan security institutions. We are also pleased to
note that, despite regional disparities, the latest police
survey by the United Nations Development Programme
notes the significantly improved confidence of the
local population when compared to 2009.
The increasing number of civilian casualties is
intolerable. Germany notes with serious concern the
latest trends. At the same time, we also note and
welcome the continued progress made by Afghan and
international forces in avoiding civilian casualties.
Germany firmly supports the extension of the
Mission’s mandate for 12 months, as recommended by
the Secretary-General and requested by the
Government of Afghanistan. I am glad to report that we
have been observing great unity in the Council’s
ongoing negotiations on the UNAMA mandate. My
delegation wishes to underline, however, that the
Afghan Government is right in reminding the Council,
in the recent letter from its Foreign Minister (see
S/2011/118), of our responsibility and commitment to
empowering the Afghan institutions, and that
sometimes the amount of goodwill of development
partners can also contribute to undermining Afghan
solutions to Afghan problems.
In this context, Germany supports a review of
United Nations support in the perspective of the next
mandate renewal in March 2012, as soon as we are in a
position to evaluate, on an informed basis, our first
experiences with transition and reconciliation. The
Bonn Conference in December, in response to a request
from our Afghan friends, was been timed to contribute
to such a process.
Let me end by emphasizing that it is the quality
of the cooperation between the United Nations and the
people of Afghanistan that will ultimately decide our
success. Given what we have achieved and invested,

8

my delegation is convinced that there is every reason to
continue to work together for a prosperous and secure
Afghanistan.
Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
for his briefing and his efforts. I also thank the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan for his
thorough briefing to the Council and for having
reiterated the priorities defined by the Afghan
Government for continued cooperation with the
international community to provide the conditions most
conducive to the transition period, which should be
owned and led by the Afghans themselves.
Lebanon supports the cooperation of other
Council members on efforts to support Afghan
priorities to achieve the well-being of the brotherly
Afghan people. We recall and endorse the words of the
Permanent Representative on the need to put an end to
war and violence in Afghanistan.
Allow me to share a few remarks with the
Council. Following the outcome of Afghanistan’s
recent free elections, lessons must be drawn and
reforms must continue while avoiding future obstacles.
In addition, the independence of the electoral
monitoring institutions must be strengthened. Lebanon
welcomes the new Afghan Parliament and invites the
legislative, executive and judicial authorities to
cooperate and complement each other’s work by giving
the highest priority to the country’s interests over any
other interests or considerations.
My country also welcomes the commendable
steps undertaken to implement reconciliation and
reintegration policies, in particular awareness-raising
and capacity-building efforts undertaken throughout
the various sectors of Afghan society. We support the
request made by the Secretary-General to Security
Council members in his report (S/2011/120*) to pay
special attention to the impact on the reconciliation and
reintegration process of the sanctions regime
established by the Council in its resolution 1267
(1999). Indeed, all sectors of Afghan society must be
convinced of the benefits of reconciliation, which is
the only way to achieve the desired objectives.
At the same time, efforts must be made to ensure
the implementation of the commitments made through
the Kabul process on security, governance and

11-26621

S/PV.6497

development by transferring full responsibility for
security in a gradual but thorough manner to the
Afghan authorities.
Lebanon condemns the killing and maiming of
civilians — some 9,000 to date — and demands that all
factions respect international humanitarian law and
protect civilians and their possessions. We hope that
the repression of and discrimination against women
will cease. Women must be protected from violence
and guaranteed the rights to education and to
participation in public life. We refer to the convention
signed between the Afghan Government and the United
Nations forbidding the recruitment of minors into the
army and the police, and we call for an end to sexual
violence by security forces against children. We also
welcome progress made in the rehabilitation of military
forces, the return of refugees, and demining.
My country believes that practices such as
arbitrary detention highlight the flaws in the security
situation and the judiciary. We also condemn the high
rate of deaths among pregnant women and children
under five. We reaffirm the importance of regional
cooperation and good-neighbourliness, which have a
positive effect on the economic and security situations.
They also strengthen the fight against terrorism,
organized crime and narcotics trafficking, ensure
border security, and strengthen internal reconciliation.
Restoring peace in Afghanistan will have a positive
effect on the neighbouring countries as well.
Lastly, Lebanon reiterates its appreciation for the
efforts of the United Nations bodies and regional and
international organizations, including the Organization
of the Islamic Conference. We thank them for their
efforts in every field and to restore peace, stability and
prosperity in Afghanistan, a friendly country with a
rich history, culture and resources.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We welcome the
participation of the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, Ambassador Tanin, in this debate and
thank him for his statement. We also thank the Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General
for
Afghanistan, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for presenting the
latest report of the Secretary-General on Afghanistan
(S/2011/120*).
We believe that a stable, peaceful and democratic
Afghanistan is crucial to the broader stability of the
region and therefore welcomes the relatively positive
developments that have taken place over the past few

11-26621

months in Afghanistan. These include agreement on the
Kabul process, momentum on reintegration and
reconciliation efforts, and increased cooperation
between Afghanistan and its neighbours.
Despite these positive developments, Afghanistan
continues to face critical challenges in its endeavour to
achieve stability and development. Key among these is
the security situation, the worsening humanitarian
situation, human rights deficiencies and continuing
civilian casualties. Given the magnitude of these
challenges, South Africa believes that a comprehensive
strategy in incorporating security, humanitarian
assistance, good governance and socio-economic
development is required.
The continued role played by bilateral partners in
supporting the people and the Government of
Afghanistan remains indispensable. In this regard, we
would like to underscore the central role of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
in supporting the Government of Afghanistan and in
coordinating international assistance to the country.
South Africa remains convinced that the only way
to lasting peace is through political dialogue. Political
reconciliation and dialogue among the Afghan people
and leaders remain critical to the long-term stability of
Afghanistan. We believe that this dialogue should
include all those who are willing to contribute to peace
in Afghanistan. We are encouraged by the progress
achieved thus far in the peace and reintegration efforts
as reflected in report of the Secretary-General. My
delegation also shares the sentiment of the SecretaryGeneral that “[a]s reintegration initiatives continue,
confidence-building measures can help bring forward
and develop an intra-Afghan dialogue” (S/2011/120*,
para. 82). In this context, we call upon the political
leadership of Afghanistan to utilize this momentum to
achieve national reconciliation.
We remain deeply concerned at the continuing
number of civilian casualties, as noted in the report
before us. While we commend the efforts of the Afghan
National Security Forces and international military
forces aimed at fighting the Taliban and other
anti-Government forces, we call upon them to
minimize the risk to civilians. My delegation is
particularly concerned about the plight of children
caught up in conflict in Afghanistan. These children
continue to be deprived of their most basic human
rights, including protection, education and assistance.

9

S/PV.6497

In this context, we are encouraged by the signing
of the action plan between the Government of
Afghanistan and the United Nations on the prevention
of recruitment of children and its commitment to
preventing the killing and maiming of children.
Similarly, Afghan women have a significant role to
play in the peace and stability of their country. Their
role in building a new Afghan society should be
welcomed and encouraged. We hope that the newly
elected National Assembly will address this matter as a
priority.
My delegation believes that there is an
inextricable link between development and security in
Afghanistan. We are pleased that the Afghan
Government has shown its commitment to addressing
the socio-economic situation that the country is facing.
We encourage the Government to increase its efforts
aimed at improving its institutional capacity to offer
viable alternatives to poppy cultivation and narcotics.
National ownership and leadership remain crucial
to political security and socio-economic progress in
Afghanistan. In this context, we commend the transfer
of some responsibilities to the Afghan Government, as
announced to the Council today by Mr. De Mistura.
The international community should continue to
support the country’s transition from conflict to
prosperity. South Africa continues to support the
presence and role of UNAMA in Afghanistan. We join
other delegations in expressing our appreciation to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
his team for their dedication to and leadership of
UNAMA. We support the extension of UNAMA’s
mandate for a further 12-month period, as
recommended by the Secretary-General.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): We
welcome Special Representative De Mistura back to
the Council and thank him for his briefing today. We
commend his strong leadership of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I hope
that he will convey our deep appreciation to the
Mission’s staff for the work that they do on behalf of
all of us to help build a stronger Afghanistan.
Also, we wish to extend a special welcome to
Ambassador Tanin and thank him for addressing the
Council once again. I wish to underscore our support
for strengthening Afghan leadership and sovereignty,
which Ambassador Tanin discussed earlier. The
transition to an Afghan security lead, the beginning of

10

United States troop reductions in July, and the ongoing
efforts to establish a new United States-Afghanistan
strategic partnership declaration are all important
aspects of restoring Afghan ownership.
Let me touch on three issues this morning. First,
the process of transferring security responsibility to the
Afghan National Security Forces is beginning. At their
11 March meeting in Brussels, the defence ministers of
States members of NATO and the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) endorsed the
recommendations of the joint Afghan-NATO Inteqal
Board to begin the transition to Afghan-led security
responsibility. In the coming days, we expect that
President Karzai will announce which areas of
Afghanistan will first undergo this transition. That
decision will be based on a thorough assessment of
conditions on the ground performed jointly by the
Afghan Government and ISAF in the months since
Lisbon. The transition process will be gradual and will
further bolter Afghan capacity.
Although this transition will largely be securityfocused, it will also have an important civilian role. We
are pleased that the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/120*) identifies several areas where the United
Nations can play a valuable role in this process,
including mediation, conflict resolution, human rights,
Afghan capacity-building and supporting Afghan
coordination of international assistance. We encourage
continued strong cooperation between UNAMA and
ISAF as the transition gets under way.
Secondly, we welcome the conclusion of last
year’s legislative elections with the 26 January
inauguration of the Wolesi Jirga. The SecretaryGeneral has concluded that despite significant flaws in
the elections, Afghanistan’s electoral institutions
performed admirably under extremely challenging
circumstances. We concur. We understand that the
Special Court has begun a recount of elections in
several provinces. We remain concerned about any
actions that could undermine the integrity of the
electoral process, and we urge all Afghan institutions to
act within their clearly defined areas of competence, in
accordance with the relevant Afghan laws and the
Constitution. We look forward to having the United
Nations continue its partnership with the different
branches of the Afghan Government as they carry out
their respective functions under Afghan law, including
the electoral reform process.

11-26621

S/PV.6497

Thirdly, as Secretary of State Hillary Clinton
noted in her remarks at the Asia Society last month, the
year 2011 will see the confluence of three surges: a
joint Afghan and international military offensive
against Al-Qaida and the Taliban; a civilian campaign
to bolster the Afghan Government, economy and civil
society; and an intensified diplomatic push to bring the
Afghan conflict to an end and chart a new and secure
future for the region.
The security and governance gains produced by
the Afghan and international military and civilian
surges have, as Secretary Clinton put it, created an
opportunity to get serious about a responsible
reconciliation process led by Afghans and supported by
intense regional diplomacy and strong United States
backing. Under Afghan leadership and ownership,
important efforts are already under way to begin a
national discussion on reconciliation. President Karzai
has formed the High Peace Council, which includes
representatives from across Afghanistan. Council
leaders are holding meetings in key provinces
throughout the country with tribal leaders, civil society,
including women, and villagers to hear their hopes and
concerns. They are working to form local councils to
begin engaging the insurgents and the broader
community. We fully support this Afghan effort. We
also applaud UNAMA’s efforts to support the High
Peace Council through the Salaam Support Group.
Over the past two years, the Government of
Afghanistan and the international community have laid
out clear conditions for insurgents who wish to
abandon the fight and rejoin Afghan society. They must
renounce violence, cut all ties with Al-Qaida and abide
by the Afghan Constitution, including its provisions
protecting the rights of women and minorities.
Insurgents who choose the path of peace will find a
willing partner in the United States.
Reconciliation will require the support of
Afghanistan’s neighbours, including, most importantly,
Pakistan. Pakistan has legitimate concerns that the
Afghan Government must acknowledge, but Pakistan
also has important responsibilities, including taking
firm action to prevent the Afghan Taliban from using
Pakistani territory as a safe haven to continue its
insurgency. Pressure from Pakistan will help push the
Taliban towards the negotiating table and away from
Al-Qaida.

11-26621

Let me also comment briefly on recent civilian
casualties. Our principal goal remains to protect the
Afghan people. We deeply regret the unintended injury
or death of any civilian in the course of military action.
The United States and international forces have made
extraordinary efforts to reduce civilian casualties and
have seen some success, although there is more work
to be done. Insurgents, on the other hand, are
responsible for at least 75 per cent of civilian
casualties, and they use innocent civilians as human
shields, extort them for support, take them as hostages
and tax their harvests.
We believe that this year holds great promise for
Afghanistan and the wider region. We are committed to
continued support for the Government and the people
of Afghanistan as they move beyond the current
conflict towards a brighter future.
Finally, the United States supports the extension
of the UNAMA mandate for a further 12 months and
thanks the German Mission for its leadership of these
negotiations.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I wish to thank
our colleague Ambassador Tanin for his very useful
comments. National ownership is at the heart of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts, an objective
that Portugal shares in its fullness. Allow me also to
thank the Special Representative and the personnel of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), who face one of the most daunting tasks
that the United Nations has undertaken to this day.
Allow me to express Portugal’s appreciation to them
for their commitment, dedication and courage.
Allow me also to recall that at the beginning of
this week, a vile attack once again indiscriminately
took the lives of dozens of civilians in Kanduz. I am
sure that I speak for all of us when I express my
condemnation of such despicable, wanton killing and
maiming, and I ask Ambassador Tanin to convey our
condolences to the victims’ families.
Peace and security are Afghanistan’s primary
needs and the foremost grounds for United Nations
assistance to the Afghan Government. The task that is
still ahead is vast, and the security progress achieved
over the past year, while significant, is also fragile and
reversible. Ambassador Tanin can rest assured that
Afghanistan’s partners are steadfast in their
commitment.

11

S/PV.6497

Afghan security forces are expanding, reflecting
growing Afghan ownership of the security situation.
The Afghan national security forces will soon reach
their growth figures for trained and operational
personnel. While this is a fundamental step in order to
attain counter-insurgency goals, we must make sure
that these levels are sustainable and that the safety of
numbers does not affect standards or capacity.
The Declaration approved in Lisbon in November
by the Heads of State and Government of the nations
contributing to the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) represents a pledge with respect to the
long-term nature of the partnership between NATO and
Afghanistan.
Portugal reaffirms its support for President
Karzai’s objective to lead and conduct security
operations in all the provinces by the end of 2014, and
we will see Inteqal through as allies and partners, not
only in the area of security but also as regards
governance, development and the rule of law.
Afghanistan is on the threshold of transition, a
process in which we all have a stake and in which we
all must assume our responsibilities. A phase- and
conditions-based transition to Afghan-led security is a
momentous step for the country, and Afghanistan must
be sure of its allies and of the support as laid out at the
London and Kabul Conferences and the Lisbon
summit.
We look forward, therefore, to the Bonn
Conference next December and to the preparatory work
to be done in that connection. Portugal will increase its
contribution to ISAF by 25 per cent, reaching a total of
250 military personnel to help train their Afghan
counterparts. We remain ready to carry out this mission
for peace and freedom in Afghanistan.
Nevertheless, there is much to be done in
Afghanistan beyond the security situation. Important
steps in increasing public trust in institutions, the
Administration and the police are needed, and their
ongoing efforts deserve our support. Tensions between
State branches over the status of Parliament risk
undermining the consolidation of institutions and
discrediting the democratic process in the eyes of the
people.
Finally, electoral reform must be addressed,
bearing in mind the effects it may have on the
transition period and on the stability of Afghanistan.

12

Portugal is pleased to be working in the Security
Council towards securing a mandate that allows
UNAMA to fulfil its mission, namely, increased
support for the efforts of the Government of
Afghanistan to improve governance, the rule of law
and the fight against corruption; better coordination of
support and resources; the delivery of humanitarian
aid; and the monitoring of the situation of civilians and
their protection.
One other fundamental issue is also the
coordination between the United Nations agencies and
programmes, so that resource allocation is improved, in
particular in the areas of counter-narcotics,
reconstruction and development.
I should also like to address the issue of human
rights. It is, as regards Afghanistan, both a tale of
achievement and an enduring concern. Indeed, the
security situation should not be a pretext to
compromise a consolidation of the democratic process
in Afghanistan and the promotion and protection of
human rights. Human rights are indeed one of the
battlegrounds in Afghanistan. We should not be
surprised that the enemies of a democratic and peaceful
Afghanistan are proud to despise the most fundamental
human rights and make it a point to flaunt their
contempt for the country’s achievement in this area.
Portugal is particularly encouraged by the
significant steps taken by the Government of
Afghanistan to prevent the recruitment of children and
other commitments to prevent sexual violence. The use
of children by the Taliban forces and the attacks
against schools and health-care facilities are certainly
some of the most dramatic aspects of the current
situation in Afghanistan.
Portugal welcomes the recent steps taken towards
the further promotion and protection of women’s
rights, especially as regards the participation of women
in Afghan Government institutions, including the civil
service. The future of Afghanistan should not be built
over the respect of human rights for all and especially
should not be built over the human rights of women or
at the cost of their education or their participation in
public and political life. In this respect, we would
encourage the Government of Afghanistan at the
highest level to publicly emphasize that the promotion
and protection of women’s rights is an integral part of
peace, reintegration and reconciliation.

11-26621

S/PV.6497

Portugal, as a friend, an ally and a partner of
Afghanistan, hopes that this Afghan New Year will
usher in a clear vision of the path ahead, robust
implementation of the planned transition, increased
institutional capacity to address the people’s needs and,
ultimately, a brighter future for Afghanistan.
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): Mr. President, I
would like to thank you for scheduling today’s debate
on the situation in Afghanistan in the context of the
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I would
also like to thank Ambassador Zahir Tanin, the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, for his
statement. We are grateful for the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/120) and are appreciative of
the briefing by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura. May I also
take this opportunity to thank my colleagues from
Germany for strongly anchoring the negotiations.
The Kabul Conference last year marked the
beginning of the Kabul process — a new phase in the
partnership of the Afghan Government and the
international community. The hallmark of the Kabul
process is Afghan ownership and leadership in
realizing the shared pursuit of sustained and tangible
improvements in security, governance and development
in the country. The NATO summit held in Lisbon in
November 2010 provided a road map for the transition
to full Afghan security responsibility and leadership by
the end of 2014.
We could not agree more with the observations
made in the report of the Secretary-General that the
transition must be Afghan-owned; it must be planned
and implemented in a systematic manner; it must
ensure the protection and promotion of the human
rights of all Afghans; and it must be accompanied by
an inclusive political process and an intra-Afghan
dialogue.
It is important the transition be linked to the
realities on the ground rather than rigid benchmarks,
along with a constant assessment and review of the
evolving situation in Afghanistan. Building the strength
and capabilities of the Afghan national security forces,
along with adequate enablers, is imperative to the
transition of security responsibilities.
Afghan ownership and leadership are also critical
for development and reconstruction in Afghanistan.
This also implies greater coherence, coordination and

11-26621

further streamlining of the international community’s
development efforts, including the aligning of
assistance with Afghan national priority programmes
and increasingly working through Afghan institutions.
It is also important to strengthen the United Nations
own coherence and coordination among its various
bodies working in Afghanistan, in accordance with the
priorities of the Afghan Government.
India supports the Afghan Government’s efforts
to reintegrate those individuals who abjure violence,
give up armed struggle, do not have links with terrorist
groups and are willing to abide by the values of
democracy, pluralism and human rights as enshrined in
the Afghan Constitution. It is important that we respect
the red lines for the process, as reaffirmed at the Kabul
Conference. Otherwise, we would run the risk of
Afghanistan sliding back to become a safe haven for
terrorists and extremist groups.
We appreciate the increasing collaboration
between the International Security Assistance Force
and Afghan national security forces, which has led to
security gains in southern Afghanistan and the
consolidation of security gains in Kabul. However, it is
a matter of deep concern that the overall security
situation continues to deteriorate in Afghanistan, and
there has, in fact, been a slight increase in security
incidents as compared to last year. The recent instances
of attacks on civilians in the Kabul Bank in Jalalabad
and suicide attacks in Kabul indicate a change in
tactics, wherein the Taliban and other opposition
groups are opting for soft civilian targets. They also
point to the existence of a virtual army of suicide
attackers who are being brainwashed, trained and
deployed — the scale, location, character and
magnitude of which has not been sufficiently analysed
in the urge to seek a political solution.
The continued resilience of the insurgents, their
changing tactics, their numbers and their spreading out
to areas previously considered safe are a grim reminder
that the security gains will remain transient unless the
international community is able to firmly deal with
safe heavens for terrorist groups outside Afghanistan’s
borders.
For the security and stabilization of Afghanistan,
it is important to isolate and root out the syndicate of
terrorism that includes elements of Al-Qaida, the
Taliban, Lashkar e Toiba and other terrorist and
extremist groups operating from within and outside

13

S/PV.6497

Afghanistan’s borders. In fact, the Jalalabad attack,
which bore the hallmark of a mini-Mumbai, pointed to
a fusion of techniques and ideology from Al Qaida and
Lashkar e Toiba, with elements from the Taliban. The
Afghan people must be allowed to rebuild their land in
conditions of peace and security, free from interference
from their neighbours, and they must be the arbiters of
their own destiny.
Afghanistan’s
stability
and
economic
development depend a great deal on its neighbours and
the region as a whole. Afghanistan has immense
potential as a land bridge linking Central, West and
South Asia to emerge as a trade, transport and energy
hub. The recent developments in regional cooperation,
including the signing of the agreement on the
Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India gas pipeline
project, will provide added impetus to regional
cooperation. Part of the solution lies in Afghanistan
being increasingly regionally integrated. Growing
economic interdependence would catalyse peace and
prosperity in the region at large and in Afghanistan in
particular. Afghanistan, as a member of the South
Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC)
since 2005, is increasingly becoming active as a fellow
SAARC member. India, as a neighbour, will continue
its efforts towards the development of Afghanistan.
India and Afghanistan share a strategic
partnership based on the strong foundations of rich
historical and civilizational bonds and share the pursuit
of regional peace and prosperity. India remains
committed to partnering with the Government and
people of Afghanistan in the building of a peaceful,
stable, democratic and pluralistic nation.
Assisting Afghanistan in capacity-building and
skills for human resource development and building
Afghanistan’s public institutions is a special area of
priority for India. India’s cumulative development
assistance stands at $1.3 billion. In addition, India has
committed to providing 100,000 tons of wheat for the
Government and people of Afghanistan, in view of the
prevailing drought in the country.
The area of Afghanistan south of the Hindu Kush
and all the way up to the Ganges delta forms a part of a
single geographical and economic basin, with the
plains of India constituting the centre of its economic
gravity. It is by far Afghanistan’s largest regional
market, a potential source of investment, skills,
training, technology and expertise and a model of

14

democracy and national institution-building in a
culturally comfortable context. Closer economic
integration with India and other countries in the region
is the key to Afghanistan’s future and prosperity.
In conclusion, we hope that the international
community will continue to remain steadfast in its
support to Afghanistan as per the priorities of the
Afghan Government. We commend the good work
done by UNAMA. In accordance with the wishes of the
Afghan Government and as requested by the SecretaryGeneral in his most recent report, India supports the
renewal of the mandate of UNAMA for an additional
period of one year.
Mr. Amieyeofori (Nigeria): I would first of all
like to thank Mr. Zahir Tanin for his insightful
statement. We share the sentiments he expressed on
national ownership during the new dispensation and in
the transitional phase. I would also like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General de
Mistura for his comprehensive briefing on recent
developments in Afghanistan.
I will limit my remarks to three issues, namely,
political developments and the elections; security; and
economic development and the situation in the region.
Nigeria welcomes the concrete steps taken by the
Government of Afghanistan towards sustained political
and socio-economic development in the country. In
particular, we welcome the efforts to strengthen the
country’s fledgling democratic institutions and
structures. We commend both the Independent Election
Commission and the Electoral Complaints Commission
for contributing significantly to those electoral gains.
We also commend the support of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
for those efforts. Through its enhanced collaboration
with other international agencies to provide training
and technical and logistical support for the electoral
system, recent elections witnessed appreciable success
and a historic level of women’s participation.
Notwithstanding that achievement, Afghanistan’s
political process will benefit from sustained electoral
reforms aimed at making the process more transparent
and credible. Indeed, the political process will bring
lasting benefits if it remains open and participatory and
is owned by the people of Afghanistan. We stress that
genuine
implementation
of
the
Afghan-led
reconciliation process should be accorded high priority.

11-26621

S/PV.6497

That will not only inspire much-needed confidence, it
will also strengthen the implementation of the
reintegration programme envisioned by the Afghan
Constitution. In our view, the sustained dialogue
between the parties, which has led to the appointment
of warlords, village elders and women to the High
Peace Council, is a first step in the right direction.
On security, we note that the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2011/120*) once again highlighted the fragile
security situation in Afghanistan, despite recent
improvements in the southern part of the country. It is
troubling that Government officials, aid workers and
civilians associated with the Afghan Government and
the NATO-led forces were the targets and victims of
the recent upsurge in civilian killings. The current
situation undermines the capabilities of Afghan
security forces to assume full local security
responsibility with the imminent drawdown of allied
forces. Therefore, the transition of the first set of
districts and provinces to full Afghan security control
later this month will prove to be a significant test of the
readiness of the Government to exercise sovereignty
within its borders. The Government must strengthen its
state of preparedness and remain resolute in assuming
full law-enforcement responsibilities by 2014.
Nigeria commends the Government’s sustained
commitment to the national priority programmes
outlined last year. Implementing those programmes and
meeting the benchmarks set by the Government will
require greater coordination and sustained and timely
international assistance. It will also require efforts by
the Government to improve accountability, implement
good governance, adhere to the rule of law and reform
the judicial system.
Today, there is great potential for growth in a
range of sectors that could provide jobs in the short and
medium terms. The development of infrastructure and
agriculture should be accorded priority, as they will
stimulate employment and ultimately help the Afghan
Government to create a viable and self-sustaining
economy. For greater coherence and efficiency, funds
and other assistance should be channelled through the
Afghan budget system.
On regional cooperation, Nigeria welcomes the
growing cooperation between Afghanistan and its
neighbours. Such efforts to take advantage of synergies
have led to improvement in combating cross-border

11-26621

crimes, including drug trafficking, arms smuggling and
human trafficking.
Needless to say, much of the progress in
Afghanistan is attributable to international cooperation
and contributions. In that regard, we welcome the
international conference of foreign ministers scheduled
to take place in Bonn at the end of this year. We
welcome the emphasis placed on Afghan ownership
and management of the process. There are high
expectations that the conference will renew
international commitment to the dual track of security
and effective accountability made at both the London
and the Kabul Conferences.
Nigeria commends the staff of UNAMA for their
dedication to the task of building and consolidating
peace in Afghanistan. We commend Special
Representative of the Secretary-General De Mistura for
his leadership and commitment to the Mission’s vital
work in Afghanistan, and we have no hesitation in
supporting the renewal of UNAMA’s mandate for
another 12 months.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I would like to
join Council colleagues in thanking the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2011/120*), Special
Representative of the Secretary-General De Mistura for
his briefing, and Ambassador Tanin for his statement.
The year 2011 is another important year for
Afghanistan. As transition gathers momentum, the
international community must continue to support
Afghanistan in making progress on the political and
civilian tracks. That is critical to securing a sustainable
political settlement and long-term stability in
Afghanistan. The United Kingdom is committed to
working with the Afghan Government, the United
Nations and the wider international community
towards that goal.
Foreign Minister Rassoul’s letter, circulated to
the Council last week (see S/2011/118), rightly
highlights United Nations work in recent years in
support of lasting peace, security and development in
Afghanistan.
The
United
Kingdom
supports
Mr. Rassoul’s call for the mandate of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
to correspond with the principles of greater Afghan
leadership and ownership, in line with the mutual
commitments made at the Kabul Conference last July
and with an emphasis on transition. The draft

15

S/PV.6497

resolution currently being negotiated by the members
of the Council does exactly that.
The United Kingdom also agrees that, in line with
the London and Kabul Conference communiqués,
donors should aim to channel at least 50 per cent of
development aid through the Afghan Government’s
core budget and to align 80 per cent of aid to the
national priority programmes. As Mr. Rassoul says,
UNAMA has the primary responsibility for promoting
aid coherence.
UNAMA performs a vital role in Afghanistan,
coordinating the international effort in building a more
stable and secure country, working closely with and in
support of the Government of Afghanistan. UNAMA
can perform that role only if it has the full support of
the Afghan Government and if its staff can operate
where it is needed. While there are no plans at present
to open new offices, UNAMA’s work must not be
limited to particular areas or zones of the country.
Any political settlement should be within a
constitutional and democratic framework. To that end,
we welcome the inauguration of Parliament and the
election of a new Speaker for the lower house. Now
that the 2009 and 2010 elections are over, this is the
ideal time for the Afghan Government to press ahead
with electoral reform. UNAMA has a central role to
play in supporting the Government as it works to
implement the commitments made by President Karzai
at the Kabul Conference. We commend UNAMA and
Mr. De Mistura for their work, and will continue to
encourage their support of the Afghan Government in
that area.
As the move towards transition gathers pace, we
will continue to work alongside the Afghan
Government, as well as our International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) partners, towards President
Karzai’s objective of transferring lead security
responsibility to the Afghan National Security Forces
in all provinces by the end of 2014. The NATO defence
ministerial meeting last week reaffirmed NATO’s
continuing commitment to a secure and stable
Afghanistan.
Since the Lisbon summit last November, the
Afghan Government has made good progress in
preparing for the start of transition. The Afghan
National Security Forces are growing rapidly in size
and capability, supported by improving governance and
development. There have been a series of security

16

operations in which they have played an increasing
leadership role. Indeed, over the past year, the Afghan
National Security Forces have expanded the area in the
south of the country under Afghan Government
control. If that progress is to be sustainable, it must be
supported by development across the rule of law sector
through the delivery of the commitments made at the
Kabul Conference.
We are ever mindful of the toll suffered by the
civilian population as a result of the insurgency. We
condemn in the strongest possible terms the insurgents’
use of violence and tactics that deliberately intimidate
the civilian population, including through assassination.
The United Kingdom is committed to working with
ISAF partners to take robust measures to protect
civilians, and we welcome the continued progress
made in that regard.
As we have heard repeatedly in this Chamber,
Afghanistan cannot be secured by military means
alone. A sustainable political settlement is essential to
long-term stability and prosperity. It will underpin the
military progress made by ISAF and the Afghan
National Security Forces. We welcome the work of the
High Peace Council in taking forward the political
process, including its outreach to countries in the
region and the provincial events that it has held to
build support for the Afghan peace and reintegration
programme.
While the challenges that Afghanistan faces are
considerable, we should acknowledge that progress is
being made. Such progress is a result of the partnership
among the Afghan Government, the international
community and the United Nations. The United
Kingdom is fully committed to continuing and
strengthening those relationships, underlining our longterm commitment to the Government and people of
Afghanistan. UNAMA’s role across Afghanistan will
become even more important as transition proceeds.
The United Kingdom warmly supports the renewal of
UNAMA’s mandate.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. De Mistura and Ambassador Tanin for their
briefings, and endorse the statement to be made by the
representative of the European Union.
As we prepare to renew the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/120*) reminds us of the overall political

11-26621

S/PV.6497

context in which that decision is being taken. With the
Kabul process and the declaration on the transition
adopted in Lisbon on 20 November, the Afghan
Government and the nations committed to it set out a
road map for Afghans to resume full exercise of their
sovereignty.
President Karzai will soon announce the list of
the first towns and provinces for whose security
Afghans will assume responsibility, the first phase of a
gradual transfer throughout the entire country by the
end of 2014.
France fully supports the transition
process. Together with the Afghan Government and our
allies, we are committed to making that transfer
possible in those areas where our civilian and military
components are deployed. We want this to be lasting
and irreversible, and to lead to Afghan assumption of
responsibilities for governance and development.
To that end, we must advance on three fronts.
First, on the security front, we have retaken the
military initiative and allowed the Afghan State to
regain its footing in a number of areas. The Afghan
army and police are increasing in power. Our military
and training efforts are beginning to bear fruit, but at
the cost of very heavy fighting that has led to an
increase in civilian deaths. We know that three-quarters
of such deaths are caused by insurgents who no longer
hesitate to strike civilian targets and ramp up their
assassinations. We understand the emotion that this
engenders, and should ensure that the number of
civilians killed or wounded by pro-Government forces
continues to decrease as it has done in recent years.
In the political field, now that legislative
elections have been held and the new Parliament has
been seated, we call on all Afghan institutions to meet
the true expectations of the voters and to respect their
mutual competencies in the framework laid out in the
Constitution and based on the principle of the
separation of powers.
We also note the progress made in inter-Afghan
reconciliation. We continue to support President
Karzai’s efforts and the actions of the High Peace
Council. The insurgents, whoever they may be, need to
understand that, if they wish to rejoin political life in
Afghanistan, they must break their ties to Al-Qaida and
not allow their country to become once again a
platform for international terrorism.
On the development front, we have mutual
obligations. The international community must better

11-26621

coordinate its civil assistance and align it with Afghan
budget priorities. The Government must provide
assurances that its funds will be used appropriately and
directed to where they are most needed at the local
level and in the building of infrastructure that will
allow Afghan resources to be developed and exported
and the country to be opened to the outside world.
France will contribute to that effort in the framework
of its presidency of the Group of Eight and the plan
defined by the competent Afghan ministers at recent
international conferences. We will continue to closely
follow the consequences of the Kabul Bank affair.
This context makes the presence and activities of
UNAMA and the United Nations as a whole more
necessary than ever in that country. I take this
opportunity to reaffirm our gratitude to the staff of
UNAMA and to express our support for the efforts of
Special Representative Staffan de Mistura. We believe
that the mandate adopted last year in resolution 1917
(2010) identifies key priorities that remain relevant.
The coordination of assistance via the co-chairmanship
of the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board,
electoral reform, reconciliation through the work of the
Salaam Support Group, the timely lifting of the
sanctions regime pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999),
military-civilian coordination in the framework of the
transition, and regional cooperation should continue to
guide the efforts of the Special Representative.
We take note of the letter addressed to the
Secretary-General by Mr. Rassoul (see S/2011/118) and
are pleased to note that most of his requests have been
incorporated into the draft resolution. Some points
should still be recalled.
First, we believe that the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General should remain involved in
electoral system reform, although the latter should be
undertaken first and foremost by the Afghans
themselves. The United Nations supported the Afghans
in the holding of elections in 2009 and 2010 and,
through its efforts on other fronts, accumulated
expertise that it would be a shame to squander.
Secondly, we need to adapt the mandate of
UNAMA to the new context of the transition, which
will gradually redefine the outlines of our civilian and
military involvement in Afghanistan. We will need
more than ever a robust United Nations presence in
Kabul and at the local level. The role of UNAMA
should therefore be strengthened and converted to take

17

S/PV.6497

into account international efforts on behalf of
Afghanistan. In the case of NATO, such efforts include
the launching of a long-term partnership with
Afghanistan. The lead role of the United Nations in
these efforts should be consolidated during the
transition.
Lastly, as requested by the Afghans, we must
profit from this context to make an overall assessment
of the work of UNAMA with a view to the next
extension of its mandate in March 2012. This
reconstruction should be undertaken in full
transparency with the Afghan authorities. Through that
12-month re-extension, which we support, we reaffirm
our trust in the activities of the Special Representative
and our common desire to see an Afghanistan that is
democratic, independent, stable and prosperous and has
rejected violence and instability once and for all.
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): We, too, wish to thank Staffan de Mistura for
introducing the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/120*), and the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan for his statement.
The Secretary-General’s report paints a somewhat
mixed picture of the overall situation in Afghanistan.
Its assessment closely resembles that which we made
here in the Council in December 2010 during a similar
debate (see S/PV.6464). Given the situation, one might
readily draw the conclusion that the security issue must
remain a priority of the Afghan Government with a
view to a successful and sustainable transition in that
country. Like the Secretary-General, my delegation
believes that the conclusion of the political transition
process, the strengthening of regional security and
cooperation, the protection of civilians and respect for
human rights in general must be at the heart of the
concerns of the Afghan Government.
As regards the political and institutional process,
my delegation regrets the fact that it is having trouble
taking root. The current controversy surrounding
representation clearly shows that the political transition
in Afghanistan is weak. There is a fear that such
divisions could delay the rebuilding of the country and
undermine the gains achieved in the national
reconciliation process. Even so, the seating of
Parliament on 23 January was to the credit of the
political process. Its effectiveness could be a decisive
factor in the democratic evolution of that country, and

18

consequently a useful tool for the success of the
transition period.
My delegation welcomes the large number of
women elected to Parliament, which highlights their
interest in the political future of their country. We also
stress the fact that the transitional process must be
inclusive by involving the largest possible number of
Afghans, if not all, in the development of their country.
It will be agreed that the political situation in
Afghanistan cannot evolve without a simultaneous
evolution in the security sphere, which has barely
improved. The recent proliferation of violence and
indiscriminate killing throughout the country, in
particular in the south, offer the international
community little reassurance with respect to the
ongoing transition process. My delegation still believes
that a solution to the Afghan crisis must be political
and not military. The military dimension can only
support the political strategy. We therefore stress the
need for the Afghan Government to emphasize the
strengthening of its political institutions and the
national reconciliation process.
The promotion and protection of human rights are
another area to which the Government must redirect its
efforts. The protection of the rights of civilians, in
particular women and children, is an increasing source
of concern, as are the enrolment of children in armed
groups and the fight against corruption and drug
trafficking. In that regard, my delegation encourages
the Afghan Government to fulfil its commitments to
pursue cooperation with neighbouring countries.
Afghanistan’s future is at stake. We should take
up our collective responsibility for the reconstruction
of the country, which has for many years been affected
by violence and internal division. Lasting peace in
Afghanistan could have positive effects on the entire
region. It would also bring hope to the millions of
women and children whose outlook continues to be
characterized by uncertainty and lack of hope in a
bright future for Afghanistan.
We would like to thank the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for its
important contribution to stabilizing Afghanistan. My
delegation is aware of the need to support the
Government and people of Afghanistan in making the
transition process a success through national ownership
over their destiny. We support the Secretary-General’s

11-26621

S/PV.6497

proposal to extend
additional 12 months.

UNAMA’s

mandate

for

an

Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Staffan de Mistura for
his briefing and we welcome the statement made by
Ambassador Tanin, Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan.
In general, we share the assessments contained in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2011/120*) on
the situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security. We would like to
touch on a number of points.
We are seriously concerned about the ongoing
high level of violence in Afghanistan, compelling
evidence of which is provided by statistics in the
Secretary-General’s report. The terrorist activities of
Al-Qaida, the Taliban movement and other terrorist and
extremist groups continue unabated. We are also
concerned about their expanded use of asymmetrical
actions, which are resulting in an ever increasing
number of civilian victims, including women and
children. While we note the efforts of the international
military presences to reduce the number of civilian
losses, we share the deep concern of Afghan authorities
with regard to ongoing incidents involving civilian
losses, including children, during military operations.
There is a need to end situations in which
insurgents are pushed out of areas where counterterrorist activities are under way while instability spills
over into calmer areas. In that regard, we note in
particular the northern part of the country, where a
deterioration of the situation could have destabilizing
ramifications for neighbouring regions of Central Asia.
Those kinds of negative trends call for the utmost
prudence when implementing a reconciliation
programme, which will only be effective if it is carried
out with Afghan Government leadership. We therefore
support the intention of President Karzai to integrate
only those who decide to end violence, take part in the
building of a free and open society, respect the
Constitution, break with Al-Qaida and other terrorists
and work to seek political aims through peaceful means.
A crucial element in the reconciliation and
reintegration process — and in an Afghan settlement in
general — continues to be effective compliance with
the sanctions regime imposed by resolution 1267 (1999).

11-26621

Afghanistan stands at the threshold of a new era
in its history. The process of Afghanization of
governance is now beginning. We support the ultimate
goal of a transfer of responsibility for security in the
country to national security forces by 2014. Among
other things, that goal implies effective measures to
increase and appropriately equip the Afghan armed
forces and police so that they can independently ensure
the security of their citizens. In that regard, the
withdrawal of the International Security Assistance
Force will be possible only once it has reported to the
Security Council that it has implemented its mandate.
Additional efforts are also needed to assist in the
social and economic rehabilitation of the country.
There is also a need to focus on the speedy
implementation of projects that are of vital importance,
above all in the areas of energy, transport, agriculture
and mineral extraction. In that connection, the role of
the United Nations continues to be crucial in
coordinating international civilian efforts to help
Afghanistan return to normal life. We are certain that
an updated mandate for the United Nations Mission in
Afghanistan, which is to be reflected in the draft
resolution now being drafted, will fully meet those
goals.
We have taken note of the assertion in the report
of the Secretary-General that expanding regional
cooperation and constructive participation by
Afghanistan’s neighbours constitutes an important
element in implementing the Kabul process. We
believe that a useful coordinating role in that regard
could be played by such credible regional organizations
as the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization, which have
extremely interesting know-how and experience in
their activities in the Afghan area.
It is clear that a peaceful and democratic future
for Afghanistan cannot emerge without addressing such
a critical problem as the illicit production and
trafficking in drugs. The magnitude of this problem has
reached such dangerous proportions that the
international community has rightfully described this
scourge as a threat to international peace and security.
It should be recalled that drug trafficking continues to
be one of the central sources for the financial
underpinning of the subversive activities of terrorists
and extremists. Given the soaring prices for opiates and
the great likelihood that Afghan drug production will
increase this year, we again draw attention to the need

19

S/PV.6497

to adopt effective measures to destroy drug crops and
laboratories and stop the flow of precursors into
Afghanistan. The decision to list drug lords on the
Security Council sanctions list still needs to be
implemented.
The drug threat must be countered jointly. We call
on the Government of Afghanistan and the
International Security Assistance Force to immediate
undertake active counter-narcotics efforts. We also
reaffirm the readiness of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization to engage with them, within the context
of the Operation Kanal drug interception effort, to
implement initiatives — with the coordinating role of
the United Nations and the involvement Afghanistan’s
neighbouring countries, of course — to establish a
comprehensive system of counter-narcotic and
financial security buffer zones. It is only by pooling
efforts that we will achieve our common goal of
building an Afghanistan that is a stable, democratic,
independent, neutral and prosperous State, free from
terrorism and drug-related crime.
For our part, we are prepared to continue to
provide this country multifaceted assistance in efforts
to stabilize the internal situation and ensure sustainable
economic development.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would very much like to welcome and thank
Ambassador Zahir Tanin, Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, and Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), for their statements and analyses of the
situation in that country.
My delegation would like to highlight the
contribution of UNAMA in improving the stabilization
and democratization process in Afghanistan. At the
same time, the Government’s request for a renewal of
UNAMA’s mandate shows that the people of
Afghanistan have trust in the Mission’s ability to help
lay the foundations for sustainable peace and
development.
We believe it appropriate to focus UNAMA’s
mandate on supporting the Government in key areas,
such as security, governance, economic development
and regional cooperation. We also support the emphasis
on a transition towards greater Afghan responsibility
and leadership in the essential areas of security, the
rule of law and development.

20

The transition process, and in particular the peace
and stabilization processes, will only be sustainable if
they are accompanied by an inclusive political process
that includes genuine reconciliation and dialogue. The
convening of the Consultative Peace Jirga, the
establishment of the High Peace Council and the
adoption of the Peace and Reintegration Programme
are all initiatives in the right direction whose value we
duly appreciate.
We support ongoing work within the agreed
timetable in order to ensure that Afghan forces resume
leadership in the area of security by 2014.
Nevertheless, we concur with the Secretary-General
that this effort should be led by the progress made on
the ground. In that respect, we recognize the efforts of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
and the International Security Assistance Force. We
encourage them to continue to work with the Afghan
authorities to create conditions that will enable them to
gradually assume full responsibility for governance,
security and economic development, in line with the
Kabul process.
As the Afghan Government gradually assumes its
responsibilities for security, it is crucial that judicial
institutions have the necessary human, political and
financial resources to implement judicial and
accountability mechanisms with a view to restoring the
public’s trust in public institutions. That includes the
fight against corruption and organized crime.
It is also essential to resolve outstanding issues,
such as those involving the case of the Bank of Kabul
and electoral reforms, with a view to addressing claims
of fraud in the recent elections and to ensure that all
Afghan communities are suitably represented in
parliament.
We regret the increase in the number of security
incidents in recent months and that violence persists as
one of the main factors affecting progress in
Afghanistan. The deteriorating security situation had
led to an increase in humanitarian needs and in the
number of civilian deaths and internally displaced
persons. We urge all parties to the conflict to fulfil
their obligations under international humanitarian and
human rights law and to take all necessary steps to
protect civilians.
Afghanistan faces numerous problems that could
threaten the sustainability of the gains made thus far.
That is why, in the context of the principle of shared

11-26621

S/PV.6497

responsibility as the basis for a comprehensive
approach to combating the global drug problem
comprehensively in all its aspects, my country
reiterates its willingness to strengthen bilateral
cooperation with Afghanistan to address that and other
types of organized crime.
We believe that creating sustainable economic
development opportunities for those who cease
cultivating illicit crops is a key component of any
anti-drug policy and should be the focus of
international cooperation. Similarly, we wish to
emphasize the importance of joint regional initiatives
undertaken to combat the global drug problem in all its
aspects in the region. The constructive and sustained
engagement of various regional and extraregional
actors with an interest in implementing common
strategies to combat this phenomenon contributes to
stabilization and builds mutual trust among
neighbouring countries and those outside the region.
Security is a key condition for strengthening the
rule of law and guaranteeing the full exercise of
fundamental freedoms. Following a military victory, a
political solution and true reconciliation are needed.
We agree with the Secretary-General that, vis-à-vis the
international community, the full exercise of Afghan
sovereignty is a right and a responsibility towards the
Afghan people. With those goals in mind, we support
the three key principles mentioned by the SecretaryGeneral, namely, leadership and ownership, sustainable
planning and implementation and the protection and
promotion of the rights of all Afghans.
Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): I also thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General de Mistura for
his briefing and for his leadership of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
I warmly welcome Ambassador Tanin and thank him
for his remarks on the priorities set by his Government.
We took due consideration of Minister Zalmai
Rassoul’s letter to the Secretary-General (S/2011/118,
annex). Brazil supports Afghanistan’s aspirations for
ownership in ongoing processes and for full
sovereignty.
The situation in Afghanistan has visibly improved
over the past year. First and foremost, I wish to
congratulate the Afghan people. I would also like to
acknowledge the importance of the work of the
Independent Election Commission and the Electoral

11-26621

Complaints Commission, which acted in
commendable way throughout the electoral process.

a

The tensions over the status of parliament,
however, must be solved in a mature and institutional
way. Efforts to create the foundations for sustainable
peace through political dialogue must continue. It is
only with the sincere involvement of all stakeholders
that the remaining challenges will be overcome.
In that sense, we welcome the latest peace and
reintegration efforts by the Afghan Government,
especially such initiatives as the High Peace Council
and the Afghan Peace and Reintegration Programme.
The fact that armed groups are increasingly joining the
reintegration process is another positive trend that the
international community should support. We commend
the role being played by UNAMA in providing
logistical assistance to the High Peace Council’s
missions throughout the country.
Efforts to further regional cooperation are
essential for the well-being of the Afghan people. In
that regard, we welcome the instances of Afghanistan’s
increasing cooperation with its neighbours, such as the
signing of the intergovernmental agreement and gas
pipeline framework agreement, as well as the
ratification of the Afghanistan-Pakistan Transit Trade
Agreement.
Nevertheless, the security situation is still
alarming. The human cost of the armed conflict in
Afghanistan grew in 2010. Civilian deaths have been
increasing each year. Although the majority of civilian
casualties are caused by anti-Government forces, it is
important that the International Security Assistance
Force and other international forces continue to review
their tactics and procedures in order to reduce civilian
casualties even more. We are particularly saddened by
the recent increase in deaths among women and
children.
There is no military solution to this conflict. The
Kabul process must be closely followed until transition
to full Afghan leadership and responsibility is attained.
The next few years offer a critical opportunity for
donors to support Afghan priorities and commit to the
principles on their effectiveness.
Other important steps to move the Kabul process
forward include UNAMA’s continued support for the
promotion of coherent planning and delivery of aid,

21

S/PV.6497

based on the principle of Afghan ownership and
leadership of aid coordination.
We believe that enhancing productivity in
agriculture is of particular importance in helping to lay
the foundation for both peace and development in
Afghanistan. The creation of conditions for sustainable
agriculture deserves full attention.
Brazil is committed to strengthening its
contribution to the stability and social and economic
development of Afghanistan. We will soon open an
embassy in Kabul.
We have sent a mission to Afghanistan to identify
areas for technical cooperation. In consultation with
the Afghan Government, we have decided to develop a
capacity-building project in the area of agro-ecological
zoning for wheat and soybean crops, which we hope
will help to advance sustainable agriculture in
Afghanistan.
Here in the Security Council, and through an
enhanced bilateral presence in Kabul, Brazil stands
ready to work with the Afghan people and Government
towards a brighter future. In response to the express
wish of the Afghan Government and as requested by
the Secretary-General, Brazil supports the extension of
the mandate of UNAMA for a further 12 months.
Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Allow
me first to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (S/2011/120*) and its annex on
the measurement of progress against the benchmarks
established at the London and Kabul Conferences. We
also wish to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Staffan de Mistura for his valuable
briefing and Ambassador Tanin for his comments.
Bosnia and Herzegovina expresses its concern at
the continued deterioration of the security situation in
Afghanistan owing to the increase in military
operations, the use of improvised explosive devices
and suicide attacks. Regrettably, the rising human cost
of the armed conflict in Afghanistan reached the
number of 7,120 civilian casualties in 2010, which
represents an increase of 19 per cent compared to 2009.
Child casualties increased significantly in 2010, and
the same trend continued in 2011 as children continued
to be victims of the ongoing conflict. These vast human
losses indicate that the solution to the conflict cannot
be a military one and that, in order to prevent
continued suffering and rising civilian casualties, a

22

political solution to the conflict must be found. We are
of the view that all parties must strengthen their efforts
to protect civilians and ensure that their actions are in
line with international legal norms.
In light of the recent developments in
Afghanistan, it is encouraging to see that the Afghan
National Assembly has been established and that the
Upper House and Lower House have elected their
Speakers. These positive political developments send
an important signal, which is the first necessary step on
the path towards national unity and the establishment
of Afghan institutions that are capable of catering to
the needs of the Afghan people.
In this context, we were pleased to learn that the
reintegration and reconciliation process has maintained
its positive momentum. We encourage the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
to continue to provide its good offices, to promote
confidence-building measures to support the High
Peace Council, to implement the Afghan Peace and
Reintegration Programme, and to develop and
implement the Afghan-led reconciliation process.
We believe that regional cooperation is of critical
importance to Afghanistan’s reconciliation process and
future economic development. In that context, we
commend the establishment of a joint peace committee
by Pakistan and Afghanistan, and the increasing
regional cooperation with Turkey, Turkmenistan, India
and Iran in the areas of the economic development and
trade, which may provide a basis for the sustainable
improvement of the security and economic situations in
Afghanistan.
With respect to the Kabul process and aid
coherence, we take positive note of the progress of its
implementation by the Government of Afghanistan and
of the development of its 22 national priority
programmes, in particular the public financial
management programme, which is considered to be
crucial to the implementation of all other programmes.
Furthermore, we welcome the initial achievements
in the transfer of the security sector to Afghan
authorities, which is one of the most important elements
of the Kabul process. In addition, we commend
UNAMA for its support to the Afghan Government on
this critical objective, which includes a long-term
partnership with the international community. We share
the Secretary-General’s view that sustainable long-term
security in the country is to be achieved through

11-26621

S/PV.6497

interdependence with economic development and good
governance. We are looking forward to the
announcement of the first round of transfers of districts
and provinces to the Afghan authorities on 21 March.

and its staff for their important work in difficult
circumstances. In conclusion, Bosnia and Herzegovina
supports the renewal of the mandate of UNAMA for an
additional 12 months.

With regard to the obstacles to the transition
process, we hope that the problems caused by the flaws
in the election process will be resolved in a transparent
and constructive manner that will satisfy all parties and
preserve political stability.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.

As for the impasse over the Kabul Bank, linked to
the finalization of the agreement on a new International
Monetary Fund country programme, we support a
solution that will best reflect the interests of the
Afghan people and economic development of their
country.
Furthermore, we welcome the strengthening of
the United Nations own coherence in supporting the
Government-led aid coordination through the
development of an integrated strategic framework in
five priority areas: peace, reconciliation and
reintegration; governance and the rule of law; human
rights; sustainable livelihood; and maternal and
newborn health.
Bosnia and Herzegovina particularly commends
the United Nations contribution to the return of
refugees in Afghanistan. The 5.5 million refugees who
have returned to Afghanistan over the past nine years
represent a very encouraging sign. Those who returned
deserve to receive all the support they need, and we
call on all international stakeholders in Afghanistan to
continue contributing to the creation of conditions for
the sustainable return of the remaining refugees and for
the return to their places of origin of internally
displaced persons, who number more than 360,000.
We are encouraged to hear that the number of
victims of landmines was reduced in 2010, and we
encourage the United Nations to continue its support to
the Mine Action Coordination Centre of Afghanistan.
Finally, Bosnia and Herzegovina reiterates its
support for the central role that the United Nations
continues to play in promoting peace and stability in
Afghanistan by leading the efforts of the international
community and coordinating and monitoring efforts to
implement the Kabul process through the Joint
Coordination and Monitoring Board.
We wish to thank the Secretary-General, his
Special Representative for Afghanistan, and UNAMA

11-26621

I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral De Mistura for his briefing and Ambassador
Tanin for his statement.
At present, peaceful reconstruction in Afghanistan
is at a critical stage. China supports the Kabul process.
Work in Afghanistan in the fields of political stability,
security, development and the rule of law should go
hand in hand so that Afghan ownership can be achieved
at an early date.
China congratulates the country on the
inauguration of the Lower House of the National
Assembly. We support the efforts of the Afghan
Government to enhance its capacity-building and to
promote the Afghanistan Peace and Reintegration
Programme while implementing relevant Council
resolutions.
China is very concerned over the recent and
frequent occurrence of security incidents and the rising
civilian casualties. The transfer of security responsibility
to the Afghan Government should be preceded by
ensuring the country’s safety and stability. The
international community should, on the basis of respect
for Afghanistan’s independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity, honour its commitments to
Afghanistan and continue to provide it with assistance.
China supports the central role of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in
coordinating the assistance of the international
community in reconstructing Afghanistan and
effectively achieving Afghan ownership. We endorse
the extension of UNAMA’s mandate for an additional
12 months. The Council should attach due importance
to Afghanistan’s request that it extend UNAMA’s
mandate.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): Italy endorses the
statement that will be made later by the representative

23

S/PV.6497

of the European Union. I should like to add a few
remarks in my national capacity.
We appreciate the long-term commitment of the
United Nations to work with the Government and the
people of Afghanistan. We reiterate our full support for
the work of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura. Italy
will work closely with UNAMA to reinvigorate the
delivery of basic services to civilians. We commend the
Organization on enhancing the coherence of
international efforts in Afghanistan.
In a few days, President Karzai will formally
announce the beginning of the transition process — a
process that Italy strongly supports — in accordance
with the framework established at the Kabul
Conference last summer and confirmed at the Lisbon
NATO Summit in November 2010. We see transition
not as an exit strategy but as a condition-based joint
process aimed at achieving Afghan ownership in
security, governance and development. It entails both
long-term international civilian commitment to support
Afghanistan beyond 2014 and a strong Afghan
commitment to translate the Kabul commitments into
concrete actions.
Italy is exerting its utmost efforts to ensure that
transition will be irreversible, including increased
security trainers to 700 units of the 4,200 troops on the
ground; a civilian-oriented presence in Herat; new
initiatives to support governance at local and central
levels; a wide range of development cooperation
programmes and support to develop the private sector.
We have also joined in the European Union’s
comprehensive effort in priority sectors of Afghanistan.
One key to stabilization is an effective,
accountable and transparent Afghan Government that
delivers basic services to its people. The Kabul
process — whereby the Government of Afghanistan is
assisted by the international community and commits
to undertake reforms, improve governance and the rule
of law, promote social and economic development and
strengthen Afghan security capacities — remains
pivotal. Roughly 70 per cent of Italy’s aid to
Afghanistan is already aligned with the priorities
indicated by the Afghan Government. While we
commend the Government on the establishment of an
Afghan-led monitoring system, we now expect that the
obstacles that still impede the channelling of additional

24

resources through the Afghan budget will be removed
and that the management of public funds will be
improved. Transparent allocation of international
resources is vital to our continued cooperation.
Italy also expects the Afghan Government to
make full use of the valuable assistance and expertise
of UNAMA and to work with the newly elected Wolesi
Jirga, all the relevant Afghan institutions and Afghan
civil society on initiating long-term electoral reform.
Another key to stabilization is the inter-Afghan
political process. We support the intertwined processes
of reintegration and reconciliation. Yet, that endeavour
will not bring about lasting peace unless it is based on
national consensus and is conducted in a spirit of true
openness to all sectors of Afghan society. The red lines
agreed upon at the Kabul Conference must be
respected. In other words, consideration has to be
given to local traditions and sensibilities, as well as to
the promotion of fundamental human rights. Italy
commends the efforts of the High Peace Council to
reach out to local authorities and representatives of
ethnic minorities and civil society and encourages
installation of the local bodies needed for
reconciliation and reintegration.
That Afghan-led process requires the support of
Afghanistan’s regional partners. We therefore
commend Afghanistan and Pakistan for deepening their
strategic dialogue following the signing of the
Afghanistan-Pakistan Transit Trade Agreement. But
more can be done. Trade, water, energy, agriculture,
capacity-building, vocational training, education,
refugee return and reintegration and infrastructure are
matters of common concern for Afghanistan and its
neighbours. Joint actions on those issues will spur
regional connectivity and help to address economic
challenges and transnational threats.
Existing organizations and forums, in various
forms, have a remarkable contribution to make to this
process and deserve greater international support. We
value the active role played by the Organization of the
Islamic Conference and look forward to working with a
growing number of Muslim countries to counter
extremism and foster peace and reconciliation to the
benefit of the Afghan people.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.

11-26621

S/PV.6497

Mr. Nishida (Japan): At the outset, I wish to
express my deep appreciation for the words of
condolence and support expressed by the members of
the Council for the people of my country, Japan,
following the devastating earthquake and tsunami. The
Japanese Government is making its utmost efforts to
address the challenges we are now facing. Japan has
overcome many challenges in the past. I am confident
that we will once again do so this time.
I thank Special Representative de Mistura for his
very comprehensive and informative briefing. At this
juncture, I would also like to express my profound
gratitude to all the men and women of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
who have demonstrated a deep commitment to this
difficult mission. I also thank my dear friend
Ambassador Tanin for his presence.
The reconstruction and development of
Afghanistan is one of the most important issues facing
the international community. While respecting Afghan
ownership and in full cooperation with UNAMA, the
international community must continue its support for
the country of Afghanistan.
An important step for the Afghan Government
took place when NATO allies and partners confirmed,
at the NATO Summit in Lisbon last November, their
commitment to create conditions to enable Afghan
forces to take the lead for ensuring security in all
provinces of the country by the end of 2014. The
expected announcement of the first group of provinces
for transition, on 21 March, will be an important step
in this effort. These achievements signify the Afghan
Government’s determination to take full responsibility
for its own development.
In that context, we welcome the tireless efforts
made by the Afghan Government since the Kabul
Conference. We expect further progress in improving
security capacity and governance. Strengthening the
capacity of Afghan security forces and promoting
capacity-building
of
the
central
and
local
administrative institutions are indispensable. The
international community, in support of the Afghanowned process, must continue its engagement with the
country in that regard. Japan has been providing, and is
determined to continue, assistance for improving the
quality of the Afghan National Police by funding
police salaries and training of the police.

11-26621

We welcomed the initiative taken by the
Organization of the Islamic Conference to host the
International Contact Group meeting in Jeddah. The
Bonn Conference scheduled for December will be an
important occasion to review progress and provide
impetus for the efforts of Afghanistan and the
international community in this undertaking.
Following the certification of the final results of
the election of new members of the Lower House of
Afghanistan, Japan welcomes the commencement of
the new session and the election of the president of the
Lower House. At the same time, we have to carefully
follow the progress of the Special Court’s activities.
Japan fervently hopes that deliberations in the Lower
House will proceed smoothly and that the remaining
issues will be resolved as early as possible.
In order to ensure the sustainable development of
Afghanistan, it is necessary to establish a system that
enables the country to express its own will, built upon
democratic processes. We hope that the Afghan
Government will make its utmost effort for electoral
reform, with the strong support of UNAMA and the
international community, to achieve a free and
transparent electoral system.
The Afghan-led political process, namely,
involving reconciliation and reintegration, will be
especially crucial in stabilizing Afghanistan this year.
As the recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/120*) indicates, the transition process can be
made sustainable only if it is accompanied by an
inclusive political process. The inauguration of the
High Peace Council and the creation of the Afghanistan
Peace and Reintegration Programme — together with
the Peace and Reintegration Trust Fund — demonstrate
the significant progress made by the Afghan
Government.
Needless to say, this process must be led by the
Afghan Government, with support from the
international community, including my country, Japan.
We provided funding for the Trust Fund in October and
will play an active role in the conference on
reintegration to be hosted by the Afghan Government
this spring. We are ready to continue making our
contribution in this area.
In order to consolidate the aforementioned gains
and to improve the well-being of the Afghan people,
keeping in mind a medium-to-long-term perspective
beyond 2015, the international community must

25

S/PV.6497

respond to the country’s development needs and
promote the stabilization of livelihoods and the
construction of basic economic infrastructure. Both the
Afghan Government and the international community
are required to make unremitting efforts towards this
goal. Japan continues to provide assistance in human
resource development and infrastructure, and for
developing and rebuilding the agricultural sector and
rural communities.
Having entered a new phase in the transition to
Afghan responsibility, Afghanistan still faces various
challenges. However, the country is steadily moving
forward on the road towards development and
reconstruction. Japan will continue to cooperate with
the Afghan Government, UNAMA and other
international partners to achieve real progress for the
future of Afghanistan.
In conclusion, we would like to express our
sincere appreciation for Special Representative De
Mistura’s dedication and reaffirm our commitment to
supporting UNAMA’s efforts.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): When I last
addressed the Council, I found myself expressing
appreciation for the many statements of support that
had been made in the aftermath of the then-recent
Christchurch earthquake. I now find myself speaking
immediately after the Permanent Representative of
Japan. I would like to express New Zealand’s support
and sympathy for the dreadful situation that that
country is facing. Japan gave unstintingly of its active
help when we were in need, and we have been
privileged to do likewise over the past six days.
The
Secretary-General’s
latest
report
(S/2011/120*), Special Representative of the
Secretary-General De Mistura’s briefing and that of
Ambassador Tanin provide evidence of many positive
developments that have taken place in Afghanistan
over the past three months — the progress of Afghan
institutions towards taking lead responsibility for their
country’s security and the inauguration of
Afghanistan’s National Assembly being just two
examples. But there have also been setbacks. Afghan
civilians, for example, continue to suffer from the
volatile security situation, and tensions remain between
the executive, the legislature and the judiciary over the
composition of Parliament.

26

New Zealand welcomes the understanding
between the President and Parliament that allowed the
successful inauguration of Afghanistan’s National
Assembly, which will, of course, play a critical role in
Afghanistan’s democratic governance. We encourage a
spirit of cooperation between the institutions involved
because that will validate the decision of millions of
Afghans who defied threats and voted in September’s
elections. All of those are positive signs of a
progressing democracy.
We look forward to the executive, the legislature
and the judiciary carrying out their functions in
accordance with the Constitution and overcoming their
differences on the status of Parliament. While the
representation issue must be addressed, it should be
done in accordance with the Constitution, thus
ensuring the confidence of the international community
and, most importantly, of those who voted last year.
New Zealand strongly supports the transition
process and welcomes the Afghan Government’s
commitment to assuming lead responsibility for all
security by the end of 2014. We look forward to
President Karzai’s announcement of the first districts
and provinces that will begin the process of transition
to full Afghan authority.
In Bamyan province, where New Zealand leads
the provincial reconstruction team, we have already
begun the transition to Afghan leadership, and key
milestones have been achieved. Along with our Afghan
partners, we are focused on the need for local capacitybuilding and development assistance. New Zealand
regards its provincial reconstruction teams as part and
parcel of building the capability of the Afghan National
Police and enabling development activity to take root
and improve people’s lives.
Although Bamyan province itself is relatively
secure, New Zealand is still concerned over
Afghanistan’s overall security situation. For Afghan
civilians, the Afghan security forces and international
coalition forces, last year was the deadliest since the
war began, reflecting the increase in suicide attacks
and the use of improvised explosive devices by
insurgents. That reinforces the need for the Afghan
National Security Forces, partnering with the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF), to
quash insurgency and consolidate security. Combined
with a push to increase Afghan civilian capacity,
security gains will give space to and opportunity for a

11-26621

S/PV.6497

political solution — an essential ingredient in ensuring
a secure and prosperous Afghanistan.
That solution requires the further isolation of
hardcore insurgency leaders, while those who renounce
violence abandon alliances with Al-Qaida and embrace
the Afghan Constitution are integrated into the
mainstream. Increased pressure on those who disrupt
the peace must be coupled with opportunity for
insurgents who lay down their arms and help make that
peace durable.
Progress towards such a solution is rightly being
led by the Afghan Government, with the support of its
neighbours and the international community.
Accommodation will be required on all sides, but we
strongly urge that it not be at the expense of hardfought and hard-won rights and freedoms, especially
those of women and minorities.
Along with Afghanistan, its neighbours and the
international community, the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) plays an
important role in supporting a political solution,
notably through the Salaam Support Group. As
transition intensifies, UNAMA has an increasingly
important role. We welcome its contribution to Afghanled electoral reform, which will ensure that
Afghanistan’s elections are more cost-effective and
sustainable. We emphasize the importance of those
reforms to Afghanistan’s overall democratic future.
It is also important, however, that UNAMA’s
mandate reflect the situation on the ground and the
aspirations of the Afghan Government and the
international community. We therefore welcome this
Council’s intention to review that mandate and believe
that it should benefit from the outcomes of the second
Bonn conference to be held in December. We look to
the Council to give UNAMA the mandate it needs to
support the Government during the critical period of
transition between now and the end of 2014.
The next three years will be decisive in ensuring
that the Afghan Government takes full responsibility
for its country’s security, so that, as ISAF troops are
drawn down, the people of Afghanistan can assume full
control of the destiny for which they have already
sacrificed so much.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.

11-26621

Ms. Smith (Norway): Let me first express our
firm support for Special Representative De Mistura and
commend him for his dedicated leadership in a time of
transition to greater Afghan ownership.
Norway has a stake in the future of Afghanistan.
We make a significant contribution of troops and we
provide $150 million a year in development assistance.
Our engagement is based on the principles of Afghan
ownership and responsibility, as expressed in the joint
Kabul Declaration last year.
In this respect, Norway supports a transition of
security responsibilities to Afghan lead beginning this
spring, provided that certain fundamental conditions
are met. Yet only a political transition can bring longterm stability to Afghanistan. This, in turn, requires
improved governance and substantial reforms in many
areas. To implement a viable political reform agenda,
the Afghan Government must continue to work closely
with the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the international
community.
Future success is to a large extent dependent on
developments at the provincial and district level,
pending the implementation of the Afghan subnational
governance policy. The continued presence of UNAMA
offices is therefore a precondition for a successful and
gradual political transition. Afghanistan needs a strong,
well-functioning UNAMA just as much as UNAMA
needs a reliable and responsible partner in the Afghan
Government.
We strongly support Special Representative De
Mistura’s call for a surge for the protection of civilians,
particularly as 2010 was the deadliest year for civilians
since the fall of the Taliban regime in 2001. We expect
all parties to fulfil their obligations under international
humanitarian and human rights law.
Although the parliamentary election process was
far from perfect, it is now important that the Parliament
assume its functions and pursue the best interests of the
Afghan people. The political crisis caused by the
parliamentary elections once again showed the urgent
need for electoral reform in Afghanistan. Norway will
continue to support an Afghan-led electoral reform
process that is sustainable and based on the joint
commitment made at the Kabul Conference.
A structured political dialogue is vital in order to
meet the challenges facing Afghanistan today. Norway

27

S/PV.6497

supports an Afghan-led peace process as part of a
broader, viable and sustainable Afghan political
settlement. The achievement of a peaceful and durable
solution will require broad participation on the part of
religious, ethnic and civil society groups from all over
the country. The substantial participation of women is
key to any durable peace process.
We note with concern the continued assaults on
freedom of speech and the media, and we commend the
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission
for its resolute efforts to monitor, protect and promote
respect for human rights in Afghanistan. Norway is
pleased to note that human rights units have been
established in the Afghan Ministry of Justice. This is
an example of the Afghan Government’s commitment
to mainstreaming human rights in all national
legislation.
Violence against women remains a major
problem. Much has been achieved in terms of a
strengthened legal framework for women’s rights.
However, there are still many obstacles to its
implementation. A joint effort between Government
authorities and civil society is likely to give the best
and most sustainable results in terms of achieving
long-term gender equality in Afghanistan.
UNAMA’s mandate has to reflect today’s political
realities, including principles for a gradual and
conditions-based transition. UNAMA must continue to
assist the Afghan Government and the Afghan people
in their continuous efforts to build a stable and
peaceful Afghanistan. This requires a viable and
credible Afghan leadership.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Let me begin by warmly
greeting Ambassador Tanin and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Staffan de
Mistura.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2011/120*) and the Special
Representative for his insightful briefing. We remain
strongly supportive and appreciative of the efforts of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) under the effective leadership of the Special
Representative.
At the last Council meeting on Afghanistan, I said
that 2010 had been an important year and a milestone

28

for Afghanistan. Today, I would like to add that 2011
will be crucial. According to the decisions taken at the
London and Kabul Conferences and at the NATO
Lisbon summit, this is the year that Afghanistan and its
international partners will move steadily forward
towards a transition to Afghan ownership and
responsibility. We are encouraged by the steps taken so
far and look forward to the official announcement by
President Karzai next week of the launch of the first
tranche of the transition to Afghan-led security, which
is to be finalized in 2014.
While we are optimistic, we are also realistic
with respect to the fact that, given the challenges
facing us, the transition is not going to be an easy
process. We appreciate the results already achieved by
the Afghan authorities in the implementation of the
Kabul process and urge them to push forward to bring
about more tangible outcomes. A great deal remains to
be done. However, we are confident of success as long
as Afghanistan and its international partners are
committed to working together. We will ensure that this
gradual and conditions-based process is irreversible by
exerting concerted and sustained efforts in conformity
with the priorities and requirements of the Afghan
Government. I must also once again emphasize that the
transition does not mean an end to the international
community’s commitments in Afghanistan. It has been
made clear that transition is not an exit and that the
international community will continue to be engaged in
Afghanistan beyond 2014.
This is also evidenced by the readiness and
dedication of the United Nations to assist Afghan
authorities and to support the Kabul process through a
constructive, comprehensive, transparent, practically
focused and complementary partnership. We are
confident that the United Nations and its Mission in
Afghanistan, under the leadership of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Staffan de
Mistura, are capable of playing the critical role
expected of them if provided with the necessary tools.
We therefore endorse a strong mandate for UNAMA
that is in accordance with the principles of Afghan
leadership and ownership.
While we work towards a sustained and credible
transfer of responsibility in the areas of security,
governance and development, the ultimate goal of
lasting peace, prosperity and stability in Afghanistan
will be achieved only by parallel efforts in the political
process. We are pleased to see a consensus on the fact

11-26621

S/PV.6497

that military means alone will not guarantee a
sustainable resolution of the conflict. It will certainly
take time and dedicated effort, but 2011 will be crucial
also in making credible progress towards reintegration
and a political reconciliation which embraces all
segments of society. This process should be Afghanled, and we are pleased to see that Afghan authorities
are indeed taking the lead. In that respect, we are
supportive of the efforts of the High Peace Council and
of the steps taken to implement the Afghan Peace and
Reintegration Programme. We also encourage
Afghanistan’s regional and international partners to
continue to provide the necessary support to those
efforts as requested by Afghanistan.
While the transition to Afghan ownership and
responsibility is progressing with the support of the
international community, Turkey has been taking steps
to ensure that its contributions to this effort continue in
an effective manner. In this vein, we have been
concentrating our efforts mainly on two levels. At the
national level, we will intensify our ongoing efforts
towards the development, reconstruction, capacitybuilding, education and training of the Afghan national
police and army in line with the needs and
requirements of the Afghan Government.
At the regional level, proceeding from the belief
that the resolution of many of the challenges
Afghanistan faces requires, first and foremost, the
constructive support of its neighbours and regional
partners, we will strive to continue our work towards
regional cooperation, confidence- building and
development. The year 2010 has been a busy and
constructive one in setting down the fundamentals of a
common vision for this purpose. It is our firm intention
to take the regional dimension forward by holding
another regional conference in Turkey in the fall. We
will be consulting with Afghanistan and the regional
countries in the process of preparing for that
conference, which be will aimed at furthering the
existing regional vision as based on the principles set
out in the Statement adopted at the “Heart of Asia”
conference. At the same time, we are convinced of the
need to bridge the efforts made at the regional and
international levels. Towards that end, we will continue
to have intensive consultations with all relevant actors,
making use of all available opportunities, in various
formats.

In conclusion, let me emphasize that Turkey’s
commitment to Afghanistan is long-term and will
continue as long as required by the Afghans.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. McNee (Canada): The Council meets today
to discuss the situation in Afghanistan and the role of
the international community in helping it to become
more stable and secure. Strong leadership by the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) is crucial in this regard. Canada salutes the
continuing, committed and very effective leadership of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Staffan de Mistura. We thank him for his very good
briefing today, and we note with appreciation the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2011/120*) and his
recommendations for the Mission for the coming year.
In its deliberations, the Council should continue
to ensure that the renewed mandate reflects the
evolving situation in Afghanistan. The international
community’s efforts over the next years should focus
on the process towards greater Afghan leadership in
order to ensure that Afghanistan has the best chance for
success and that the progress that has been achieved in
development, governance and security will be
consolidated.
Over the past year, the Afghan Government has
demonstrated
leadership
in
coordinating
the
international community around a focused series of
national priority programmes that prioritize the
development objectives outlined in the Afghan
National Development Strategy. While they began with
a great deal of promise, we are concerned by recent
developments that threaten the progress of these
programmes. Critical to this is finding a satisfactory
way of implementing the President’s decree on private
security companies and resolving critical issues at
Kabul Bank. UNAMA should be at the forefront of
these discussions and continue to fulfil its critical role
in coordinating donors and ensuring that the
international community is responding adequately to
Afghanistan’s needs. Canada remains committed to
working with international partners and the
Government of Afghanistan in supporting the Kabul
process and realizing the objectives of these
programmes.
The transition of security responsibility to Afghan
authorities by 2014 is a goal shared by Afghanistan and

11-26621

29

S/PV.6497

the
international
community.
The
increasing
capabilities of Afghan institutions, notably the Afghan
National Security Forces, will allow the process of
transition to begin in the coming months. At the same
time, it will be important to build up the civilian
governance institutions that will need to oversee the
Afghan National Security Forces.
As others have noted today, the security situation
remains a serious concern. The most recent UNAMA
report highlights the growing human cost of the
conflict in Afghanistan. Every step possible must be
taken to avoid civilian casualties due to International
Security Assistance Force operations. But it is very
important to stress that over three-quarters of all
civilian casualties last year were caused by insurgents.
Canada strongly condemns continuing attacks on
civilians and humanitarian personnel and calls for
respect for key principles to allow the full, safe and
unhindered access of humanitarian actors to people in
need.
Reconciliation between the Government of
Afghanistan and the Taliban is critical to our efforts in
bringing the conflict in Afghanistan to a successful
conclusion. This reconciliation process should be
Afghan-led, but the international community should
support a process that respects “red lines” requiring the
insurgents to renounce violence, recognize and respect
the Constitution of Afghanistan, and sever ties with AlQaida and other terrorist organizations. Within the
international community, support from Afghanistan’s
neighbours, in particular Pakistan, will be critical.
This is the first open debate on Afghanistan since
the tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) on women and peace and security.
Progress has been made, but the continued efforts of
the Afghan Government, civil society, the United
Nations and the international community as a whole
are required to prevent backsliding and to secure a
brighter, more stable future for the women of
Afghanistan. In 2010, we welcomed the commitment
by the Government at the Kabul Conference to
identifying and prioritizing benchmarks for the
National Action Plan for the Women of Afghanistan, as
well as its commitment to developing a strategy to
implement the law on the elimination of violence
against women. Canada does remain concerned,
though, about the potential implications for women’s
rights in the original draft regulation on women’s
shelters. We urge the Government of Afghanistan to

30

ensure that the regulation respects its national and
international human rights obligations to women and
girls.
(spoke in French)
Afghanistan’s relationship with its neighbours is
also central to its development. The States of the
region are the most affected by the situation in
Afghanistan and play a primary role in helping it to
become more stable and secure. It is important that
these States play a positive role, allowing Afghanistan
to develop its own institutions and structures free from
outside influences. Additionally, we note with
appreciation the positive dialogue that has been taken
up by regional organizations and individual countries,
and encourage Afghanistan and its neighbours to
ensure that it continues. By maintaining such links,
Afghanistan can continue to foster greater
understanding with its neighbours and develop the
links crucial to its long-term prosperity and security.
We note that the 2010 parliamentary elections
were not held under ideal circumstances and were
marred by many irregularities. However, the
Government of Afghanistan and UNAMA are in a
unique position to work together in order to distil the
lessons learned from this event and to further
strengthen
Afghanistan’s
electoral
institutions.
Afghanistan’s democratic process has three key
components: ensuring the sustainability of electoral
reforms, strengthening democratic institutions and
allowing Afghans to be heard.
UNAMA’s mandate will come to an end later this
month, and the Security Council will deliberate and
decide on the best way forward for the Mission. In so
doing, it will take into account the clear progress
achieved within the country and the many challenges
that remain.
In conclusion, Canada will remain a devoted
partner of the Afghan Government in order to ensure
that Afghanistan becomes a country where all its
citizens can live in freedom and security.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): Before I proceed, the
recent events in Japan must find a place in my speech.
We not only commiserate with the people of that noble
country, but recognize their great contributions to the

11-26621

S/PV.6497

United Nations. We would like to express solidarity
with them at this stage.
I would also like to recognize the briefing by
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Staffan de Mistura. We greatly value the work of the
United Nations in all areas of the world, and
specifically Afghanistan.
The problem we seem to face here on a fairly
regular basis, without denigrating the great work being
done by this Council or its members - all honourable
members, who I find are absolutely on the dot – is that,
nevertheless, very often, sitting here, we somehow,
without quite realizing it, start reinventing the wheel. I
am not terribly sure that this is something that is
necessarily beneficial. When we start reinventing the
wheel, I believe that we should recognize the fact that
we have a diplomat who implements the work of the
Council and the Secretary-General.
However, at the same time, it must be realized
that with a State that is as old as, if not beyond the age
of, known history, there is a certain requirement for it
to fulfil its sovereignty. The fact that it has survived so
long and that it wants to have some say in its destiny
creates some distance between what is happening here
and what is felt necessary and beneficial there. That,
my friends, creates some sort of a divide of which,
unfortunately, we are not aware when we sit here and
talk about such issues, inasmuch as we have the
noblest intentions, beliefs, concepts, paradigms and
ideology.
However, that country has its own beliefs and
traditions, which may indeed have led to war, not so
much of its own doing, but through the expansion of
empires. It is like the continental plates under the
oceans that, as they rub against each other and want to
move from one point to another, create an earthquake,
a tsunami. That country has been caught is such a
tsunami, such an earthquake. It is not of its doing, or
that it wants that. I think that we also have to respect
that. If we really wish to have a comprehensive and
cohesive policy, we must understand the requirements
of both sides, some of which may at times seem at
cross purposes with the very noble design of the
Council.
The Secretary-General’s quarterly reports are an
important yardstick. Regarding some aspects of the
latest report (S/2011/120), I think that the personnel
enhancement of the Afghan National Army and it

11-26621

reaching the targeted figure by 2012 are issues that
most people readily support. I think that the question of
governance and institution-building is a very important
aspect, but I believe that we must recognize that there
will often be changes in the noble designs suggested in
the very Council itself.
It is a great pleasure to note that the Afghan
National Development Strategy is supported by both
sides in most areas. That is an important aspect
because aid must be disbursed with the cohesion,
connivance and interest of the national Government. As
raised in the report, Afghan ownership is important for
all these points to succeed. That is only possible when
there is such cohesion.
The report documents the challenges ahead for
the international community in Afghanistan. It
envisages the transfer of full responsibilities to Afghan
institutions, specifically through the Kabul process,
and the aspect of commitment to economic
development, good governance and a comprehensive
vision of security. I feel that that might occasionally be
at odds with what is being advocated here.
While security has an important contribution to
make, we must realize that the challenges are myriad
and very extensive. I feel that incidents that have taken
place within Afghanistan are reprehensible and that we
should understand what is happening from the Afghan
perspective and point of view.
We have no hesitation in extending the fullest
security and intelligence cooperation to Afghanistan,
including through the Tripartite Commission, which
includes the United States and the International
Security Assistance Force. The number of our military
and paramilitary personnel deployed along the border
is more than all international troops present in the
whole of Afghanistan. Our efforts and financial costs
should not be downplayed or denigrated. Pakistan’s
commitment to peace in the region is unwavering. We
do not want Afghanistan to remain a theatre of proxy
wars.
We must understand that there is a specific area
from west of the Indus roughly to the Oxus, even
beyond in places, that the British accepted as part of
their imperial design and commitment. Today, that is
where the theatre of war is most evident.
The London and Kabul processes emphasize the
Afghan Reintegration Programme, which needs

31

S/PV.6497

international support for the Government’s efforts. We
support an Afghan-led inclusive reconciliation process.
The visit of Burhanuddin Rabbani, Chair of the High
Peace Council, to my country in January and the
International Contact Group meeting in Jeddah were
landmark events. We are supportive of such
engagements, including the High Peace Council’s
interaction with the United Nations and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference.
Pakistan wants durable peace in Afghanistan. I
would take this opportunity to highlight that the safe
return of over 1.5 million registered Afghan refugees,
the smooth implementation of the Afghanistan-Pakistan
Transit and Trade Agreement and the completion of
transregional economic projects are conceivable only
in a secure and stable Afghanistan.
The quest for peace and stability in Afghanistan
dovetails with a long-term Pakistan-Afghanistan
cooperative partnership. Despite our own woes, we are
continuing our assistance, the largest that we have in
any country.
I will conclude by reiterating our support for the
objectives and efforts of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan. I hope that the draft resolution
to extend its mandate for another 12 months will be
adopted by consensus and implemented with the
complete support of the international community, to the
satisfaction of Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): Like my
dear colleague, the Ambassador of Pakistan, I will try
to be brief.
Allow me to start by expressing our gratitude to
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative,
our good and dear friend Mr. de Mistura, head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, for
their efforts and dedication to strengthening peace and
stability in Afghanistan. We attach great importance to
the role of the United Nations in coordinating
international efforts in Afghanistan, and extend our full
support for the Mission’s success.
Very briefly, I would like to touch upon a few
points regarding the prevailing situation in
Afghanistan.

32

First, the announcement of the drawdown of
United States military forces this year is a welcome
step, but this withdrawal should not be compensated
for by the establishment of permanent military bases in
Afghanistan. Obviously, the presence of foreign
military forces, in whatever form and under whatever
justification, would not help to ensure peace and
stability in Afghanistan; rather, it would provide
enough excuse for the extremist groups to prolong and
continue the armed conflict.
Secondly, we are very concerned about the
increase in the loss of lives and injuries inflicted upon
Afghan civilians. We are also worried about more
displacements of people. Putting the lives of innocent
people at the mercy of drone attacks must be halted.
There is no justification for putting the lives of
innocent civilians at risk in the name of countering
terrorism.
Thirdly, we welcome the initiative of the
Government of Afghanistan in setting up the High
Peace Council. Mr. Rabani, the head of the Council,
paid a visit to Iran and we expressed our readiness to
host one of the meetings of the Council in Iran, with
the participation of Afghan political groups and
factions. We hope that the High Peace Council will
expand its discussions on the reconciliation and
reintegration efforts within Afghanistan and with the
countries in the region.
Fourthly, in the area of regional cooperation, the
neighbouring countries of Afghanistan share critical
interests in Afghanistan’s security and long-term
stability and play a role in promoting Afghanistan’s
socio-economic development. Obviously, a stable and
flourishing Afghanistan would be the ideal situation for
its neighbours and the wider region. The continuing
engagement between Afghanistan and its neighbours
and regional partners in the areas of trade and
economic and infrastructure development must be
supported.
Fifthly, the narcotic drugs problem is still one of
the most serious challenges that Afghanistan and the
transit countries are facing. We should all take
seriously the warning issued in January by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime that rising opium
prices may encourage farmers to plant more opium
poppies. The traffic in narcotics has also served as a
breeding ground for terrorists, extremists and illegal
groups attempting to destabilize the Afghan

11-26621

S/PV.6497

Government. We call again on those who bear the
responsibility for combating narcotic drugs on behalf
of the international community to take more concrete
steps to curb this threat as soon as possible.
Sixthly, we have continued our dialogue with the
Afghan
authorities
on
bilateral
cooperation,
particularly in relation to increasing cooperation on
security matters, counter-narcotics efforts, illegal
immigrants, migrant workers and the completion of
development projects, including road and railway
building. A number of agreements were reached at last
week’s visit by Iran’s Minister of the Interior to
Afghanistan, and we look forward to more agreements
at the bilateral and trilateral summits of the Presidents
of Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan, and the trilateral
meeting with Tajikistan during next week’s visit to Iran
for the celebration of Nowruz.
We are confident that the people and Government
of Afghanistan, who have undergone so many
hardships and much suffering in past decades, will
soon surmount the challenges and difficulties and move
ahead towards a prosperous, peaceful and stable
Afghanistan. We wish them the best, especially at the
beginning of Nowruz, the historical New Year
celebration, in the coming days.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): I thank you, Sir,
for the opportunity to address the Council today. Given
the hour, I will somewhat reduce the length of my
printed statement.
However, I would like to begin, as other have
done, by extending the condolences of my delegation
to the delegation, Government and people of Japan.
They are going through a very difficult time, but we
know that they will recover from this period because
that is who they are.
I would also like to thank Ambassador Tanin for
his presentation, and to commend the Special
Representative and head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for the important work he is
doing in partnership with the Government of
Afghanistan. Australia welcomes the opportunity to
reaffirm our commitment to international efforts in
Afghanistan and supports the renewed UNAMA
mandate for a further 12 months.

11-26621

This discussion takes place at an important time
for the partnership between the international
community and the Government of the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan. Next week, the President of
Afghanistan, Hamid Karzai, we understand is due to
announce the first provinces to begin the transition of
responsibility for security to Afghan leadership. This
announcement will mark the beginning of a process to
fulfil President Karzai’s goal for the Afghan National
Security Forces to take the lead in conducting security
operations across Afghanistan by the end of 2014. This
is a goal which the international community fully
supports, and 2011 is the lynch pin of that goal.
At the December debate on Afghanistan (see
S/PV.6464), we welcomed the release of the final
results of the Wolesi Jirga elections. The National
Assembly performs a vital role within Afghanistan’s
system of governance. Since that time, we have been
pleased to see the election of a Speaker to the Wolesi
Jirga, who we understand has made an excellent start in
his work. We note that further investigations into the
September 2010 parliamentary elections have been
referred to a special tribunal. It is vital that, if any
further investigations are pursued, they be in full
accordance with the Afghan Constitution and other
relevant Afghan laws.
The continued development of democratic
institutions based on the rule of law and the separation
of powers is crucial to a stable Afghanistan. We
encourage President Karzai and all who serve in the
Afghan Government as they work to continue to
rebuild their country and to strengthen the foundations
of sustainable peace and constitutional democracy.
Strengthening
Afghan
governance
and
development will be critical to sustainable, irreversible
transition. The United Nations has a key role in the
international civilian effort to enable greater Afghan
capacity and leadership in support of transition,
including in responding to requests by the Afghan
authorities for support to the electoral process.
We have come a long way down that path, but
there is still a long way to go. Reconciliation and
reintegration are a part of Afghanistan’s future, and
these processes must be Afghan-owned and led.
UNAMA is providing essential support to the Afghan
Government’s efforts. For example, UNAMA’s
logistical support, via the Salaam Support Group, has
enabled the High Peace Council to undertake an active

33

S/PV.6497

programme of regional and provincial visits. These
visits are improving local and regional support for
reconciliation and reintegration processes.

Australia’s engagement is but one example of the
international community’s long-term commitment to
Afghanistan.

Afghanistan’s neighbours and regional partners,
from whom we have just heard, play an important role
in supporting the reconciliation process. Australia
commends the efforts of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General to promote regional engagement
in accordance with UNAMA’s mandate.

I would like to take a moment to remember those
civilians who have been killed or wounded in
Afghanistan since 2001. I refer to the recent report by
UNAMA and the Afghanistan Independent Human
Rights Commission, which urges all parties involved in
the armed conflict in Afghanistan to strengthen their
efforts to protect Afghan civilians.

I would like to briefly draw on Australia’s
engagement in Afghanistan in the period since we last
addressed the Council on this issue.
As the Council knows, Australia is the tenthlargest contributor of troops to the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and the largest nonNATO troop contributor overall. Two weeks ago, my
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Kevin Rudd, visited
Afghanistan. His trip was focused on Kabul and on
Uruzgan province, where Australia is engaged as part
of the ISAF-flagged Combined Team-Uruzgan. Mr.
Rudd visited Australian soldiers and civilians working
in Tarin Kowt, in Uruzgan province, and saw first-hand
the positive effects of the international community’s
efforts. To quote the Minister, there is “clear evidence
of progress being made in our mission”. That is what
we believe.
We are also seeing progress in our development
and governance efforts. Australia will deliver
$123.1 million
in
development
assistance
to
Afghanistan this fiscal year, with the Australian
Agency for International Development’s country
programme growing by 50 per cent, to $106 million.
During 2010, Australia tripled its civilian capacity in
Afghanistan to some 50 people. An Australian civilian
leads the provincial reconstruction team in Uruzgan,
where we are seeing slow but steady progress in
improving standards of governance and development.
It is heartening to see discussion of Afghanistan’s
prospects for increased trade and investment. I refer in
this instance in particular to the Afghanistan
International Investment Conference, hosted by the
United Arab Emirates late in 2010, which was attended
by my Minister for Foreign Affairs. Improving the
economic well-being of Afghanistan is key to
improving the livelihoods of Afghans and, in turn, their
prospects for a safe and stable society.

34

Finally, I also take this moment to acknowledge
the dedication and sacrifice of UNAMA personnel
working in Afghanistan. Australia supports all efforts
to ensure that those who work in support of
Afghanistan’s future are able to do so with the security
necessary to complete their challenging tasks.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the European Union.
Mr. Serrano (European Union): The candidate
countries Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and Montenegro; the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Serbia; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova
and Georgia, align themselves with this declaration.
Like others, I would like to greet Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Staffan de
Mistura and his team and thank them for their excellent
work and for the good cooperation with the European
Union. I also thank Ambassador Tanin for his
presentation.
The Secretary-General’s report on the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
(S/2011/120*) before the Council today devotes a good
deal of attention to the transition to full Afghan
leadership regarding security and to the broader Kabul
process, which has gained some momentum in recent
months.
The European Union welcomes the wish of the
Afghan Government to take the lead in the transition
process and the overall development of Afghanistan, as
recently expressed in the letter of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Rassoul, to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon (S/2011/118, annex). We appreciate the fact
that the transition will soon be officially launched by
President Karzai on the occasion of the Afghan New
Year, on 21 March.

11-26621

S/PV.6497

At the same time, we fully endorse that — as the
Secretary-General underlines — the exercise of
sovereignty also implies responsibility, first and
foremost towards the Afghan people. In the face of
significant security incidents, many of which affect or
target an alarming number of civilians, we remain
committed to calling for and assisting in a sustainable
transition process. While we are pleased with the
continuing build-up of Afghan security institutions, we
still need to see them develop a stronger capability to
protect the population against violence and hence
support training efforts to that end.

Afghan ownership and leadership is indeed
essential for a sustainable transition and needs to be
matched with accountability, strengthened financial
management and effective institutions. That is also
indispensable for the success of the national priority
programmes and for continued international assistance
in times of greater scrutiny by the domestic
constituencies of Afghanistan’s partners. Moreover, it
has become apparent that economic governance
requires particular attention, including improving
oversight of the financial sector, with the assistance of
international financial institutions where necessary.

Together, we all subscribed to a comprehensive
vision of security for Afghanistan that encompasses
good governance, human rights and development. We
did so because it is our common understanding that a
successful and sustainable transition is also predicated
on an inclusive political process and on tangible,
country-wide improvements for the Afghan people. In
view of that, we hope that the political institutions can
soon focus on the actual challenges at hand and thereby
gain further legitimacy in the eyes of the population.
We believe that it is time to resolve the current
disagreements over the composition of the Parliament
while respecting the mandate of the electoral
institutions and the separation of powers.

As the transition gradually proceeds, UNAMA
continues to play a critical role in the coordination and
management of international assistance, as well as in
support of the Afghan-led peace and reconciliation
process, which must respect human rights and
transitional justice. A balanced UNAMA presence
throughout the country, including through United
Nations funds and programmes, is needed for that
purpose, all the more so because we believe that
United Nations field offices carry out essential tasks.

On a more general note, building strong and
credible institutions capable of delivering justice and
other services to the people is a key priority. Also, we
cannot stress enough the importance of improving the
capability to ensure the human rights of all Afghans,
including women, children and persons belonging to
religious or ethnic minorities, and to protect them from
violence and abuse. Moreover, the European Union
firmly believes that all countries stand to gain from the
greater involvement of women as important actors in
post-conflict development- as stated in resolution 1325
(2000) - and in public life in general.
The Kabul process has made some headway since
the Kabul Conference in July last year, but more
remains to be done to respond to the basic needs of the
Afghan people. For its part, not only has the European
Union further increased its assistance package, but it is
also on track regarding the alignment of its
programmes with Government priorities and the
channelling of assistance through Afghan Government
structures and multi-donor trust funds.

11-26621

We also endorse a continued United Nations role
in long-term electoral reforms, the importance of
which was underlined in the Kabul communiqué, in
particular as regards the sustainability of the electoral
process. Efforts in that field should build on the lessons
drawn from the 2009 and 2010 electoral cycles.
In conclusion, we support the proposed extension
of a strong UNAMA mandate so that the Mission can
continue to contribute to and steer the creation of an
enabling environment for successful transition and
transformation in Afghanistan. For its part, the
European Union recently reaffirmed its strong support
for transition and the importance of long-term
cooperation with Afghanistan, also beyond 2014, in a
meeting with President Karzai.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to Mr. De Mistura to respond to comments.
Mr. De Mistura: I will keep my remarks
extremely brief in view of the time and the fact that we
are very satisfied with what we have heard today.
I would like to make two points. First, we will do
our best to implement the common understanding that
we perceive as becoming apparent in the Security
Council regarding the review and the future mandate
and activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission

35

S/PV.6497

in Afghanistan (UNAMA). Of course, that will be
based on the work done in the context of the review
process and on the realities on the ground, so that the
Council, which will make the mandate adjustments,
will be able to consider the results of the review. We
will do our best to do that together.
Secondly, I would like to say a few words about
an issue that we have not flagged enough here today. I
was planning to do so myself at a certain point. The
issue pertains to 51 per cent of the Afghan population:
the women of Afghanistan. We will continue to
consider it part of our duties to help the Afghan
authorities ensure that Afghan women will continue to
have a better future. A total of 69 women are members
of Parliament. Recently, we have been very concerned
about a number of issues related to women’s shelters. I

36

will insist on that point because it is part of the human
rights mandate of UNAMA to do everything we can to
assist this large, important part of the Afghan
population.
A female Afghan Member of Parliament
reminded me that one of the most important areas is
education. If you teach and educate a man, you educate
a man; if you educate a woman, you educate a family.
She reminded me of that just before I came here, so I
take this opportunity to recall it here today.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.

11-26621
