S/PV.7360

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7360th meeting

Thursday, 15 January 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Muñoz/Mr. Barros Melet/Mr. Gálvez .. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Chile)

Members:

Angola .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Mrs. Jakubonė
Mr. Haniff
Mr. McLay
Mr. Laro
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

15-01357 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1501357*

S/PV.7360

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.

decision required to begin the process of reversing
the ever-widening trust deficit between the two sides.
Instead, we have witnessed developments that may
unfortunately further reduce the likelihood of talks
resuming in future.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Algeria,
Botswana, Brazil, Cuba, Egypt, Guatemala, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel,
Japan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Liechtenstein,
Morocco, Namibia, Pakistan, Peru, Qatar, the Republic
of Korea, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey and Zimbabwe
to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in the meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jens Anders
Toyberg-Frandzen, Assistant-Secretary-General ad
interim for Political Affairs, to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following to
participate in this meeting: His Excellency Mr. Ioannis
Vrailas, Deputy Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, and His Excellency
Mr. Fodé Seck, Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen.
Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen: As we commence a new
year, I brief the Security Council today with a mounting
sense of apprehension at the direction in which events
are transpiring in the region.
Regrettably, since last month’s briefing (see
S/PV.7339), neither the Palestinians nor the Israelis
have taken the challenging step or made the bold
2/68

15/01/2015

On 30 December, a draft resolution (S/2014/916)
was submitted to the Security Council seeking to reach
a final status agreement and an end to the occupation
by the end of 2017. The Secretary-General took note of
the fact that the draft resolution failed to be adopted.
However, he also believes that the status quo remains
unacceptable and unsustainable, as stressed by many
Council members during their statements after the
voting (see S/PV.7354).
On the following day, President Abbas signed
instruments of accession to 18 international treaties,
including the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court. On 2 January, 16 instruments of accession were
submitted to the Secretary-General, who accepted them
in deposit, after having ascertained that the instruments
received were in due and proper form. On 3 January,
Israel decided to freeze approximately $127 million
in tax revenues collected on behalf of the Palestinian
Authority for the month of December, contrary to
Israel’s obligations under the Paris Protocol of the Oslo
Accords. We call on Israel to immediately resume the
transfer of tax revenues. I also note that the League of
Arab States has been meeting today in Cairo to discuss
the latest developments on the Palestinian issue.
The Secretary-General is alarmed that the parties
are now engaged in a downward spiral of actions and
counter-actions and calls on both sides to refrain from
any action that would exacerbate existing divisions.
While the parties are ultimately responsible, the
international community must uphold its responsibility
to play an active role in shepherding an effective way
forward towards the two-State solution and lasting
peace.
Let me turn to the situation in Gaza, where
the security situation is showing signs of serious
deterioration. During the reporting period, Palestinian
militants fired three rockets at Israel, two of which
landed within Gaza, while one landed in an open area
of Israel without resulting in injuries or damage. In
response, Israel conducted its first air strike into Gaza
since the 26 August ceasefire. No casualties were
reported. Militants also test-fired some 22 rockets at
the sea. On 24 December, an exchange of fire across
the border resulted in one Hamas militant killed, three
15-01357

15/01/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestinian civilians injured and one member of the
Israel Defense Forces injured.
As we have consistently warned, the Strip is
balancing on a tightrope that will continue to fray unless
a number of critical issues, many of which are political,
are tackled with both determination and a heightened
sense of urgency. One of the most critical issues is the
outstanding payment of salaries to Gaza employees.
In late October 2014, the United Nations facilitated a
one-time humanitarian payment to help temporarily
address the matter. However, worryingly, there has
been no progress on the issue, which is once again
threatening stability in Gaza. On 14 January, dozens of
former Gaza employees disrupted the weekly Cabinet
meeting of the Government of National Consensus,
demanding their salaries.
In addition to the salary payment issue, since
the most recent briefing by the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process (see S/PV.7339), a
number of other grave issues remain unaddressed, and
the status quo is very much in place. Reconstruction
is not happening at the required scale and will not be
achievable without some tangible progress on a number
of key issues.
After almost five months, the ceasefire agreement
between Israel and the Palestinians of Gaza remains
perilously fragile, and there are no indications that
a return to talks under Egyptian auspices is on the
immediate horizon. The Palestinian factions have
unfortunately failed to overcome their divisions and
agree on a united path for the Palestinian people.
Further, the Government of National Consensus has not
yet taken control over the civil and security institutions
or the border crossings in Gaza, and there has still
been no progress on civil service reform. In addition,
once again Gaza is facing critical energy shortages, the
severity of which is being compounded by the harsh
winter conditions.
As has been repeatedly emphasized, the Gaza
reconstruction mechanism is temporary and is not a
substitute for the lifting of all closures on Gaza, as laid
out in resolution 1860 (2009). While the mechanism
has started to provide some much-needed relief to the
people of Gaza, its ongoing implementation is being
made increasingly difficult by the failure to address the
critical issues I have just outlined.
Despite these unfavourable circumstances, I
can report some positive news with regard to the

S/PV.7360

implementation of the mechanism. Operations have
scaled up significantly since mid-December. As
of 11 January, over 38,000 individuals requiring
construction material for shelter repairs have been
cleared to procure materials under the mechanism;
that number is well beyond the 25,000 figure predicted
for the end of December in our most recent briefing
(see S/PV.7339). Furthermore, over 23,000 individuals
have procured construction materials. Ultimately, over
100,000 individuals are expected to access construction
materials for shelter repairs through the mechanism.
Large-scale projects are also now being initiated.
These developments, while positive, must be
viewed in the broader, more troubling context of Gaza’s
overall reconstruction process. Up to 100,000 families
are living in houses that have sustained varying degrees
of damage, while 18 school buildings belonging to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East continue to serve as collective
centres for some 15,500 internally displaced persons.
Obtaining the necessary financial resources to allow
Palestinians in Gaza to procure materials continues to
be a monumental challenge for the majority of those in
need.
Most pressingly, donors have largely failed to fulfil
their pledges three months after the Cairo conference.
This has severely handicapped the ability of the
Government of Palestine, the United Nations and other
development actors on the ground to make significant
progress on recovery and reconstruction work. The
importance of donors urgently meeting their pledges
cannot be overstated.
Inflammatory criticism of the United Nations for
its role in facilitating a temporary agreement between
the Palestinian Government of National Consensus and
Israel to open crossings for the import at the required
scale of construction material, while also taking account
of Israel’s legitimate security concerns, is unhelpful.
It could affect the United Nations ability to continue
supporting the mechanism. The United Nations remains
committed to doing all that it can to facilitate resolutions
of the problems, but parties responsible for the delays
need to be fully engaged as well. The stark reality of the
situation demands a resolute approach on the part of all
those engaged in Gaza’s reconstruction — a daunting
task under any circumstances.
I also encourage the Egyptian authorities to reopen
the Rafah crossing, while taking into account Egypt’s
legitimate security concerns. Humanitarian concerns

15-013573/68

S/PV.7360

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

are growing, with around 17,000 registered people,
including patients, waiting to exit Gaza, in addition to
37,000 others who wish to exit Gaza.
Meanwhile, violence is continuing in the occupied
West Bank, including East Jerusalem. As of 12 January,
Israeli security forces conducted some 390 searchand-arrest operations during the reporting period,
resulting in the arrest of at least 500 Palestinians. Two
Palestinians, including a teenager, were shot and killed
by Israeli security forces, and 145 Palestinians, including
60 children and 4 women, were injured during security
operations. Palestinians injured three Israeli security
personnel, including one during violent protests.
Overall, in 2014 Israeli forces killed 54 Palestinians
and injured some 5,800 in the West Bank — the largest
number of injuries recorded in a single year since
2005 and the largest number of fatalities since 2007.
During the same period, Palestinian attacks resulted in
15 Israeli fatalities and some 270 Israeli injuries in the
West Bank and Israel, which is the largest number of
injuries recorded in a single year since 2006 and the
largest number of fatalities since 2008.
Daily clashes continued to take place between
Palestinians and Israeli settlers during the reporting
period, resulting in two Palestinians, including one child,
being injured. Settlers also reportedly damaged some
5,000 Palestinian olive tree saplings, while Palestinians
injured nine Israelis in the West Bank, including three
children and two women. The demolition of Palestinian
structures in the occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, continued during the reporting period. A
total of 60 structures, including 17 residences, were
demolished, leading to the displacement of some
47 Palestinians, including 16 children.
We are encouraged by the Israeli Supreme Court’s
decision of 25 December ordering the evacuation and
demolition of Amona, the largest settlement outpost
in the West Bank, within two years, and look forward
to the swift execution of that judgment. The United
Nations reiterates its call on the Israeli authorities
to freeze and reverse all settlement activities in the
occupied territory.
Before closing, let me say a few words about Syria
and Lebanon.
On Syria, separate consultations continued with
the Syrian parties and a wide range of interlocutors
inside and outside Syria on the parameters of the
freeze, starting with Aleppo city. The Special Envoy

4/68

15/01/2015

and his Deputy intend to return to Syria in the coming
days to pursue the discussions that were launched
in mid-December with the Government of Syria on
implementation before being able to brief the Council
on progress achieved. In the meantime, the Office of
the Special Envoy is closely following developments
relating to the Cairo and Moscow forum meetings, as
well as related developments with the opposition.
In Lebanon, the dialogue between the Future
Movement and Hizbullah, facilitated by Speaker Berri,
started on 23 December. Two rounds of talks have
now taken place aimed at calming sectarian tensions
and helping to resolve the deadlock over the election
of a new president. Efforts are also ongoing to initiate
talks between the leaders of the two largest Christian
parties, Samir Geagea and Michel Aoun. We welcome
and encourage dialogue among the parties in Lebanon
aimed at easing tensions, addressing security threats
and contributing to stability. We hope that these
processes will facilitate at the earliest the election of a
new president, which is long overdue.
The Lebanese Armed Forces continue efforts to
secure the border with Syria. On 26 December, they
killed three gunmen attempting to infiltrate near Arsal.
Twenty-five Lebanese Army and security personnel
remain in the captivity of the Al-Nusra Front and the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. On 10 January, the
Al-Nusra Front claimed responsibility for the double
suicide bombing in the Alawite neighbourhood of Jabal
Mohsen in Tripoli, which killed 9 people and injured
over 35 others. Council members have condemned
this new terrorist attack in the strongest terms. There
are now over 1.1 million Syrian refugees registered in
Lebanon. On 5 January, new procedures were formally
introduced at entry points on the Lebanese border with
Syria — a consequence of which was a restriction on
the entry of refugees, except for extreme humanitarian
cases.
The area of operations of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebaon (UNIFIL) remained generally calm,
as both Lebanon and Israel continued to cooperate
with UNIFIL through its liaison and coordination
arrangements, and demonstrated their continued
commitment to the cessation of hostilities and to
the stability along the Blue Line in accordance with
resolution 1701 (2006). In a letter dated 12 December,
Israel communicated to the Council concerns about
media reports about Hizbullah’s military capability.
It is worth reiterating that resolution 1701 (2006) calls

15-01357

15/01/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

for the disarmament of all Lebanese and non-Lebanese
militants.
Israeli violations of Lebanese airspace continued
on an almost daily basis, as also regularly reported by
Lebanon to the Council. In accordance with resolution
1701 (2006), it is also worth reiterating the calls on
Israel to cease its overflights of Lebanese airspace.
In conclusion, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is
now entering unchartered territory, which, lamentably,
seems to have dashed any immediate hope for a
return to peace talks. We should be under no illusions
about the perils that this new chapter may entail.
The increasingly antagonistic and virulent nature of
the discourse between the two sides should be cause
for serious concern among those seeking to foster an
environment conducive to a return to constructive
dialogue.
The failure of the parties to take the steps necessary
to overcome their mutual distrust has contributed to
bringing us to this precarious phase. It is now up to both
sides to determine their respective courses of action
moving forward. I urge Palestinians and Israelis to plot
a course that ultimately leads to a negotiated resolution
of the conflict on the basis of a two-state solution in
which Israel and Palestine live side by side in peace
and security. The alternative is fraught with unknown
hazards that may be irreversible.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen for his important briefing to the
Council.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): On behalf of the State of
Palestine, I congratulate the friendly country of Chile
on its presidency of the Security Council and wish it
every success in steering the important agenda of work.
We are confident in its able leadership. We also welcome
you, Mr. Heraldo Muñoz, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Chile, to preside over today’s important debate.
I also express our appreciation to the delegation of
Chad for its honourable and capable stewardship of the
Council in December. Allow me also to thank Assistant
Secretary-General ad interim Toyberg-Frandzen for his
briefing this morning.
I also extend the warm congratulations of
the State of Palestine to the new members of the
Security Council — the friendly countries of Angola,

S/PV.7360

Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela — as they assume their solemn
responsibilities to uphold the Council’s Charter duties,
its resolutions and international law. We pledge to
them, as to all the members of the Council, our full
support and cooperation, and express confidence in
their principled service on the Council.
We return to the Security Council after its failure,
once again, to uphold its duties vis-à-vis the Palestine
question and to genuinely contribute to the efforts
to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and forge
a credible path for peace. We regret that the Council
as a whole was unable to rise to the occasion, even as
the situation is acknowledged by all to be completely
unsustainable and to constitute a threat to peace and
security in the Middle East and globally.
The draft resolution (S/2014/916) that was
presented to the Security Council by Jordan on behalf
of the Arab Group was in substance fully consistent
with the demands made in previous resolutions. Those
resolutions continue to be flagrantly violated by Israel,
the occupying Power, and the Council continues to allow
that to occur without consequence. While the draft
resolution met with strong resistance, the reality is that
the elements it contained are essential for achieving a
just peace and have been unanimously supported by the
international community for decades.
That includes, inter alia, the reaffirmation of
parameters based on the relevant Security Council
resolutions, the Madrid principles and the Arab Peace
Initiative; the calls for the withdrawal of Israel from the
Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, including East
Jerusalem, and for bringing an end to the occupation
in all manifestations, including the illegal settlement
enterprise, for the achievement of the two-State solution
on the basis of the pre-1967 borders; and the call for
a just solution to the Palestine refugee question based
on resolution 194 (III) and the Arab Peace Initiative.
The draft resolution also rightly set a deadline for an
end to the Israeli occupation, an objective that cannot
be logically rejected by anyone, and rightly called for
an international conference as the starting point and
framework for any negotiations forward, recognizing
the failure of the negotiations for more than 20 years
and also the need for clear responsibilities of major
stakeholders in shepherding the effort.
That initiative was intended to revitalize the
international consensus and efforts for a just solution
and to open doors for peace through such a new

15-013575/68

S/PV.7360

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

mechanism and clarity on the parameters of a peaceful
solution and the end goals. Yet it was illogically
treated as a confrontational and irrational effort and,
regrettably, obstructed.
In spite of that setback, we will continue to
approach the Security Council. We are determined in
our pursuit of this peaceful, political, diplomatic and
legal path towards the realization of the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people and their legitimate
national aspirations and the achievement of a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace. Those goals are
shared by the international community. This principal
organ of the United Nations should not be absolved of
its responsibilities in that regard.
How could we cease our appeals to the Security
Council as long as the Israeli occupation of our land,
and the endless crises and human suffering it causes,
continues? How could we cease our calls for international
support and action while our people continue to be
denied their freedom and liberty — continue to be
brutally oppressed — and this historic injustice persists?
As we sit here in the Council Chamber, the situation is
deteriorating and becoming more fragile and volatile
by the day, while a peaceful solution remains elusive
due to a lack of political will and the intransigence of
Israel, which carries on with blatant impunity with zero
accountability.
In the Holy City of Jerusalem, tensions are raging
as Israeli violations and crimes push the situation to
a precipice. Every day we are witness to Israel’s rapid
settlement colonization, altering the City’s demography
and character and further surrounding and isolating it;
heavy-handed raids and repression of the Palestinian
civilian population; vicious “price tag” attacks by Israeli
settlers, who continue to harass and assault Palestinians
and seize Palestinian homes, with the full backing of the
Government; and ongoing provocations and incitement
by Israeli politicians and religious leaders, along with
other Jewish extremists who continue to raid and defile
holy sites, including the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound,
and to attack worshippers and other civilians in violent
rampages of hatred, discrimination and superiority.
The rising fury and despair in occupied East Jerusalem
constitutes an extremely toxic situation that could
erupt at any moment, including in the form of religious
conflict.
In the rest of the West Bank, Israel also continues its
illegal settlement activities — doing the exact opposite
of what is required to end this insidious occupation.
6/68

15/01/2015

Israel has totally undermined the two-State solution
for peace by constructing settlements, expropriating
land, building the wall, demolishing homes and
displacing civilians, in grave breach of the Fourth
Geneva Convention and in flagrant contempt of the
global demands to stop that illegal campaign. Settlers
also continue to terrorize and torment Palestinian
civilians and to wreak havoc and destruction. Military
raids and arrests and detentions continue, day and
night, with more than 6,800 Palestinians, including
children, women and elected officials, now imprisoned
by Israel under dire conditions. Israel has yet to be held
accountable for all those grave crimes.
The humanitarian disaster wilfully and wantonly
inflicted by Israel, the occupying Power, in the Gaza
Strip last summer is worsening beyond comprehension.
The illegal Israeli blockade, delays in reconstruction,
a fuel and water crisis and fierce winter storms are
compounding the unimaginable suffering of the
Palestinian civilian population and further exposing
the lasting impact of the crimes perpetrated by the
Israeli occupying forces. Massive flooding has further
displaced civilians, in addition to the 110,000 people
displaced following Israel’s destruction of their homes
and neighbourhoods. In the bitter cold, families
continue to shelter in United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) schools, in makeshift homes and even in the
ruins and rubble of what remains of their homes, where
they struggle to survive with minimal food, water,
sanitation and other human necessities.
Despite the obstruction and collective punishment
caused by the Israeli blockade, the Palestinian
Government of National Consensus, under the
leadership of President Mahmoud Abbas and Prime
Minister Rami Hamdallah, continues its efforts to
advance reconstruction and tend to the needs of our
people in Gaza. However, it must be recognized that
the massive scope and scale of this disaster, on both
the human and the physical levels, would present a
formidable challenge to even the strongest and most
capable Government.
We call on the international community to demand
that Israel immediately end its blockade of the Gaza
Strip and allow for unimpeded humanitarian access,
the movement of persons into and out of Gaza, the
entry of all necessary supplies, including construction
materials and exports, and that it honour pledges to
support reconstruction. Without that, it will be next

15-01357

15/01/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to impossible to address urgent humanitarian needs,
rebuild Gaza, ease the isolation and trauma of our
people there or revive any semblance of an economy.
In addition to the brutalization and collective
punishment of our people and the colonization of our
land, Israel, the occupying Power, is again withholding
Palestinian tax revenues, in a blatant act of reprisal and
theft of Palestinian funds. This kind of retribution has
been condemned by the international community before
and should be once again. The international community
should demand that Israel release our tax revenues,
which are vital to the functioning of Government
institutions, including for education, health, security,
sanitation and social welfare services. Such vulgar and
illegal behaviour by Israel should not be tolerated or
excused, for it can only encourage its contempt for the
law and impunity.
In that regard, it must be clearly stated: the recent
accessions by the State of Palestine to international
conventions and treaties, including the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), are
legal, peaceful steps that should be welcomed by the
international community. There should be no doubt
about Palestine’s commitment to international law and
peace. Palestine should not be punished for that proven
commitment. To do so is wrong and perverse, and no
rational, law-abiding and peaceful person or country
can condone it.
We are compelled to remind the international
community that there is no symmetry or balance in this
conflict. There is an occupier imposing and entrenching
a nearly half-century-long military occupation in the
most vicious, lethal and destructive ways. And there
is an occupied people seeking their liberty, rights and
justice through peaceful, political and legal means
despite the oppression and crimes they have been
mercilessly subjected to for decades.
It defies logic, and of course the law, to excuse
and absolve the violator — Israel, the occupying
Power — of any culpability, instead threatening and
punishing those — the Palestinian people — who are
merely seeking their human rights, foremost their right
to be free and independent.
We therefore express appreciation for the
statements issued by Governments, intergovernmental
organizations and human rights groups in support of
Palestine’s accessions and against Israeli reprisals.
We are also grateful for the principled statement, on

S/PV.7360

7 January, by the President of the Assembly of States
Parties to the Rome Statute, Mr. Sidiki Kaba, who
welcomed the deposit by the State of Palestine of the
instruments of accession to the Rome Statute and
stressed that
“Each ratification of the Rome Statute constitutes
welcome progress towards its universality. I call
on all members of the United Nations to join this
permanent and independent system of international
justice to fight against impunity and prevent the
most serious crimes under international law.”
The State of Palestine responded in a positive way to
that call, and I am proud to say that we will be the one
hundred and twenty-third member State of the Rome
Statute.
While recognizing the many serious threats and
problems in our world, we must conclude by asking how
the international community can allow the Security
Council to remain paralysed, while the PalestinianIsraeli conflict continues to burn, inflaming tensions
and further destabilizing the situation in an already
volatile region? How long can the international
community stand aside while this injustice continues
and the Palestinian people continue to be denied their
rights and freedoms, the same rights and freedoms so
staunchly defended everywhere else around the world?
We can no longer wait. After nearly seven decades
of Al-Nakba and nearly five decades of occupation,
we can no longer accept being told to wait for the
fulfillment of our rights. The Palestinian people and
leadership have been more than patient, more than
reasonable and more than steadfast. History will clearly
attest to that resolve in the face of such grave injustice.
Neither can we continue to accept being told to
wait to seek accountability for Israeli violations against
our people. This is based on our firm conviction that
accountability and compelling respect for the law are
crucial to deterring further crimes against our people,
making the Israeli occupation too costly, hastening
an end to this tragic conflict and realizing justice and
peace.
The focus now must be on implementing the law
and ensuring responsibility for the gross human rights
violations, breaches of humanitarian law war crimes
that have been perpetrated, rather than on punitive
measures meant to exact retribution for a commitment
to international law. The focus must be on ending this

15-013577/68

S/PV.7360

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

illegitimate, belligerent, colonial Israeli occupation in
all its manifestations and realizing the international
consensus for a peaceful solution.
We will thus continue to reject all of the irrational
arguments against our peaceful, nonviolent, political,
diplomatic and legal endeavours and will continue on
this path for justice and peace. At the same time, we
will persist in our appeals to all peace-loving countries
and peoples to continue their principled solidarity and
support in this effort to uphold international law and
to realize the rights of the Palestinian people. These
include self-determination in their independent State of
Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and just
solutions for all core issues, including the plight of the
Palestine refugees, based on the relevant resolutions
and international law.
Despite the recent setback in the Council, we are
hopeful and confident that this global support and
solidarity, as well as the needed political and moral
responsibility, will be forthcoming, extending the spirit
and momentum of the International Year of Solidarity
with the Palestinian People, towards the attainment of
the just, lasting and comprehensive peace we have so
long been seeking.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): I congratulate Chile for its
able stewardship of the Security Council this month. I
thank Foreign Minister Heraldo Muñoz for being here
today to preside over this session. Allow me to take this
opportunity to congratulate the new non-permanent
members of the Security Council: Angola, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Spain, and Venezuela. I welcome them
and wish them good luck. They will need every bit of it.
I cannot begin without addressing the tragic events
that took place in France last week in which radical
Islamists launched an attack against our way of life.
The slogan of the French Republic is Liberté, Égalité,
Fraternité-Liberty, Equality, and Brotherhood. These
are the very values that are being attacked. The terrorists
who stormed the offices of Charlie Hebdo attacked
liberty and the right of every person to express himself
or herself. The terrorist who targeted Jews in a kosher
grocery store attacked equality: the idea that every
person, no matter his faith, is equal. By aiming their
attacks at innocent civilians, the terrorists also attacked
brotherhood: the bonds of our shared humanity.

8/68

15/01/2015

The world responded in force. “Je suis Charlie” and
“Je suis juif” became rallying calls to defend our way of
life. Millions of people took to the streets of Paris, and
tens of thousands of people from Boston to Brussels
to Buenos Aires rallied to honour the 17 victims who
were murdered. Just as we stood united on the streets,
we must remain united in our commitment to uphold
freedom.
Make no mistake. Freedom is under attack throughout
the world. We see it in Nigeria, where innocent people
were cut down by gunfire and a ten-year-old girl was
strapped into a suicide vest and sent into a crowded
market. We see it in Pakistan, where children were
gunned down as they sat in their classrooms. We see
it in Syria and Iraq, where journalists are savagely
murdered. We see it in Saudi Arabia, where a blogger
was sentenced to 1,000 lashes for running a website
promoting free speech. And, we see it in Iran, where
15 people were executed on New Year’s Day. A war is
being waged against human dignity and human rights,
and we must fight back. Standing united with courage
and conviction, we can turn back the tide of violent
extremism and safeguard the values that we all cherish.
Israel has been fighting to defend its values since
its establishment. Surrounded by extremist groups
committed to our destruction, we have been forced to
fight wars and endure wave after wave of terrorism. We
have buried too many sons and daughters and shed too
many tears, but we have never abandoned the dream of
peace.
In 1967, eight Arab Heads of State attended a
summit in Khartoum to formulate the policies of the
Arab States in the conflict with Israel. They emerged
with their famous three `no’s’: no negotiations, no
recognition of Israel, and no peace. Even when it
seemed impossible, Israel continued to strive for peace.
Egypt and Jordan came to understand that while
we are not brothers in faith, we are brothers in fate,
with a shared destiny in the Middle East. Today, other
Arab nations in our region also recognize that radical
Islamists are not just a threat to Israel, but they are a
threat to their own stability and existence. Egypt and
Jordan abandoned the three `no’s’ and made peace with
Israel.
The Palestinians, however, are chained to the past.
Weighed down by resentment and bound in hatred, the
Palestinian leadership refuses to abandon the rhetoric
and seek reconciliation. Decades after other Arab

15-01357

15/01/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

nations sought to end our conflict, the Palestinian
leadership remains committed to the three no’s. It will
not negotiate, it will not recognize Israel as the nation
state of the Jewish people, and it will not make peace.
The Palestinian leadership has said no to
negotiations. The Palestinians are under the impression
that the United Nations is their personal vending
machine: they can insert grievances and dispense claims
against Israel at will. Ever since the United Nations
voted to accept the Palestinians as a non-member
observer State in 2012, the Palestinians have discovered
that the United Nations is the gift that keeps on giving.
This institution gives and gives and does not expect
anything in return.
When it comes to making New Year’s resolutions,
I can assure you that the Palestinian resolution
imposing terms for a peace deal was not what we had
in mind. I would be hard-pressed to conceive of a more
biased proposal. It did not address Israel’s long-term
security needs. It did not demand an end to Palestinian
terrorism, and it did not recognize Israel as the nation
State of the Jewish people. All it did was impose an
arbitrary one-year deadline that would have allowed
the Palestinians to run out the clock and get a State
without giving anything in return. You cannot wave a
magic wand and hope that all of the critical issues such
as borders, security arrangements, water allocation and
the “claim of return” will magically be resolved.
Rather than engage in negotiations, President Abbas
is cultivating impossible fantasies. In November, he told
an Egyptian newspaper that millions of Palestinians
wish to return, and he will not close the door to them.
Demanding that millions of Palestinians flood the
Jewish State is a euphemism — there is no other word
for it — for the destruction of the State of Israel.
The proposals put forward in this Council dictate
what Israel should do and the Palestinians should get.
Aside from being deeply biased, the Council is indulging
their delusions. Every nation that voted in favour of the
Palestinian one-sided resolution encouraged them to
continue what I would describe as a diplomatic triathlon:
running away from negotiations, placing hurdles in the
peace process, and cycling towards protracted conflict.
Some nations on this Council claim that they voted
for the Palestinian resolution to encourage Israelis
and Palestinians to resume peace negotiations. One
Government even explained that it was trying to prevent
the Palestinians from joining the International Criminal

S/PV.7360

Court (ICC). Really? You do not have to be Inspector
Clouseau to know that this is what the Palestinians
wanted all along.
The international community endorsed a road
map to peace, but the Palestinians have found every
off-ramp and detour. They are looking for shortcuts
and quick fixes where none exists, and in the process,
they are politicizing another international body. It is
extremely convenient that the Palestinian Authority
has asked that the Court’s jurisdiction to extend back
to June 13, 2014. That is, surprisingly, the day after
three Israeli teenagers were kidnapped and murdered
by Palestinian terrorists. By choosing to go to the
ICC, the Palestinians have reinforced the message that
they are not interested in negotiating and they are not
willing to compromise. The international community
must stop encouraging this march of folly. It must tell
the Palestinians that the claim of return is a nonstarter,
make it clear that peace requires compromise and insist
that they return to direct negotiations.
The Palestinian leadership has said, “no” to the
recognition of Israel as the nation-State of the Jewish
people. Israel is our historical homeland. When I walk
the streets of Jerusalem, I am walking in the footsteps
of our forefathers: Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. When
I stand at the Western Wall, I can feel thousands of
years of Jewish prayers and dreams. When I traverse
our small State, history comes alive. I see the valley
where David battled Goliath, the hills where Isaiah
prophesized about beating our swords into plowshares
and the mountains where Elijah saw a vision of peace.
Israel has been our land for 3,800 years, and we are
here to stay.
Nothing can change the historical facts. Yet the
Palestinian Authority has made a career of denying
the facts. Here is a fact the Council members may not
know. President Mahmoud Abbas is currently in his
tenth year of a five year presidential term. He is willing
to say anything and do anything to cling to power.
Last year, the Palestinian Authority committed every
form of diplomatic treachery. It abandoned peace talks,
formed a Government with the Hamas terrorist group,
awarded honours to convicted terrorists and broke its
word by signing dozens of international conventions.
Its leadership delivered a hate-fuelled speech against
Israel here in the General Assembly, called for violent
“Days of Rage” and urged Palestinians to prevent
Jews from visiting the Temple Mount using “all means
necessary”.

15-013579/68

S/PV.7360

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The international community has not challenged the
Palestinian leadership on any of these crimes. Instead,
it is giving them a free pass and sending a message that
they can incite violence that leads to terrorist attacks
with impunity. The international community is literally
letting them get away with murder. President Abbas’s
hateful speeches have sparked dozens of violent riots.
Palestinian terrorists have shot and stabbed our citizens
and driven their cars into crowds of pedestrians. The
wave of terrorism shows no sign of abating. Just a few
weeks ago, Palestinian terrorists threw a firebomb at a
car carrying 11 year-old Ayala Shapira. The little girl
suffered third-degree burns over much of her body and
face. As we speak she is fighting for her life in hospital.
Does that disgusting attack on a child not merit
condemnation? Because I have not heard one — not
from the Palestinian leadership nor from this Council.
The international community must demand more
from the Palestinians. Make it clear that fostering a
culture of hatred is unacceptable. Make it clear that there
is no impunity for intolerance and send the message
that the path to peace begins with the recognition of
Israel as the nation-State of the Jewish people.
The Palestinian leadership has said “no”, to peace.
Israel is committed to peace. No one understands what
is at stake more than we do, It is our cities and our
citizens that terrorists are targeting. At Camp David in
2000 and again at Annapolis in 2008, Israeli leaders
made far-reaching offers that could have led to the
creation of a Palestinian State. Those offers were met
by deliberate evasion, outright rejection and waves of
terrorism. Israel has made concession after concession
and received nothing in return.
Forging a lasting peace requires courage and
political capital, and the Palestinian leadership is in
short supply of both. The Palestinian Authority has no
authority over the Gaza Strip. Hence it has no authority
over nearly half of the territory and 40 per cent of the
population it claims to represent, and it certainly has not
demonstrated a willingness to assist the people of Gaza.
When this Council tried to pass a resolution to speed
up the delivery of construction materials into Gaza,
the Palestinian President dragged his feet, obstructed
the process and eventually abandoned the proposition
altogether. The Palestinian Authority agreed to take
responsibility for monitoring the crossings and then
never showed up.
What about the Arab nations? The oil-rich Arab
nations pledge funds, but the pipelines seem to have
10/68

15/01/2015

run dry. Israel, on the other hand, is taking meaningful
steps to rebuild Gaza. The Palestinian Authority is
missing in action. Its leadership could not even find the
time to visit Gaza. They have left their people to suffer
under the tyranny of Hamas. That terrorist organization
sends teenagers to terrorist training camps, condones
honour killings, punishes homosexuality with death and
encourages public executions. Instead of condemning
Hamas for its crimes, the Palestinian leadership formed
a Government with a terrorist group that is more
interested in tearing Israel down than building the
Palestinian people up.
In December, Hamas celebrated its twentyseventh anniversary by burning effigies of Jews and
parading trucks carrying long-range rockets through
the streets of Gaza. At the celebration, Hamas military
spokesman Abu Obeida publicly thanked Iran and
Qatar for supplying the group with arms and support.
Those rogue regimes have enabled Hamas and Fatah to
commit countless war crimes. Over the summer, Hamas
and Fatah terrorists fired rockets from mosques, stored
weapons in schools run by the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
used Gaza hospitals as military headquarters and sent
children to rooftops as human shields. The evidence
is overwhelming, yet the international community has
failed to hold the Palestinians to account.
Hamas is once again preparing to go on the offensive
by rearming, rebuilding its terror infrastructure and
reaffirming its commitment to waging war against
Israel. It has tested and fired dozens of rockets, it
is aggressively taxing its people to fund its terror
enterprise, and it is stealing cement — I will repeat
that; stealing cement — intended for humanitarian
purposes to rebuild its terror tunnels.
I find it curious that many of those facts — not
alleged facts, not reported facts, but real facts — were
omitted from this morning’s report. The great American
statesman Daniel Patrick Moynihan once said,
“Everyone is entitled to his own opinion, but not his
own facts”. This Council would be better served if it
would be presented with more facts and fewer opinions
in the monthly reports.
What has been the response from the international
community? The more the Palestinian leadership says
“no”, the more “yes” votes it seems to garner in this
institution. European nations claim to stand for human
rights and civil liberties, but with every passing day
I am given more reason to be a Euro-skeptic. Every
15-01357

15/01/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

European Union parliament that voted to prematurely
recognize the Palestinian State was rewarding
terrorism, and the decision by the Court of Justice of
the European Union in Luxembourg to remove Hamas
from its list of terrorist organizations was a victory for
terrorism. The Court claimed the decision was simply a
technical matter. Really? Well, I can tell you that there
was nothing technical about the thousands of rockets
that Hamas fired into Israel, or the innocent civilians
that the group kidnapped and killed. No amount of
Swiss chocolate, Belgian waffles or fine French wine
can mask the unpleasant taste this leaves in our mouths.
It is time for the nations that believe in liberty and
democracy to stand with the only liberal democracy in
the Middle East.
The results of unchecked extremism may have
just arrived at Europe’s doorstep, but we have been
combatting radical groups since our establishment.
Every day we confront Hamas in Gaza, the Islamic
State of Iraq and the Levant in the north, Jihadi groups
in the Sinai, and Hizbullah in southern Lebanon. Iran is
bankrolling Hizbullah with $200 million a year to wage
war on its behalf. It is training terrorists and smuggling
weapons in blatant violation of resolutions 1701 (2006)
and 1747 (2007). Hizbullah has amassed well over
100,000 sophisticated missiles and rockets and senior
Hizbullah officials regularly threaten to use them.
Last month a senior United Nations official declared
that the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon had
“seen no evidence of unauthorized weapons or weapons
transfers in its area of operations”. Really? Clearly the
United Nations has tuned out, because if it were tuned
in to the news it would know that Hassan Nasrallah
and other senior officials regularly boast about the size
and sophistication of Hizbullah’s arsenal. Hizbullah’s
Deputy Secretary General, Naim Qassem, was quoted
in an Iranian newspaper as saying that Hizbullah
was in possession of missiles with pinpoint accuracy,
and that with the Islamic Republic’s support it would
be ready for any future war. The terror group even
published a map showing the locations of their Fateh
missiles in Lebanon and made the threat that they can
strike anywhere in Israel. Hizbullah has the capabilities
and it has made its intentions very clear. The threat to
our region is real and it is imminent. The international
community can no longer afford to ignore the warning
signs. Israel will not stand idly by as Iran continues
to arm its terrorist proxies. We will act to defend our
citizens.

S/PV.7360

Winston Churchill once said that all the greatest
things are simple, and many can be expressed in a
single word, such as “freedom”, “honour” and “hope”.
Israel stands for freedom and honour and hope. It is the
only State in the Middle East that defends the right of
all people to practice their religion as they choose. It
is the only country in the region with a free press, free
elections and free speech. It is the only country in the
Middle East where women have presided over each of
the three branches of Government. Israel is on the right
side of the moral divide.
The question is, which side will the Security
Council stand on? If it opposes terrorism and
oppression, it must stand with the Middle East’s only
democracy. Tell the Palestinians that while we might
have a territorial dispute, Israel’s right to live in
security is beyond dispute. Make it clear that unilateral
actions are no substitute for meaningful dialogue. And
send the message to the Palestinian leadership that they
must say yes to the recognition of Israel as the nation
State of the Jewish people, yes to direct negotiations
and through that, yes to peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Chile.
I welcome this opportunity to preside over this
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the question of Palestine. Chile is home to a large
colony of people of Palestinian origin, the largest
outside the Middle East, and a smaller but significant
Jewish community that is fully integrated into Chilean
society, living in peace and harmony. Chile recognized
the State of Israel early on; in addition, it was one of
the first South American countries to open a diplomatic
presence in Ramallah. In January 2011, we recognized
the State of Palestine and supported its full membership
in UNESCO the same year. In 2012, Chile was a
sponsor of the General Assembly resolution accepting
Palestine as a United Nations non-member observer
State (General Assembly resolution 67/19). We view
those actions as a contribution to the peace process,
strengthening the capacity of the Palestinian State and
creating the conditions for better institution-building.
A little more than two decades after the Oslo
Accords between the State of Israel and the Palestine
Liberation Organization (PLO), those provisional
dispositions have stood the test of time. Unfortunately,
after years both of progress and too many setbacks in

15-0135711/68

S/PV.7360

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the negotiations, a two-State solution — in accordance
with United Nations resolutions and the terms of
reference we are all familiar with on the establishment
of an independent and sovereign Palestinian State,
living in peace and security side by side with the State
of Israel, within secure and internationally recognized
borders — is still not a reality.
It is discouraging that, for the first time in all these
years, there is no peace plan on the table. That sends
an extremely negative political signal. In 2014, for the
third time in six years, we witnessed new outbreaks of
armed violence between factions in the Gaza Strip. We
saw Hamas launching rockets indiscriminately against
Israel’s civilian population, and disproportionate
military action against Palestinians, resulting in more
than 2,000 deaths, mostly of women and children,
and thousands of new internally displaced persons in
an already saturated region. Chile has condemned all
such actions threatening life, peace and security. The
West Bank and East Jerusalem have also been the scene
of tensions, fanning fears of a possible third intifada.
This shows that the status quo is unsustainable. A new
approach is needed, supported by at least a minimal
degree of political will.
First, the parties must build trust and strengthen
their dialogue. That requires continued action and
an end to unilateral acts and violent rhetoric. As we
stated at the recent Conference of High Contracting
Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention, most of
the international community is urging Israel, as the
occupying Power in the occupied Palestinian territory,
to abide by international standards for human rights
and international humanitarian law. Similarly,
unilateral acts such as the illegal settlement policy, the
actions of extremist settlers, the eviction of Palestinian
families from their homes and collective punishments
such as demolition of the houses of people presumed
to be involved in terrorist acts must cease. They
constitute extra-judicial measures incompatible with
the democratic character of the State of Israel.
The current situation does nothing to help
President Abbas or the leadership of the PLO. On the
contrary, it favours the position of radical elements.
The international community must continue to support
the Palestinian Authority and encourage it, through
a process of internal reconciliation, to emphatically
distance itself from the extremist narrative of groups
that only foster hatred and violence and do not recognize
Israel’s right to exist.

12/68

15/01/2015

Secondly, we need a more forceful international
approach. We appreciate the sustained effort of the
United States to advance the peace negotiations. That
is an important part of a broader political approach that
should involve the multilateral system as a whole. In
Chile’s view, it is essential that the Security Council
define the parameters for the negotiations. The new
approach should provide for greater involvement of the
European Union, the League of Arab States and the
Middle East Quartet. Chile calls for a general dialogue
on the Arab Peace Initiative, based on the principle of
land for peace.
Lastly, I should like to reiterate that Chile will
continue to encourage Palestine and Israel to make
progress towards a just and lasting peace. We have a
hope, though a faint hope, that this is possible. The time
has come to restore trust, resume negotiations and end
this long and painful conflict.
Concerning the conflict in Syria, my country
reiterates that political dialogue is the only solution
to the conflict. In that regard, we support the work
of the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for Syria,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura. Chile also commends the efforts
of the Russian Government to convene a peace dialogue
to which various opposition groups have been invited.
We hope that representatives of all Syrian political
tendencies will participate and take the opportunity
to contribute to identifying points of convergence that
could point to a way out of the crisis.
Chile reiterates its condemnation of the violence
against civilians, especially women and children,
perpetrated by all the parties to the conflict. We
believe it is crucial that steps be taken to protect the
most vulnerable populations and hold the perpetrators
of such crimes accountable. In that regard, one priority
is for the parties to the conflict to allow access to the
humanitarian aid needed to mitigate the effects of the
violence.
It is clear that as long as there is no solution
to the conflict in Syria, its neighbours, especially
Lebanon, will continue to have to deal with a delicate
situation. Chile commends the Lebanese Government’s
willingness to take in more than 1 million Syrian
nationals, despite the challenges that brings. We urge
that other countries in the region cooperate in order to
assist the thousands of Syrian families who are seeking
better living conditions. In that context, I can announce
that Chile is contemplating the possibility of taking in
more families of Syrian and Palestinian origin.
15-01357

15/01/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In view of the resurgence of numerous armed
groups along the border with Syria, Chile reiterates the
importance of respecting the principle of dissociation
outlined in the Baabda Declaration and preventing the
involvement there of other armed factions, especially
Hizbullah, which aggravates sectarian divisions. We
strongly condemn the double attack of 10 January in
Tripoli and recall the press statement issued by the
Council.
Finally, we view it as crucial to reaffirm the
importance of resolutions 2170 (2014), on threats to
international peace and security posed by terrorist
attacks, and 2178 (2014), on foreign terrorist fighters,
in keeping with the obligations on States under
international law.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank and
welcome you, Sir. We are grateful to have you here to
chair a meeting on such critically important issues and
we are appreciative of Chile’s leadership every day.
We thank Assistant Secretary-General ad interim
Toyberg-Frandzen for his informative briefing.
Today I will speak on three topics: Syria, Lebanon
and the Middle East peace.
On Syria, we welcome the efforts of United
Nations Special Envoy de Mistura to establish a freeze
in the city of Aleppo. Any freeze must be consistent
with humanitarian principles and include measures
to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
It should also reduce violence, not provide cover for
any side to advance military aims, such as redeploying
forces, and we welcome serious efforts to advance a
political dialogue consistent with the second Geneva
communiqué, including those led by Special Envoy de
Mistura. There is no military solution to this devastating
conflict, only a political solution.
In meeting after meeting before the Council, we
have presented mounting evidence of the unspeakable
atrocities perpetrated by the Al-Assad regime. This
meeting is no exception. Since we last met to discuss
Syria, the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) released its third report, with further
evidence indicating that the regime has repeatedly
use chlorine as a weapon against civilians, directly

S/PV.7360

violating international norms and Syria’s international
legal obligations. Investigators concluded “with a
high degree of confidence” that chlorine gas was used
against three opposition-controlled villages and Syria
last year. In one affected village, 32 of the 37 people
interviewed by OPCW investigators “saw or heard the
sound of a helicopter over the village at the time of the
attack with barrel bombs containing toxic chemicals”.
Of the forces fighting in Syria, only the Al-Assad
regime uses helicopters and only the Al-Assad regime
drops barrel bombs.
The Council must stop the Al-Assad regime’s
use of chemical weapons and ensure that it has fully
declared and verifiably eliminated its chemical weapons
programme, as required by resolution 2118 (2013) and
by the Chemical Weapons Convention. We vigorously
condemn the use of chemical weapons by any party
anywhere.
The use of chemical weapons is far from the
regime’s only deplorable act. As Under-SecretaryGeneral Amos informed the Council one month ago
today (see S/PV.7342), the use of barrel bombs against
civilians has been particularly acute in Aleppo, Hama,
Idlib, rural Damascus, Deir ez-Zor, Raqqa and Dar’a,
and the regime continues to systematically use torture
as a means of inflicting suffering and extracting
information. According to the Syrian Observatory for
Human Rights, at least 2,100 people died in Syrian
prisons last year, and the bodies of many showed signs
of torture. Because the Observatory only counts cases
in which families have received a corpse or a death
certificate, they believe the actual number to be much
higher. This is consistent with the abhorrent practices
of the Al-Assad regime brought to light by the Syrian
defector Caesar.
Al-Assad, those around him and any individuals
overseeing or complicit in the commission of serious
crimes in Syria must know that they will ultimately
be held accountable. That is why the United States is
actively supporting the collection and preservation of
evidence to support future justice processes in a variety
of jurisdictions for war crimes and other human rights
violations, including those involving sexual and genderbased violence. Those overseeing or complicit in these
crimes must be aware that the international community
is building case files on its abuses, and the files are
growing. In the meantime, the immense suffering and
insecurity caused by the regime’s brutality and by the
extremist groups, like the Islamic State in Iraq and

15-0135713/68

S/PV.7360

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the Levant (ISIL) and the Al-Nusra Front, continue
to deepen the most severe humanitarian catastrophe
in a generation. Approximately 12.2 million people
are in need of humanitarian assistance in Syria; some
5.5 million of them children — 5.5 million children.
Around 7.6 million people have been displaced within
Syria and more than 3 million Syrians have become
refugees.
On 2 January, the Italian Coast Guard intercepted a
crewless ship floating 40 miles of the country’s coast.
Approximately 400 people, including many women and
children, were on board, huddled together for warmth
in containers originally built to transport livestock.
Most of them were Syrians fleeing the civil war and
had been abandoned on the ship by their smugglers
and left for dead. People abandoned, freezing and
starving in containers built for animals — that is what
Al-Assad’s brutality has done to Syrians. And this
is not an isolated incident: days earlier, Italy’s Coast
Guard had intercepted another crewless ship as it
steamed towards a collision with the coast with nearly
800 Syrians packed on board.
In the face of such unprecedented need and
desperation, all countries can and must do more,
including by supporting the countries that are already
hosting the majority of Syrian refugees and making
robust contributions to the United Nations enormous
$8.4 billion humanitarian appeal.
No country has taken in more Syrian refugees
than Lebanon, which is host to more than 1.1 million
Syrians and is facing growing challenges in getting
their basic needs, especially with the onset of winter.
We encourage Lebanon and all receiving countries to
coordinate closely with Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees in the development
of criteria to ensure that those fleeing violence and
persecution are able to enter these countries, just as we
encourage Governments across the region and around
the world to provide refuge for asylum-seekers, in
accordance with international humanitarian principles.
Lebanon deserves the election of a president and
fully empowered Government to help deal with the
considerable challenges the country faces. Electing a
president is, of course, a Lebanese decision, but it is
one that must be taken now for the sake of the Lebanese
people.
The suffering inside Syria is not limited to Syrians.
Some 18,000 civilians are trapped in Yarmouk, the

14/68

15/01/2015

vast majority of them Palestinian refugees. The United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East estimates that 400 food parcels are
needed daily to make the population’s minimum needs.
Yet over the past month, only 36 parcels in total have
been distributed. That is 36 parcels distributed during a
time when a minimum of 12,000 parcels were needed.
Assad’s brutality has helped fuel the rise of violent
extremist groups like ISIL and the Al-Nusra Front,
which are spreading terror and instability across the
region. The United States and partner nations are
committed to continuing to degrade and ultimately
defeat ISIL through operations in Syria, as well as in
Iraq at the request of the Iraqi Government. Together
with our partners, we are committed to rooting out
ISIL’s safe havens in the region. We commend Iraqi
Prime Minister Al Abadi for his outreach in the region
and to all of Iraq’s communities, an effort that has
consolidated his broad-based support. We urge his
Government to continue along the path towards genuine
inclusion of all groups in the political, economic and
security future of the country.
The spread of ISIL, the Al-Nusra Front and other
extremist groups also threatens a security of Iraq and
Syria’s neighbours, most directly Lebanon. Hizbullah’s
involvement in the conflict in Syria violates Lebanon’s
policy of disassociation and has made Lebanon a target
for violent extremist attacks. On 10 January, extremists
staged a double suicide bombing in a café in the Jabal
Mohsen neighbourhood of Tripoli, Lebanon, in which
9 people were killed and dozens more injured. Yet if
the attackers’ aim was to divide Lebanon, they failed.
A full range of Sunni, Shia and Christian Lebanese
leaders firmly the condemned the attack as did a broad
swathe of Lebanese society, who rallied behind the
Lebanese armed forces in pursuing those responsible.
The Lebanese people also vigorously condemned
the attack. In the days following it, the Twitter hashtag #JesuisJabalMohsen was a top-trending tweet in
Lebanon.
Lastly let me turn to the Middle East. For decades,
the United States has worked to try to help achieve a
comprehensive end to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Immense though the challenges may be, we firmly
believe that they can and must be overcome because the
status quo is unsustainable. We remain committed to
achieving the peace that both Palestinians and Israelis
deserve: two States for two peoples, with a sovereign,

15-01357

15/01/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

viable and independent Palestine, living side by side in
peace and security with a Jewish and democratic Israel.
As the Council is aware, on 30 December (see
S/PV.7354) the United States voted against a Security
Council draft resolution (S/2014/916). We made our
position clear. The draft resolution, which was hastily
put to a vote, would have taken us farther from and
not closer to an atmosphere that makes it possible to
achieve two States for two peoples. Since that vote, the
United States, represented in particular by Secretary
Kerry, has reached out to both parties in an effort to try
to reduce tensions and find a path forward. The Quartet
envoys will meet at the end of this month to discuss the
way ahead.
We continue to oppose unilateral actions by both
sides that we view as detrimental to the cause of peace.
Palestinian efforts to join the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court and to accede to a number
of international treaties are counter-productive and will
not advance the aspirations of the Palestinian people
for a sovereign and independent State. We urge both
parties to exercise maximum restraint and avoid steps
that threaten to push Israeli-Palestinian relations into a
cycle of further escalation.
As we continue to work towards Israeli-Palestinian
peace, we share the deep concern of the United Nations
regarding the situation in Gaza. All sides must work
together to accelerate efforts and increase support for
rebuilding through the Gaza reconstruction mechanism.
The humanitarian needs are considerable, particularly
in the harsh winter months. In December, the United
States announced an initial $100 million contribution
to the 2015 needs of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
including in Gaza. We encourage other States to make
pledges and to promptly deliver the funds that they have
already promised to fully meet those urgent needs.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I repeat again, Sir, the
personal greeting I extended to you yesterday.
While, as the Assistant Secretary-General’s
briefing has sadly made very clear, there are a number
of regional issues that deserve consideration by
the Security Council. I want to take this, our first,
opportunity to outline our position on five points that
guide New Zealand’s approach to the Middle East peace
process.
First, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict has endured
for too long, and its resolution is overdue. It has

S/PV.7360

devastated Palestinians and Israelis alike. It contributes
to insecurity and instability in the region and beyond.
It is a threat to international peace and security. New
Zealand therefore believes the Council does not just
have a responsibility to remain seized of the issue, but
that it should go further and actively promote a just and
sustainable long-term peace agreement.
Secondly, a two-State solution is the only real basis
for an enduring Israeli-Palestinian peace. Although
final status issues can be agreed only by the parties,
New Zealand believes that a two-State solution should
be based on Israel and a Palestinian State existing
side by side, in mutually agreed and accepted peace
and security, with pre-1967 borders with agreed land
swaps, a solution on the status of Jerusalem, mutual
recognition, and agreement on security arrangements
and refugees. None of those elements will startle
anyone. The parameters are well known; most of them,
over the years, were supported by the Council. Indeed,
the two-State solution is almost universally supported,
not least by the parties themselves. New Zealand has
therefore supported initiatives towards those ends and
particularly acknowledges the recent, unstinting efforts
of Secretary Kerry.
Thirdly, New Zealand believes the two-State
solution should be achieved by a negotiated agreement
between the two parties and regrets that currently there
are no such negotiations, despite sustained efforts
by others, notably the United States. The parties
themselves have previously supported and agreed to
many of the elements of a peaceful settlement.
Fourthly, without a recommitment to negotiations,
the prospects for a lasting, two-State solution will
further diminish. Both sides need to cease provocations
that impede peacemaking, provocations that lead
Israelis to face threats to lives and communities from
missile and rocket attacks, provocations that led to the
devastation most recently wrought upon Gaza in July
and August of the past year. Israeli settlement activity
also inflames the situation and is now rapidly closing
the window of opportunity for a two-State solution.
Settlement activity must stop. It is illegal under
international law and it is prejudicial to a just peace.
Fifthly, the status quo is unsustainable; doing
nothing is simply not viable. More time — time
out — will not, by itself, resolve matters. Delay only
breeds further hostility. Tensions are rising, driven by a
cycle of violence and loss of hope and reducing prospects
of a settlement. Increased radicalization within some

15-0135715/68

S/PV.7360

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

15/01/2015

Palestinian communities prompts responses from Israel.
All of that means an ever-growing risk to regional and
international peace and security.

hopefully maintained through the good offices the
United Nations, supported by the Council’s authority
and by its determination to support a lasting settlement.

For all those reasons, New Zealand believes that
the failure of the Security Council to bring leadership
to this issue, at this time, amounts to an abdication of
its responsibilities. Arguments that the Council does
not have a role or that it cannot add value can no longer
be justified, particularly as other ways to find a solution
simply have not succeeded. Indeed, with its primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security, if the Council does not have a role in the
current circumstances, it is hard to envisage when it
might have such a role.

Against that background, New Zealand supports
in principle the idea of a suitably balanced Security
Council draft resolution touching on the final status
issues, possibly also promoting specific steps to
support a resumption of negotiations. If peacemaking
is to proceed with reasonable expedition, it might also
be appropriate to establish a realistic time frame for
completing that process. For the Council to support
such a timeline does no more than others have before;
Oslo and Annapolis come to mind.

None of that diminishes in any way the ongoing
efforts, particularly of the United States, to resolve
the issue. United States leadership is essential; it is
indispensable. But, as recent events have demonstrated,
only the coordinated and focused efforts of the whole
of the international community can now bring the
momentum that is required. Therefore, while it is for
the parties to reach final agreement, the Council can
promote and support negotiations. It can legitimize
any resulting agreement. And it can use its moral and
legal authority and the practical tools at its disposal to
shift the dynamics back to productive negotiations. We
acknowledge the acute sensitivity of the conflict. We
acknowledge the roles of multiple stakeholders. We
acknowledge the difficulty both sides have in talking
with one another. All of that justifies the Council taking
a proactive role in supporting the peacemaking process.
This present debate is not the time to promote
approaches that might be initiated or supported by
the Council. But that time will come very soon. There
are a number of possibilities that might at least lend
momentum to the negotiations, that might draw on
the United Nations legitimacy and convening power,
that might also draw on the authority of the Security
Council, that might, for example, require that the
Secretary General’s monthly Middle East report be
more specific and more action-oriented. All those are
possibilities that could support the parties working
with their major stakeholders in reaching an agreement.
New Zealand commits to exploring those options in an
effort to inject new momentum into negotiations once
elections are concluded in Israel in March. Any resumed
negotiations will be no less difficult than before, but
at least the Council would be better placed to play its
part in moving the process forward, with momentum

16/68

New Zealand staunchly supports the existence of
the State of Israel and supports its right to defend that
existence in accordance with international law, and we
accept that security arrangements will be fundamental
to any final agreement. We will remain alert to
Israel’s security concerns. New Zealand likewise
acknowledges that both States comprising the eventual
two-State solution will be entitled to sovereignty, to
security and to membership of the Organization, and
consistent with that view we supported the Palestinian
request to become an observer State in the General
Assembly. We have told both the Israeli Government
and the Palestinian Authority that New Zealand would
positively consider contributing to any third-party
presence that secures the sovereignty and security of
both States, just as, since 1982 in the Sinai, we have
supported the Egyptian-Israeli treaty of peace.
New Zealand has strong friendships with Israelis
and Palestinians alike. In the spirit of that friendship
and as an elected member, we will seek and support
initiatives for the Council to speak on this issue with a
more credible and authoritative voice and to use its legal
powers and authorities to engage proactively towards a
sustainable Middle East peace. We therefore call on the
Security Council to live up to its responsibility to seek
an enduring solution to that conflict.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Mr. President, for presiding over this open debate.
I would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General ad
interim Toyberg-Frandzen for his briefing this morning.
We meet today for the first Middle East debate
of 2015. On 30 December, in its last vote of 2014
(see S/PV.7354), the Council was divided on a draft
parameters resolution (see S/2014/916) on the Middle
East peace process. As I said on that occasion in my

15-01357

15/01/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

explanation of vote, while we agreed with much of the
text, which reflected long-standing United Kingdom
and European Union positions, we did not agree with
some elements of the text and were disappointed
that there were no proper negotiations of it. Despite
those divisions, the Council shares the same core
commitments to a negotiated settlement that would
lead to a safe and secure Israel living alongside a viable
and sovereign Palestinian State, based on 1967 borders,
with agreed land swaps, Jerusalem as the shared capital
of both States, and a just, fair and agreed settlement for
refugees.
Sadly, in 2014 the prospects for a two-State solution
moved backwards rather than forwards. We believe that
in 2015 the Security Council should play a meaningful
role in promoting a negotiated two-State solution. In
doing so, we must draw on the lessons of last year.
First, Israel and the Palestinian Authority must
commit to resuming talks to allow for the political
changes necessary to prevent a return to conflict. No one
can fault the energy and commitment of United States
mediation efforts in 2014, but courage, determination
and bold leadership are necessary on both the Israeli
and Palestinian sides to make the hard decisions and
compromises necessary to reach a peaceful, negotiated
settlement. The United Kingdom stands ready to support
the efforts of international partners — including the
United States, the European Union and those in the
region — to encourage and assist the parties.
Secondly, all parties need to avoid taking steps
that could further damage the prospects for resuming
meaningful talks. We are deeply concerned by Israel’s
decision to freeze the transfer of tax revenues to the
Palestinian Authority. That is contrary to the 1994 Paris
Protocol and to Israel’s obligations as an occupying
Power. It risks undermining the financial stability of
the Palestinian Authority and it could have serious
implications for the viability of a two-State solution.
We urge Israel to revoke that decision and to refrain
from taking any further punitive action, including
settlement announcements.
We note the Secretary-General’s communication
that the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court will enter into force for the Palestinians on
1 April. Our priority remains the achievement of a
two-State solution, and we continue to believe that the
best way to achieve that in reality and on the ground is
through negotiations.

S/PV.7360

Thirdly, we must not forget Gaza. We welcome
the positive steps taken by United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process Robert
Serry to facilitate the import and use of construction
materials to rebuild Gaza. But demand is not being
adequately met and more needs to be done to address the
humanitarian situation and kick-start Gaza’s recovery.
Fourthly, we remain open to a first-ever Security
Council resolution on the parameters of a two-State
solution that would command full Council support. We
judge that it is possible, as long as sufficient time is
allowed for proper negotiation.
In Syria, we are approaching four years of brutal
conflict. Well over 200,000 people have now been
killed. The majority of deaths have resulted from the
indiscriminate shelling of civilian areas by the Syrian
regime. The repeated use of chlorine as a chemical
weapon in northern Syria and the consistent reports of
witnesses of the presence of helicopters at the times of
the attacks leave little doubt as to the Al-Assad regime’s
culpability. In December 2014 alone, there were at least
nine separate reported uses of chemical weapons by
the regime. The Security Council needs to act on those
reports. The ongoing brutality of the Al-Assad regime
and its refusal to engage in a meaningful political
process continue to drive the conflict and strengthen
extremists such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant.
The United Kingdom welcomes the timely
adoption of resolution 2191 (2014), which will allow
humanitarian assistance to continue to be delivered
in hard to reach areas within Syria, avoiding the
deliberate delaying tactics that prevent crossed-line
humanitarian aid delivery from regime held territory.
Even last Wednesday — which, according to the Syrian
Observatory for Human Rights, was the first day for
more than three years when no one was reported killed
by military action — six people died as a result of
severe weather conditions and lack of humanitarian
relief. We will continue to support the development
of United Nations Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura’s
proposals for a freeze in Aleppo to reduce the violence.
We welcome the recent election of Syrian National
Coalition President Khaled Khoja and encourage him to
maximize the opportunity presented by the Egyptiansponsored meetings later this month, to further unite
the Syrian opposition to speak with one voice against

15-0135717/68

S/PV.7360

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

15/01/2015

the twin evils of the tyranny of the Al-Assad regime
and extremism.

international organizations and its efforts to strengthen
its internal solidarity.

New energy is needed on the political track. The
Moscow conference can be an element of that, but if
it is to be successful we will need a broader initiative
with United Nations backing and Security Council
engagement. We encourage Russia to use its influence
with the regime to help bring that about. This must be
the year in which a political process brings an end to
the Syrian conflict.

Meanwhile, Israel’s legitimate security concerns
should also be addressed. China hopes that Palestine
and Israel will meet each other halfway and resume
negotiations as soon as possible so as to promote an
early and proper settlement of the question of Palestine.
The question of Palestine is the core of the question
of the Middle East and is interwoven and closely
related with other hotspot issues in the Middle East.
The protracted absence of a settlement of the question
of Palestine will lead to more violence and extremism
in the region and will make the regional hotspot issues
more complicated and difficult.

Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the Chilean presidency’s convening of today’s
open debate on the Middle East. I thank Assistant
Secretary-General ad interim Toyberg-Frandzen for
his briefing. China has also listened attentively to the
statements made by the Ambassadors of Palestine and
Israel.
Today’s meeting is the Council’s first debate on the
Middle East in the year 2015. The past year marked the
International Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People, as established by the United Nations. Sadly,
2014 witnessed severe difficulties in the peace process
in the Middle East, with the Palestinian-Israeli peace
talks stalled and the conflict in the Gaza Strip.
Palestine and Israel were once again beset by tension
and confrontation. The Security Council was still not
able to take substantive measures on the subject of
Palestine, and was not able to adopt the draft resolution
on the question of Palestine proposed by Jordan on
behalf of the Arab States. China expresses its profound
regret in that regard.
The history of the Middle East peace process has
repeatedly proved that conducting peace talks is like
sailing upstream — if they do not move forward, they
will fall back. The stalled peace talks will inevitably
bring about intensified conflicts and bring both
Palestine and Israel into the vicious cycle of violence
begetting violence. China hopes that Palestine and
Israel will consolidate their confidence in peace,
remain committed to the strategic option of peace talks
and take measures to rebuild mutual trust.
We call upon Israel to stop building settlements in
the occupied Palestinian territories, stop dismantling
Palestinian housing, completely lift its blockade against
the Gaza Strip and transfer to Palestine the tax revenue
that has been withheld so as to create the conditions
necessary for relaunching the peace talks. We support
Palestine’s bid to join the United Nations and other

18/68

The international community must have a sense
of urgency when it comes to the question of Palestine,
strengthen coordination, explore all possibilities and
develop synergies so as to bring Palestine and Israel back
to the right track of peace talks. The Security Council
should respond as soon as possible to the call of Palestine,
the Arab States and the international community by
effectively shouldering its responsibilities and playing
an effective role in promoting peace talks, ending the
occupation and promoting the rebuilding of Gaza, and
take action to promote progress on the question of
Palestine.
China has been a firm supporter and sincere
mediator of the peace process between Palestine and
Israel. We support the endeavour of the Palestinian
people to establish an independent State of Palestine on
the basis of the 1967 borders, with full sovereignty and
with East Jerusalem as its capital. We support Palestine
and Israel’s enjoyment of common peace and security.
China has been promoting, through its means, peace
talks among the parties concerned. China is in favour of
all international efforts that are conducive to the peace
process. China is ready to enhance its cooperation with
the international community so as to play a greater role
in pushing for a settlement of the question of Palestine.
The Syrian crisis will soon enter its fifth year.
Protracted warfare has plunged the Syrian people into
misery and suffering, and has severely threatened
regional and international peace and stability.
Promoting a political settlement through dialogue and
negotiations among the parties in Syria is the only way
to achieve peace and stability in Syria.
Recently, the international community has made a
series of efforts towards a political settlement to the

15-01357

15/01/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Syrian crisis. Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
De Mistura has been conducting shuttle diplomacy
with the goal of establishing freeze zones. Russia has
invited the Syrian Government and the opposition to
hold a dialogue in Moscow at the end of the month.
China welcomes those initiatives. We are in favour of
all efforts conducive to resolving the conflict in Syria,
enhancing mutual trust, alleviating people’s suffering
and promoting a political settlement. We hope that
all the parties in Syria will act in the interests of the
entire nation and its people, actively cooperate with
the international mediation efforts, achieve as soon
as possible a political settlement that responds to the
circumstances in the country and addresses the interests
of all parties concerned, so as to give peace a chance
and bring tranquility to the Syrian people.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Sir, for presiding over this meeting. I also
thank the Assistant Secretary-General for his briefing.
I align myself with the statement to be made by the
observer of the European Union.
Spain joined the Security Council on 1 January
2015. That very day, its representative, the Spanish
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation, was in
Egypt. Two weeks later, and in preparation for today’s
debate, Minister Margallo visited Israel, Palestine
and Jordan. I believe that constitutes the best proof of
the fact that Spain will devote special attention to the
situation in the Middle East.
We are speaking today of a region in which, after
six decades, violence still has unforeseen ramifications,
with consequences for global security. The ultimate
expression of that is the emergence of terrorism under
the banner of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict remains st the heart of
all the regional crises. After more than half a century,
there is still no glimmer of a comprehensive, just and
lasting solution that would channel the legitimate
aspirations of the Palestinian people to establish their
own State and guarantee the right of Israel to live in
peace and security with its neighbours in the region.
Given that overview, I would now state that Spain
has shown interest in listening to the parties and offering
its good offices to create a framework within which to
return to political negotiations between Palestinians
and Israelis. There is no alternative to that. Everyone
knows the extremely delicate and fragile nature of
the current situation. When what is most needed is an

S/PV.7360

understanding between the parties, there seems to be
a perverse trend towards progressive detachment from
and break with the internationally accepted principles
and parameters as the framework for a final solution.
In that regard, Minister García Margallo has
conveyed clear and firm messages to both his Israeli
and Palestinian interlocutors on the importance of
remedying the situation, acting responsibly to defuse
tension and adopting a constructive approach to
restoring confidence, which has been entirely destroyed.
Spain has demonstrated its belief that any unilateral act
will distance us from the promised peace we all want.
In Israel, the Spanish Minister for Foreign Affairs
conveyed to his partners our conviction that the
settlement policy in the West Bank and Jerusalem is
illegal under international law and remains the main
obstacle to the two-State solution, which has been
accepted by both parties since the Madrid Peace
Conference of 1991. Furthermore, an eventual litigation
of the conflict would not help to build the confidence
needed to revitalize the peace process. Accordingly,
the Spanish Minister has conveyed to the Palestinian
leaders the urgency of curtailing any further step
regarding the International Criminal Court, including
any request to the Prosecutor to start investigations.
Minister Margallo has conveyed to all his
interlocutors Spain’s belief that the Security Council
can and should combine its forces and work to overcome
this dangerous impasse. Spain has not given up on the
option of a draft resolution based on the parameters
recognized by the international community and that
establishes a clear and precise timetable for the parties’
return to the negotiating table or the holding of an
international conference, if that is the format adopted.
The goal is not to substitute a draft resolution for the
negotiations, but to use such a resolution to unblock the
current situation and bring Israel and Palestine back to
the negotiating table.
To achieve that, the draft resolution must be
negotiated in such a way as to achieve the consensus
of all Council members and must be presented at the
most politically opportune time. That is the only way
the draft resolution will be a constructive element for
the peace process. Spain wants a draft resolution that
is more effective than gimmicky and that will enjoy
the broadest agreement, and is fully prepared to work
for it with the members of the Council, all relevant
stakeholders and, of course, the European Union, as
well as the League of Arab States, which is holding

15-0135719/68

S/PV.7360

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

a meeting today to assess possible initiatives, and the
Quartet, which will meet on 26 January.
The Spanish Minister for Foreign Affairs has
verified the degree of destruction caused by the recent
conflict in Gaza. Although it has managed to launch
the reconstruction mechanism to ensure that necessary
materials reach Gaza, the process has been slow
and is frustrating the expectations and needs of the
population. We need at least to double the daily entry of
material and to use the potential of the border crossings,
beyond the mere introduction of building material,
by seeking to ease the blockade, allowing the transit
of Palestinian labour, exporting Palestinian products,
and estabishing maritime communication routes that
give Gaza access to the wider world. Moreover, it is
indispensable that all funds pledged by various donors
be delivered punctually. It is essential to consolidate
the ceasefire agreed in Cairo. Resolution 1860 (2009)
must be implemented in all its aspects.
The international community must support the
reconciliation efforts between Fatah and Hamas and
the formation of a Government of National Consensus
under the authority of President Abbas. The success
of the Government of National Consensus will
unavoidably require the prompt return of the Palestinian
Authority to Gaza — a condition necessary to both the
construction of a Palestinian State and to advancing
the reconstruction of the Gaza Strip and improving the
daily lives of its inhabitants. The growing despair of
the people of Gaza could give wings to the more radical
options, including such groups as the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), condemning it to further
disaster. The perpetuation of this chaotic situation also
threatens the security of the popuation of southern
Israel.
Time is running out. The Security Council must
be prepared to act responsibly and effectively. We
appeal to the leaders of Israel and Palestine to show the
courage to build the peace that their people need and
crave. We applaud their decision to walk together in the
march against terrorism in Paris. That same decision
should impel them to negotiate a just and lasting peace.
Spain has made significant political gestures
consistent with its position of support for the creation
of a Palestinian State within the framework of a
comprehensive solution to the peace process in the
Middle East. Spain believes that the recognition of a
Palestinian State, far from being an end in itself, must

20/68

15/01/2015

be a political act designed to achieve the coexistence
of two States, Israel and Palestine, living in peace,
prosperity and security. That is the meaning of the
motion, supported by all parliamentary groups,
approved by the Spanish Parliament in December.
The international community must end the conflict
in Syria, which has claimed more than 200,000 victims
since 2011 and generated a massive outflow of displaced
persons and refugees. The plan of action of the United
Nations Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. De Mistura, takes
new dynamics into account in addressing the Syrian
conflict. Ensuring that all parties allow the freezing
of hostilities in Aleppo would represent a promising
step towards alleviating the humanitarian tragedy.
The United Nations is called on to play a key role in
implementing it. It will be vital to monitor compliance
with the principles accepted by the parties in order to
prevent the recurrence, as has happened in the past,
unwanted situations that ended up generating further
suffering.
The Syrian conflict will come to an end once and for
all only with a political negotiation involving all parties.
This will entail a wide range of actors negotiating to
avoid the collapse and a subsequent institutional vacuum
in Syria. There can be no doubt that the principles of
the Geneva communiqué of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/522,
annex) should guide a possible negotiation framework.
In this sense, Spain will continue to promote dialogue
between the Syrian opposition forces and other factions
of the moderate opposition, and offer its good offices to
the Special Envoy of the United Nations, based on the
experience of the so-called Córdoba group. Launched in
January 2014, this process has promoted rapprochement
between the moderate opposition groups belonging
to Syrian minority communities — Kurdish, Yezidi,
Assyrian and Syriac Christians and Druze — and in
the coming weeks, Alawites. Spain thinks the process
Córdoba is a valuable experience ahead of a wider
political process, and seeks to play a part therein.
The humanitarian crisis is having a strong impact
not only in Syria and Iraq, but in the neighbouring
countries of Lebanon, Egypt, Jordan and Turkey. During
its two years as a member of the Security Council, Spain
wishes to embded itself deeply in the Syrian dossier.
The Council has adopted several resolutions aimed at
mitigating the very grave humanitarian crisis. We have
identified a number of humanitarian and protection
challenges, all of which remain active and, in many
cases, unanswered.

15-01357

15/01/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

It is essential to safeguard Lebanon from being
contiminated by the Syrian conflict. Lebanon is already
host to a number of refugees, straining the absorption
capacity of a country of its size and sensitive and
complex social balance. We must help to alleviate this
problem and further support the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon. We must ensure compliance with
resolution 1701 (2006) and keep working to strengthen
the capacity of the Lebanese Armed Forces to maintain
the territorial integrity, rule of law, independence and
sovereignty of Lebanon . We must also pay special
attention to the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force in the Golan Heights, which is currently one of
the most vulnerable missions and therefore requires
more support.
The Security Council has a crucial role to play in
combating terrorism and its political legitimization.
Jihadist terrorism in all its forms is one of the greatest
threats to international peace and security. No one
is free from the threat. It is the right and duty of the
international community to defend itself. We must
act together and with determination. We are all
necessary. Especially important in that respect are the
predominantly Muslim countries, which are the main
victims of the barbarians designs of jihadist terror.
Resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014) have
drawn clear lines of action. It behooves us to ensure
their implementation and development. The strategy to
combat ISIL, which includes more than 60 countries
and in which Spain participates with a contingent of
300 military advisers, is bearing fruit on the ground
and has reduced the terrorists’ capacity for action.
In the case of Iraq, we will give full support to
the inclusive Government of Mr. Al-Abadi in its fight
against terrorism and in maintaining the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the
country. The people and Government of Iraq and the
international community can rely on the full readiness
and experience of Spain in the service of this just cause.
The complexity of the region complicates
international coordination and highlights the need to
create, through diplomacy, mechanisms to address
structural conflicts in the Middle East, with the
participation of the key countries of the region and
Arab regional organizations such as the League
of Arab States and the Gulf Cooperation Council.
The entire international community, particularly
neighbouring countries with the capacity to influence,
must join in this common endeavour. The recent tragic

S/PV.7360

terrorist attacks by jihadist fanatics around the world
remind us that it is time to build bridges to enable the
international community to defeat terrorism in the
realm of ideas aw well. The growing terrorist threat
makes the achievement of a just and lasting peace
between Palestine and Israel even more urgent. Spain
can be relied upon to play its part on the road to peace.
Mrs. Jakubonė (Lithuania): Let me start by
welcoming you, Sir, as President of the Security
Council. I thank Assistant Secretary-General ad interim
Toyberg-Frandzen for his briefing.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
made on behalf of the European Union (EU).
Before I turn to the situation in the region, allow me
to express my delegation’s sincere condolences to all
those affected by last week’s terrorist attack in France.
Sunday’s unprecedented massive rally in Paris in
response to the massacre serves as a powerful reminder
to the world that tolerance, freedom of expression,
and respect for diversity are at the very core of our
humanity.
As once again underlined in the Security Council’s
statement on the terrorist attack in Tripoli on 10 January,
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations constitutes
one of the most serious threats to international peace
and security. There is no, and there can never be, any
justification for such acts, wherever and whenever and
by whomsoever committed.
In Iraq, determined efforts have helped to halt the
deadly advances of Daesh. To sustain those efforts, we
also need to redouble our efforts in exposing Daesh and
other terrorist groups for what they are, in all of their
brutality, as sheer monsters and merciless killers who
have no faith, no religion, no humanity. We must also
step up the whole range of counter-terrorism measures
and enhance international cooperation to that effect.
Furthermore, profound and sustainable changes
within the country are paramount, with a legitimate
and inclusive Government providing security for, and
engaging with, all of Iraq’s citizens. In that respect,
we welcome the steps taken by Prime Minister Al
Abadi. The 2 December oil deal between the Kurdistan
Regional Government and the Iraqi Government is
a positive development that provides hope that the
Iraqi Government is on the right track in pursuing
its commitment to national reconciliation and
inclusiveness. Those steps need to be matched by similar
outreach to the Sunni community. International and

15-0135721/68

S/PV.7360

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

regional partners need to provide support to the Iraqi
Government for capacity-building and reconstruction,
so as to give Prime Minister Al Abadi the space to
deliver his reform programme.
At the beginning of 2015, Syria remains the
greatest humanitarian tragedy of the modern world.
Human suffering in Syria has reached levels beyond
imagination. More than 12 million Syrians are in urgent
need of humanitarian aid, among them 5.6 million
children. Horrendous atrocities and crimes against
humanity have been recorded in detail in the reports of
the Independent Commission of Inquiry, the “Caesar”
report (S/2014/244, annex) and elsewhere.
Doctors, medical staff and humanitarian aid
workers have been attacked and killed for their selfless
efforts to alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people.
The Government of Syria, which has the primary
responsibility to protect, for four years has continued
to perpetrate crimes against its own people. We fully
support Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura in his efforts
to find ways to reverse this horrific spiral of violence
and move towards an inclusive political solution.
We also urge all the parties, in particular the Syrian
regime, to fully implement resolutions 2139 (2013) and
2191 (2014).
Impunity in Syria has lasted for much too long.
The Council must step up the pressure in the face of
continued non-compliance. The perpetrators of mass
atrocities and crimes against humanity, whoever
they are, must be brought to account. Justice and
accountability are essential for the resolution of the
crisis in Syria.
There is a tremendous lack of trust, interest and
support by both sides for the efforts aimed at solving
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In that extremely
unstable and explosive context, the status quo is
unacceptable. All unilateral actions, inter alia joining
international organizations and the halt of the transfer
of tax revenues, are obstacles to the resumption of
negotiations. The Israeli Government transfers of tax
revenues to the Palestinian Authority should be timely
and transparent, as required under the Paris Protocol.
The Palestinian leadership should use its
international status constructively. Furthermore,
continuous settlement expansion, settler violence, house
demolitions, inflammatory statements by Hamas, and
incitement must stop immediately in order to preserve
the viability of a two-State solution.

22/68

15/01/2015

In Gaza, life remains a human tragedy. Lithuania
reiterates the importance of a fundamental change of
the political, security and economic situation in the
Gaza Strip, including the end of the closure. We urge the
parties to fully implement the temporary mechanism
for the monitoring and verification of reconstruction
materials negotiated by the United Nations, Israel and
the Palestinian Authority, as an important step towards
the necessary urgent opening of all crossing points.
We would like to stress the importance of a change
in Israeli policy to allow Gaza to trade normally and on
a permanent basis.
The assumption of full Government functions
by the Palestinian Authority is critical for a lasting
improvement of the situation in Gaza. In order to
advance the reconstruction of Gaza, it is paramount
that the international community honour its financial
commitments.
The unsustainable situation in the West Bank,
Gaza and East Jerusalem and the deteriorating regional
context underline the urgency of a comprehensive peace
agreement. We call on all the parties and all the major
stakeholders, including the United States, the Quartet,
the League of Arab State, regional actors, the Security
Council, the EU and others, to take the necessary
steps to that end. The participation of both Palestinian
President Abbas and Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu
at the solidarity rally in Paris demonstrates that
Palestinians and Israelis stand for the same universal
values — peace, tolerance and mutual respect. Let us
hope that those shared values will bring Israelis and
Palestinians back to the negotiating table, the sooner
the better.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Allow me again
to express my great satisfaction, Sir, at seeing you
presiding over a meeting of the Security Council. I also
thank Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen for his very interesting and
comprehensive briefing to the Council this morning.
I would like to start by clearly stating our position
on this situation. Angola maintains good relations
with the State of Israel, as well as with the Palestinian
authorities. Our relations with Israel are based on the
universal principles of international law and the mutual
interests of both sides. Rather fruitful cooperation
with Israel has evolved over the years in several
sectors, in particular in agriculture, health, aviation,
construction, fishing and telecommunication, among
others. Likewise, Angola has very friendly historical

15-01357

15/01/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

relations with Palestine. For a long time, we hosted the
diplomatic representation of Palestine in our capital.
Those relations reflect Angola’s solidarity with the
Palestinian people in their quest to fulfil their legitimate
national aspirations to self-determination in a free and
independent State.
We strongly believe that the peaceful settlement of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict would be a far-reaching
step for the achievement of stability in the whole of the
Middle East. Being fully aware of the complexities of
the issue, we are of the view that a two-State solution is
the only viable option for comprehensive peace between
the Israelis and the Palestinians, for which both sides
need to make significant compromises. We furthermore
believe that there should be an end to the occupation of
the Palestinian territories, so as to allow the Palestinian
people to exercise their full right to self-determination
towards peace and sustainable development.
At this point, we would like to address of Israel’s
ongoing settlement activity. We all agree that it has
been consistently stated by the international community
that settlement activity constitutes a violation of
international law, that it is counterproductive for a twoState solution and that it serves as incitement to violence,
as reflected in the recent events in Jerusalem. We hereby
appeal to the Government of Israel to consider a new
policy approach as a demonstration of its willingness to
compromise and cooperate constructively with a view
to attaining a peaceful settlement.
The humanitarian situation in Gaza is especially
worrying. Although a temporary Gaza reconstruction
mechanism is in place, urgent funding is required to
rebuild critical services, including important electricity
and water supply infrastructure. In this connection,
we are pleased that the international community has
pledged $5.4 billion for the reconstruction of Gaza,
and commend Egypt and Norway for spearheading that
effort, which is urgently needed to improve the living
conditions of the Palestinians and to see fundamental
changes in the dynamics of the conflict.
It is also crucial that the Palestinians unite in an
effective governing structure, and we are pleased to
note the critical steps that have been taken recently
to create a unity Government. The Government of
National Consensus needs to be consolidated and
assume its responsibilities for the effective management
of security and public services and become a viable
counterpart in effective, result-oriented negotiations
with Israel. The two-State solution cannot and should

S/PV.7360

not continue to be a mere refrain. It has to be clear and
objective, with an aim reachable through positive and
productive negotiations.
Indeed, the political situation in the Middle East is
extremely worrying. Continued conflict in Syria and
its appalling humanitarian consequences, persistent
instability in Iraq and its exacerbation of ethnic
and religious divisions, and the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in Gaza need to be forcefully
addressed by the Security Council. There are factors
that have been feeding the rise of extremism, with
radical groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham and the Al-Nusra Front in the Middle East,
as well as Boko Haram and Al-Shabaab in Africa,
spreading a message of intolerance and hatred in the
name of religion. The challenges in dealing with these
trends are immense, and we must all join forces to
find appropriate solutions through dialogue among
civilizations and respect for cultures.
I would like to conclude by reiterating that we
strive to contribute to the establishment of a forum for
dialogue and productive discussion. At the recent march
in Paris, we saw various world leaders, in particular
President Abbas and Prime Minister Netanyahu,
marching together for the same objective of combatting
terrorism and achieving peace. That was a ray of hope
that we hope to preserve. We deeply hope that the
international community will continue to help efforts
to reach a peace settlement between the Israeli and
Palestinian peoples, easing tensions in the entire region
and contributing meaningfully to a world of peace and
security.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I too thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral ad interim Toyberg-Frandzen for his briefing.
Nigeria remains convinced that a negotiated
settlement represents the most viable path to lasting
peace between Israel and Palestine. That is why we are
concerned by the lack of progress in the peace process.
There is a need for both parties to show flexibility and
the political will to negotiate in good faith. Nigeria
believes that the relevant Security Council resolutions,
the Madrid principles of land for peace, the road map for
peace in the Middle East and the Arab Peace Initiative
all form a valid basis for the attainment of lasting peace
between Israel and Palestine.
What is required now, in our view, is for the
leadership on both sides to take the courageous
decisions that would allow the peace process to move

15-0135723/68

S/PV.7360

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

forward. Peace cannot be imposed from the outside. It
has to come from within. We urge both sides to avoid
the unilateral action and hostile rhetoric that deepen
mistrust between them and push back the prospects for
resumption of peace talks. There is no alternative to a
negotiated solution. We wish to make it abundantly clear
that Nigeria would like to see the Israeli-Palestinian
issue resolved within the framework of a two-State
solution that would allow both Israel and Palestine to
live side by side in peace and security.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): As we
meet here, there are millions of displaced persons and
refugees across the Middle East, in particular children,
who have spent the past few weeks in the bitter
cold under heavy rain and snow. The international
community must respond to calls to address the causes
that led to their displacement, whether in Palestine,
Syria or Iraq. In the meantime, the international
community must enhance humanitarian assistance to
refugees and help host countries, particularly Jordan,
in this humanitarian mission, which we undertake on
behalf of humanity and the international community.
I should also like to express our appreciation to
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East for their
efforts to alleviate the effects of the difficult weather
conditions on refugee communities in the Middle East.
I also want to thank those Governments that have
helped by providing necessary support, which, although
greatly appreciated, is far less than what is required.
Last year was one of the toughest and harshest years
for the Palestinian people in the occupied territories.
Their sincere aspirations for peace were struck down
by the halt of peace negotiations at the end of March,
despite the appreciated and unprecedented efforts of
United States Secretary of State John Kerry. That halt in
negotiations was followed by political tension, as well
as a vacuum that led to deadly violent confrontations
in various parts of the occupied Palestinian territories,
particularly the Gaza Strip. According to the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, 2014
witnessed the greatest number of casualties among
Palestinians since 1967, largely due to the unjustifiable
Israeli aggression in the Gaza Strip. More than 2,000
Palestinians — mostly civilians, in particular women
and children — were killed. Infrastructure, such
as health and education services and facilities, was
destroyed. Half a million Palestinians were displaced

24/68

15/01/2015

in 2014, and 22,000 Palestinian homes were either
destroyed or rendered uninhabitable.
Last year saw settlement expansion and the forced
displacement of Palestinians. In 2014, the Israeli
Government continued to announce the construction
of new housing units in disregard of repeated
condemnations by the international community. The
number of settlers in the West Bank increased by 4 per
cent over the previous year, according to figures from the
Israeli Government itself. The number of Palestinians
displaced in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
also increased by 6 per cent in 2014 as a result of the
forced displacement of Palestinians and the policies
of occupation. Even the Al-Aqsa Mosque suffered last
year, with two unprecedented incidents — the first
being its closure and the second the storming of the
site — not to mention a series of attacks by Jewish
settlers and extremists on Al-Haram Al-Sharif and
provocative visits by members of the Israeli right and
the Knesset, all in disregard of the feelings of millions
of Muslims around the world.
Jordan — based on the Hashemite guardianship
and custody of the Islamic and Christian Holy Sites
in East Jerusalem assumed directly by His Majesty
King Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein — will continue
to stand against all Israeli violations and incursions
into the Al-Haram Al-Sharif. Jordanian efforts under
the leadership of His Majesty the King succeeded in
providing relatively better access to worshippers and
increasing their numbers as compared to previous
months.
By the end of last year, both Palestinian and Israeli
parties moved in two different directions. Israel chose
to continue its settlement policies and to enact laws
that threatened the two-State solution. The Palestinian
leadership, for its part, chose to resort to this
international organization in pursuit of the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people to live in freedom and
dignity in their own independent State. Today I will not
warn again of the consequences of continuing with the
status quo. We have all witnessed episodes of violence
and tension, to which I have already referred to and
which will be repeated even more gravely, with wider
ramifications, if the international community fails to
achieve a just and comprehensive peace in the Middle
East.
What I do want to repeat and emphasize today is
the urgent need to work this year to urge the two sides
to build on the efforts made by United States Secretary
15-01357

15/01/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of State John Kerry, and engage in negotiation through
a serious framework in which all unilateral measures
come to an end. Such negotiations have to lead to the
enactment of a two-State solution within a reasonable
period, and an end to the conflict through resolving all
core issues — Jerusalem, refugees, security, borders
and water issues — in accordance with international
terms of reference and the Arab Peace Initiative in all
its elements, one that meets and fully protects Jordan’s
vital interests associated with each of those issues.
Jordan is directly involved in all those issues. The
success of such endeavours requires a genuine, actual
Israeli movement in this direction. It requires that
Israel show seriousness and commitment to peace and
the two-State solution through action, work and halting
all violations, attacks and unilateral measures that are
already illegal, and engaging in good faith in serious
negotiations.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
deadly events of last year, took up 23.8 per cent of the
meetings and consultations of thr Security Council,
despite the fact that the Council in 2014 adopted only one
official document on the Isreaeli-Palestinian conflict,
namely, presidential statement S/PRST/2014/13, which
Jordan submitted and which called for a ceasefire in the
Gaza Strip on the eve of Eid Al-Fitr. As a matter of fact,
the Security Council has not adopted any resolutions
on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict since 2009, despite
the historic record of resolutions that the Council was
able to adopt over the past decades — resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1515 (2003) and many
others — that form the international terms of reference
and legitimacy considered as the basis for the solution
of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Such facts must prompt us to conduct a genuine
review of the required role of the Security Council
this year vis-à-vis finding a solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict. They also prompt us to work
together unanimously and consensually in coordinated
fashion, within a framework that supports direct
negotiations in the Council, to develop a frame of
reference for such negotiations, end the occupation and
establish an independent, fully sovereign and viable
Palestinian State on the June 1967 border with East
Jerusalem as its capital, in the framework of a twoState solution, living in peace and security side by side
with Israel and all countries and peoples of the region.
One of the prominent reasons that lead to extremism
is the failure to find a just and comprehensive solution

S/PV.7360

to the Palestinian cause, which Jordan, under the
leadership of His Majesty King Abdullah, considers
the core of the conflict in the region. We in Jordan are
at the forefront of regional and international efforts to
combat terrorism and extremism and their supporters,
particularly through initiatives aimed at promoting
dialogue among religions and cultures, and explaining
the true concepts of Islam, the religion and its message
of tolerance — such as the Amman Message, Common
Word and the World Interfaith Harmony Week. Jordan
will spare no efforts in working to combat terrorism
with other States by all legitimate and legal means
through the mechanisms of joint international action.
What we are doing to achieve this goal reflects the
complex danger of terrorism, which also requires
that we confront it militarily, on the security front
and ideologically, as well as emphasizing the fact that
terrorism has no religion or race. Moreover, linking
terrorism with any religion, race or region, intentionally
or unintentionally, is the very best way to give publicity
to extremists, terrorists and the enemies of humankind,
including their deviant thoughts.
Jordan stresses the need for a political solution to
the crisis in Syria that ends bloodshed and achieves
a political transition, in line with the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people. It must be a political
solution that restores security and stability to Syria and
its people, rebuilds Syrian national, including among
all components of the Syrian people, and provides for
the return of refugees to their homes. The absence of a
comprehensive solution to the Syrian crisis will ignite
sectarian conflict in the region. Jordan, as a country
hosting more than 1.5 million Syrians is exhausted.
It has exceeded its limits in providing assistance to
Syrian refugees, particularly in the light of our limited
resources and inadequate international support. We
appeal today to the international community, now more
than ever, to shoulder its responsibilities in supporting
Jordan and other host countries to enable them to
continue to perform this important humanitarian role.
In conclusion, let us work together to make 2015
the year of achieving peace and security in the Middle
East. The peoples of our region are eager to do so.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I wish to thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Chile for convening
and presiding over this open debate. I also wish to also
thank Assistant Secretary-General ad interim ToybergFrandzen for his briefing.

15-0135725/68

S/PV.7360

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We just left behind the year 2014, which the
United Nations declared as the International Year
of Solidarity with the Palestinian People. The
international community believed and hoped that 2014
would be a critical year for Israeli-Palestinian peace
and that it could further promote solidarity with the
Palestinian people and generate further momentum
and international support for the realization of their
inalienable rights, denied for too long.
Malaysia regrets the fact that the year 2014 ended
with yet another disappointing and crushing blow to
the Palestinian people and their aspirations, as the
window of opportunity once again slammed shut on
their dreams of self-determination. The peace talks
brokered by the United States stalled, another war
broke out in Gaza, with catastrophic consequences, and
the Security Council failed to adopt a draft resolution
(S/2014/916) aimed at setting a deadline for ending
the Israeli occupation. The year also marked the tenth
anniversary of the International Court of Justice’s 2004
advisory opinion on Israel’s construction of a wall in
the occupied Palestinian Territory, an opinion that for
the past 10 years has unfortunately been completely
ignored and remains unimplemented.
Malaysia wishes to reiterate and reaffirm its longstanding support for a just and lasting solution to the
question of Palestine, based on a two-State solution
and the legitimate right to self-determination of the
Palestinian people in an independent State, living side by
side in peace and security with Israel, based on the 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. We remain
committed to the implementation of internationally
recognized initiatives such as the Arab Peace Initiative,
the Oslo Accords, the Quartet road map, the Madrid
terms of reference and the relevant Security Council
resolutions. We commend the diplomatic efforts of the
United States to try to revive the peace talks. However,
little progress has been made with their resumption,
while the conditions on the ground worsen and move
further and further away from a two-State solution,
owing to increasing illegal Israeli settlements and the
continuing construction of a wall of separation in the
occupied Palestinian territory, among other actions.
Faced as we are with more than 60 years of
failure to resolve the conflict, the current deadlock in
negotiations and the increasingly unlikely future of a
two-State solution, Malaysia no longer sees the wisdom
in insisting that the only possible route to resolving
the Palestinian-Israeli conflict is through bilateral

26/68

15/01/2015

negotiations, a position that serves only to perpetuate
the status quo. Let us not forget that the State of
Israel was created by the United Nations following a
General Assembly vote in 1947 (resolution 181 (II)).
The State of Israel did not come into being through
bilateral negotiations with its neighbours, and yet
we deny a similar path to Palestine and criticize any
attempt by Palestine to seek fulfilment at the United
Nations of its right to self-determination as unilateral
action. Considering the prolonged deadlock in efforts
to resolve the conflict through bilateral negotiations,
the Security Council should step in and shoulder its
responsibility under the Charter of the United Nations
to address the situation, which constitutes a threat to
international peace and security that extends beyond
the region’s boundaries.
As the Council is aware, earlier this month
Palestine acceded to various international conventions
and treaties on issues such as cluster munitions, the
law of the sea, the International Criminal Court and
transnational organized crime. Such moves should not
be seen as undermining or jeopardizing the peace talks.
The international community should rather welcome
them as a step in the right direction. In Malaysia’s
view, in acceding to such international conventions
and treaties, Palestine’s actions will be constrained
by and evaluated against internationally agreed norms
and standards. Such actions will also help to deter the
commission of war crimes and to end impunity for the
parties on both sides of the conflict. They definitely
represent a preferable and more legitimate path to
achieving the legitimate right to self-determination
than that of resorting to violence and extremism. It is
thus in everyone’s interest to embrace Palestine as a
responsible member of the international community,
bound by the rules and norms of international law.
We commend France’s effort towards the end of
2014 in taking an initiative to try to bridge the gaps
between Council members on the issue of Palestine.
The parameters for the peace agreement proposed by
France and subsequently taken up by Palestine provide
a good basis for further negotiations. They demonstrate
that a Security Council resolution on Palestine, despite
allergic reactions from certain parties, is not necessarily
incompatible with peace talks. Instead, the parameters
and time frame could provide much-needed pressure on
both sides to return to the negotiating table in order
to arrive at a just, lasting, comprehensive and peaceful
settlement to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. Malaysia
wishes to see peace talks and negotiations between
15-01357

15/01/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestine and Israel continue. We repeat our call on
the international community, and the Security Council
in particular, to shoulder its responsibilities under the
Charter to resolve the conflict and act as honest brokers
to the conflicting parties in order to ensure long-term
peace, security and stability in the region. However,
negotiations should not take forever and should be
carried out within a reasonable time frame.
Moving on to Syria, Malaysia strongly supports
all efforts to find a diplomatic and peaceful solution
to the Syrian crisis through dialogue and negotiations,
especially through the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura. We
will continue to support a comprehensive political
settlement of the Syrian crisis based on the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex). We note that there
will be a meeting of the parties in the very near future
and look forward to being apprised of developments by
the Special Envoy.
Malaysia welcomes the progress made by the
United Nations and the Organization for the Prevention
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) on eliminating chemical
weapons in Syria. However, we are gravely concerned
about the use of chlorine for hostile purposes in Syria,
as described in the reports of the OPCW’s fact-finding
mission. We also remain deeply concerned about the
massive and deteriorating humanitarian situation
in Syria. We urge all parties in Syria to respect
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, and to implement the various Council
decisions and resolutions on humanitarian access. As
Chair of the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict, Malaysia is concerned about the scale, scope
and gravity of violations committed against children in
Syria. We strongly condemn the widespread incidence
of grave violations against children and call on all
parties to protect and uphold the rights of all children
in Syria. We also urge that the perpetrators of such
heinous crimes be held accountable.
With regard to the occupied Syrian Golan, Malaysia
reiterates its call for Israel’s complete withdrawal from
the area, in line with the relevant Security Council
resolutions, as well as international law and the Charter.
We also call on Israel to cease its violations of Lebanese
sovereignty and withdraw its troops from the occupied
territories in Lebanon, in accordance with resolution
1701 (2006).
The Middle East has seen a deeply worrying surge
in extremism and terrorism, including in Syria, Yemen,

S/PV.7360

Lebanon and Iraq. It is no coincidence that extremism
and terrorism have gained ground against a backdrop
of prolonged political conflict and highly unstable
socioeconomic situations in those countries. Malaysia
condemns in the strongest terms the horrific atrocities
committed by terrorist groups such as Daesh, which
in no way represent the peaceful religion of Islam. We
must not let extremism and terrorism gain the upper
hand in the region.
For the past several years Malaysia has called for
an international platform for the silent majority — that
is, the voices of moderation — to enable them to come
together to counter the growth of extremist sentiments
in all their forms. That position is based on the belief
that the real divide in the world today is not between
East and West, developed and developing countries or
Muslims and non-Muslims. The fault line lies rather
between moderates and extremists of all religions and
beliefs, and in all areas and aspects. The disturbing
developments in the world today, and in the Middle East
in particular, reflect the urgent need for a comprehensive
approach to countering extremism and terrorism,
including by addressing the underlying contributing
factors, and not through the use of force alone. The
voices of moderation must prevail against those who
espouse hate, ignorance, violence and extremism. We
must summon the political will required to bridge
differences and restore stability to the lives of all the
peoples of the Middle East, regardless of religion,
ethnicity or nationality.
In conclusion, Malaysia sincerely hopes to be able
to play a constructive role in the Security Council
in maintaining international peace and security,
particularly in the Middle East. We look forward
to contributing to the maintenance of international
peace and security and to upholding the Charter of the
United Nations, including through our long-held value
of moderation as a useful tool to counter extremism,
reconcile differences and resolve disputes.
As Malaysia takes its seat on the Security Council, I
wish to reaffirm my delegation’s readiness to cooperate
and engage constructively with all interested partners
and stakeholders on all issues before the Council,
including the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, I wish to welcome you, Sir, as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Chile to preside over
the Security Council today. As this is the first time I
have taken the floor in the Council this year, I would

15-0135727/68

S/PV.7360

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

15/01/2015

also like to welcome all new non-permanent members
of the Council and to express our hope that there will
be close and constructive cooperation with them in the
period before us.

the Security Council in the Middle East peace process
must be an important element in international support
for the Palestinian-Israeli contacts. Discussions alone,
even on a monthly basis, are, of course, not enough.

The situation in the Palestinian track of the Middle
East settlement remains among the major contentious
items on the international agenda. It has already been
almost a year since Palestinians and Israelis broke off
negotiations, and the alienation between them only
continues to grow.

The excessively protracted Syrian conflict is
having an extremely negative impact on the situation
in the Middle East. It is quite clear that relying on the
military option to overthrow the regime has not been
justified. Those who would follow such an approach
have only worsened the plight of the Syrian people.
We would like to emphasize once again that the only
way to end the conflict is through dialogue. In order
to truly launch a process of national reconciliation, all
opportunities must be made use of.

Against this background, the situation on the
ground continues to deteriorate. The situation in the
West Bank, including in East Jerusalem, remains
tense, frequently teetering on the edge of open, armed
confrontation. The ongoing settlement activities of
Israel in the occupied territories play a considerable
role in this. There are further pending issues relating to
normalization around the Gaza Strip in the wake of the
bloody conflict that took place in the summer of 2014.
In such conditions, any opportunity must be seized
to rekindle the peace process. Guided by that kind of
logic, Russia supported the draft resolution (S/2014/916)
proposed by Jordan in December, which, unfortunately,
was not adopted, although it did not contradict the
existing international consensus on the PalestinianIsraeli settlement. On the contrary, it referred to the
fundamental principles of the peace process, including
confirmation of the relevant resolutions of the Council.
In our view, the developments on the Palestinian
track are being transformed before our very eyes into a
dangerous chain reaction, when any step by one of the
parties automatically triggers counter-actions by the
other side. The resulting spiral exacerbates the negative
backdrop of relations between Palestinians and Israelis.
In this kind of climate, the task of remedying the
situation in the peace process would appear to be a
highly complex one. But this is one of those challenges
where, if we fail to respond in a timely and appropriate
manner, we risk worsening the situation with respect
to the Palestinian issue and the situation in the Middle
East in general.
The complexities of the task of rekindling
the Palestinian-Israeli negotiations mean that the
international community needs to step up its efforts to
revive the talks. We believe that the best mechanism
for this is the Middle East Quartet of international
mediators, whose work, above all at the ministerial level,
should be promptly reinvigorated. Close involvement of
28/68

Intra-Syrian consultations are planned from 26 to
29 January in Moscow. This is a practical contribution
by Russia to international efforts to assist in advancing
the peace process in Syria. The purpose of these
meetings is to lay the groundwork for launching,
without preconditions, an inclusive dialogue among
Syrians based on the Geneva communiqué of 30 June
2012.
We do not view the Moscow event as a one-off. It
must have specific applicable results. We realize that
the Syrian crisis also has international and regional
dimensions, meaning there is a critical need for a
comprehensive settlement of the situation in and around
Syria. We expect that our approach will meet with
understanding and support from all external actors
who have leverage with various segments of the Syrian
opposition. Those who decide not to participate in this
event will lose their standing in the whole negotiation
process.
The Moscow gathering is a unique opportunity
to start directs talks on an equal footing between the
representatives of the Syrian Government and the
opposition. To let this opportunity slip away would
be an unforgivable mistake, as it is in the interest of
a speedy end to the fratricidal conflict in Syria and of
the consolidation of positive forces of Syrian society to
counter international terrorism and violent extremism.
We hope that our appeal will be heard by the Syrian
sides, influential outside forces and regional players
alike.
Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, on presiding over this important debate
on the Middle East, including the Palestinian

15-01357

15/01/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

question — an issue of particular importance to the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. I would also like to
welcome Mr. Jens Anders Toyberg-Frandzen, Assistant
Secretary-General ad interim for Political Affairs.
Our country endorses the statement to be delivered
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. Nevertheless, I
would like to set out our national position on the matter
before us.
The fomenting of armed conflicts and the
maintenance of colonial situations and foreign
occupation in some areas of the world have a negative
impact on international peace and security. We cannot
remain indifferent to these facts and their gravity,
especially when we recall that the Charter of the United
Nations enshrines the commitment of Member States to
safeguard future generations from the scourge of war.
The Venezuelan delegation reaffirms its full support
for the right to self-determination, which entitles
the nationals of the State of Palestine to live within
internationally recognized borders, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council. In this regard, we reiterate our repudiation
of the illegal policies implemented by the occupying
Power, Israel, which seek to deny the Palestinian people
their rights, with the political-territorial disintegration
of the State of Palestine as the goal.
Our country urges the immediate cessation of Israeli
settlement construction in the occupied territories
that are part of the sovereign and independent State
of Palestine. Such Israeli practices flagrantly violate
international law. Moreover, we condemn the Israeli
occupying Power’s withholding of tax revenue from the
State of Palestine, in contravention of the agreements
signed between both parties regarding the transfer of
resources.
Israel is attempting to suffocate the State of
Palestine by cutting it off from basic supplies,
including economic income, food, medicine and other
goods essential to residents’ everyday lives and to the
functioning of its political institutions, including the
payment of salaries to public sector employees. Israel
must refrain from implementing measures of collective
punishment against the Palestinian people that worsen
their appalling humanitarian conditions, in clear
violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention. At the same
time, we deplore the fact that the blockade imposed by

S/PV.7360

the occupying Power against the Palestinian population
of Gaza since 2007 is still in force, which affects the
human rights and worsens the already precarious living
conditions of the inhabitants of that area. We demand
that Israel immediately and definitively lift this brutal
blockade.
The Israeli military occupation is the leading cause
of the flagrant violation of the human rights of the
Palestinian population and of international humanitarian
law. Venezuela advocates the establishment of a
timeline for bringing an end to this unsustainable and
illegal occupation of territories belonging to the State
of Palestine, in accordance with the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council.
In keeping with the Charter of the United Nations,
our country encourages both parties to continue
with negotiations in order to achieve a firm and
lasting peace, whereby both States can safely coexist
as sovereign and independent countries, within
internationally recognized borders. A negotiated
political solution to this matter is a decisive factor for
peace and security in the Middle East. In addition,
we welcome the accession of the State of Palestine to
various international instruments, which confirms its
irrevocable commitment to the cause of international
peace and security, human rights, cooperation and
development.
Lastly, we reiterate our unwavering support for the
request of the State of Palestine to be admitted as a full
Member of the United Nations. We hope the Security
Council will fully assume the responsibilities bestowed
upon it by the Charter, so that the General Assembly,
under the recommendation of this principal organ, will
be able to quickly decide on the matter.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): Allow me to
thank the Chilean presidency of the Security Council
for convening this open debate on the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question. Let
me also thank Mr. Jens Anders Toyberg-Frandzen,
Assistant Secretary General ad interim for Political
Affairs, for his briefing.
In order, I will address the Palestinian question, the
situation in Syria and, lastly, the situation in Lebanon.
In a regional context that is deeply troubled and
destabilized by a number of conflicts and tensions, the
Palestinian question presents itself with even greater
drama, especially since the peace process is currently
deadlocked. Do we need to continue the pattern of

15-0135729/68

S/PV.7360

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

ongoing negotiations that produce no results, or do
we need to explore other ways and means to find
appropriate solutions to the crisis? The status quo has
become increasingly untenable, both for Palestinians
and for most of the international community. The
international community as a whole, particularly the
Security Council, needs to assume its responsibilities
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations
in order to propose prospects for a viable peace, putting
an end to the conflict, enabling Palestinians to have an
independent sovereign State, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, and a just, appropriate settlement of the refugee
issue, based on the General Assembly resolution 194
(III), of December 1948.
The ongoing failure to settle the Israeli-Palestinian
question affects the credibility of the international
system and poses increasingly serious threats to
international peace and security. The Security
Council’s rejection of the draft resolution (S/2014/916),
which in our consideration was reasonable, submitted
on 30 December by Jordan on behalf of the Group of
Arab States, included a deadline for the end of Israel’s
occupation of the Palestinian territories. That rejection
should not undermine the initiative on which it was
based. The initiative was supported by a majority of the
international community and remains an alternative to
the current stalemate. It is henceforth crucial for the
Council to become even more involved, together with
other international partners, as it explores avenues
for solutions that could end the negotiation cycle that
merely allows the occupation to continue and maintains
the current situation. The Security Council needs to
become further involved to salvage the solution of
two States, living side by side, based on the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Madrid principles,
notably the exchange of land for peace, the road map,
the previously established agreements between the
parties and the Arab Peace Initiative. The two-State
solution should not be challenged under any pretext,
for it is fully in keeping with the legitimate aspirations
of the Palestinian people and takes into account the
security concerns of Israel.
With respect to Syria, we are deeply concerned by
the increasingly violent actions that the conflict has
assumed and the ongoing suffering of the Syrian people
within and outside the country, especially during this
period when there is a serious cold wave and snow
enveloping the region, which has even led to several
deaths, including those of women and children. We call
on the international community to step up its efforts
30/68

15/01/2015

to provide considerable assistance to humanitarian
agencies of the United Nations so that they can ease the
plight of the Syrian people who are subject to cold, the
horrors of war and difficulties in terms of the climate.
We believe that it is time to act to find a solution to
the Syrian crisis by focusing on a political solution.
From that perspective, we support the proposal of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, aimed at ending hostilities in Aleppo,
providing humanitarian assistance and opening a
brief hiatus that would make it possible to create the
conditions necessary for a political dialogue between
the belligerents. We encourage them to pursue this with
the stakeholders and countries of the region in order to
work out a consensus on a strategy aimed at ending the
crisis.
Lebanon continues to deal with numerous
challenges and has been fully affected by humanitarian
and security fallout from the Syrian crisis. More than
1 million refugees have entered Lebanon, which largely
exceeds Lebanon’s ability to host them. Lebanon has
shown exemplary generosity in that regard. We call on
the international community to work to help Lebanon
deal with the tremendous burden and to deal with the
collateral effects of the Syrian crisis. We urge the
Lebanese leaders to continue dialogue and to reach
the necessary compromises so that the election of the
country’s President will take place without further
delay. Lebanese stakeholders need to deal with the
current situation and overcome their own difficulties
in order to avoid a constitutional vacuum that would
further weaken the country and worsen its security
situation.
Lastly, we firmly condemn the attack perpetrated
by Jabhat Al-Nusra north of Tripoli on 10 January,
which claimed several lives and caused many to be
wounded. We express our solidarity with Lebanon in
its fight against terrorist movements.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): This
public debate is the first meeting of this nature of the
Security Council since the terrorist attacks perpetrated
in France last week. Allow me to say a few words on
the subject.
On behalf of France, I would like say how
overwhelmed and strengthened we were by the massive
support that was shown to us from all around the world.
On behalf of France, I would like to thank the United
Nations for its exemplary support through the Security
Council press statement issued on 7 January (SC/11727),
15-01357

15/01/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

through the minute of silence observed by the Council
and through the commitment of the Secretary-General,
who came to provide his support to the French Mission
to the United Nations here in New York, as well as the
representatives of so many countries. All these were
signs of exceptional solidarity.
On behalf of France, I would like to underscore
the historic dimension of the march that took place
in my country on 11 January. Four million citizens of
all origins took to the streets of my country to combat
terrorism and to defend the values that are at the very
core of who we are. That was the largest demonstration
since the liberation of France in 1944. Four million
people were marching side by side, with a number of
world leaders unprecedented for such a public march
since the funeral of President Kennedy in Washington,
half a century ago. It has been an extraordinary message
of unity. The France that speaks today is standing tall,
mobilized, with greater determination than ever. The
march in Paris and all throughout France was the best
response to terrorism.
France, which had been targeted for defeat, is
still standing with its friends and its allies, in support
of three principles. The first is the protection and
defence of free expression and its corollary, freedom
of the press, which does not champion either hatred or
terrorism. The second is the affirmation of a response
to terrorism that combines the greatest firmness, both
beyond and within our borders, with strict respect
for the fundamental rights, without which democracy
is denied. Naturally that response does not target
any religious community; it targets individuals who
practice or defend violence. Of course France expresses
solidarity with all countries affected by terrorism,
such as, most recently, Nigeria. The third principle is
tolerance, which comprises a resolute struggle against
all forms of anti-Semitism, Islamophobia, racism and
all types of discrimination against people. We will not
allow men, women or children to be attacked or killed in
France because they are Jewish, as occurred last Friday
at the kosher supermarket, or because they are Muslim
or of any other religion, or atheist. France protects all
of its citizens, without regard to belief or lack of belief.
The attacks have highlighted the extent to which,
in an interdependent world, the security of each and
every one is a common good. More than ever, peace and
stability in the Middle East are inseparable from that of
Europe. More than ever before, France is committed to
the future of the Middle East.

S/PV.7360

Today, the Middle East is an area of major
instability, marked by regional rivalries and the
scourge of terrorism, with an immense human cost
that is only partly reflected in the terribe number of
dead, of refugees and of displaced persons. In order to
restore durable peace and stability, we must maintain
a single course, namely, provide a fair response to
the legitimate aspirations of peoples and preserve the
peaceful coexistence of peoples in a zone that has
seen sectarianism gain ground. That is the meaning
of the policy that France seeks to lead and which it is
pursuing in all current crises. We will stay the course
with strength and determination, whether it concerns
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, Iraq, Syria or Lebanon.
On 30 December, the Council suffered a new
setback in the relaunching of the peace negotiations
between Israel and Palestine (see S/PV.7354). Once
again the Council was unable to unite to find consensus
to move towards a two-State solution, which is the only
solution capable of providing a just solution to the
aspirations of the two peoples — for the Palestinians,
the aspiration to a sovereign, independent State; for
the Israelis, the guarantee of lasting security. Those
two legitimate claims can be satisfied only if we move
towards the solution that is known to all, on the basis of
internationally recognized parameters.
As is well known, the current situation remains
dangerous. The process is at an impasse. Gaza is
growing poorer as Israel blocks the tax payments that
are by law are due to the Palestinian Authority, and that
threatens the stability of the area. We are doing all that
we can to prevent an escalation. That would not be in
anyone’s interest.
In that context, France is determined to work towards
changing the methodology of the peace process. We are
convinced that without that, the two-State solution will
remain wishful thinking. That collective effort must
be based on an indisputable basis that the Security
Council can and must offer through the adoption
of a resolution on the parameters of the final status.
France will continue its efforts towards a constructive,
reasonable and consensual resolution, one allowing the
Council to become an actor fully committed to peace.
We continue to believe that an international mechanism
in which the countries of the region have a role to play
should help the parties to emerge from the impasse that
has lasted far too long.
In Iraq, as in Syria, Daesh has thrived through lack of
governance, and the repression and the marginalization

15-0135731/68

S/PV.7360

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of the Sunni population. Our fight against Daesh must
be carried out on all fronts — political and military,
foreign terrorist combatants and financing — without
ever losing sight of the fact that in Iraq and in Syria,
any lasting solution must be political.
In Iraq, the military intervention of the international
coalition aims to weaken the offensive capacity of
Daesh and support the Iraqi forces on the ground. The
international community must provide full support to
Prime Minister Haider Al Abadi, who has committed
himself with courage to the path of reconciliation and
assembly. We must encourage him to continue his
efforts on behalf of recovery and good governance.
In Syria we are facing a completely opposite
situation. The regime of Bashar Al-Assad and its
brutality and repressive measures have encouraged the
development of Daesh. The fight against terrorism in
Syria can never involve compromising with a regime
that is responsible for 200,000 deaths. In Syria, half
of the population has been forced to flee their homes.
They should not have to choose between the scourges
of terrorism and dictatorship. The fight against Daesh
cannot be separated from a political transition that
responds to the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian
people on the basis of the Geneva communiqué
(resolution 2118 (2013), annex II).
The Security Council must remain fully mobilized
in favour of the thorough and definitive dismantling
of the Syrian chemical arsenal. The continued proven
use of chlorine gas by the regime dmonostrates that
the international community cannot have faith in
the sincerity of the Syrian commitment towards the
Chemical Weapons Convention. In the light of such
violations, we cannot neglect the imperative to fight
against impunity.
The situation in Lebanon remains extremely
precarious, as we have seen once again with the
terrorist attack in Tripoli on 10 January, which the
Council has condemned. Those events show how much
Lebanon has experienced the direct fallout from the
crisis in Syria. We must do all that we can to ensure
respect for the disassociation policy and the principles
of the Baabda Declaration of 2012 (S/2012/477, annex).
At the same time, we must encourage the Lebanese
people to elect a President as soon as possible. The
continuing vacancy of the position of Head of State
deprives Lebanon — which is facing an influx of more
than 1.2 million Syrian refugees into its territory — of

32/68

15/01/2015

the ability to respond effectively to the humanitarian,
political, security and economic challenges it faces.
Mr. Barros Melet took the Chair.
France is aware of the seriousness of the situation in
the Middle East. Now more than ever, it is determined
to work as hard as necessary towards a resolution of the
conflict that undermines the region. In the light of the
terrorist threat, France reaffirms that it will maintain
a clear course and fully assume its international
responsibility.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I wish to remind
all speakers to limit their statements to no more than
four minutes in order to enable the Council to carry
out its work expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy
statements are kindly requested to circulate the text
in writing and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking in the Chamber. I also appeal to speakers to
deliver their statements at a normal speed to so that the
Interpretation Service can carry out its work properly.
I wish to inform all those present that we will
continue the open debate through the lunch hour, as a
large number of speakers remains on the list.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Lebanon.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I wish to
welcome Angola, Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain and
Venezuela.
I would like to focus on the heinous terrorist
attacks that took place in Paris last week. I wish to pay
a triple tribute, a Lebanese, Arab and Muslim tribute,
to that glorious city, which has proven the extent to
which it deserves its title as the capitol of freedom and
of light. Muslims will recall that it was in Paris that
the two pioneers of Islamic reform — the two great
sheiks Jamal Al-Din Al-Afghani and Mohammed
Abduh — took refuge during their fight against
oppression and colonization. It was from Paris that they
published, in 1884, their famous journal, The Firmest
Bond, in order to spread their thought on renewal.
Arabs will also recall that it was in Paris that what has
since been called the first Arab conference took place in
1913, because of the freedom and security that unique
city offered to the conference’s participants.
Lebanese, for their part, who were pioneers of the
modern Arab renaissance, will also recall that the first
Arabic newspaper, Birgys-Barys, was published from

15-01357

15/01/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Paris in 1859 by a Lebanese national, Rochaid EdDahdah. How can we forget that the neighbourhoods,
the streets, the squares and the universities of Paris
throughout the past century have been the forum for
meetings, protests and conferences that called for the
granting of freedom to colonized people, including
those colonized by France, in particular Algeria. How
can we forget that Paris, over the past decades, has once
again become a haven of peace for Arab politicians,
writers and journalists, including Lebanese journalists,
who went there in search of the freedom of expression
and safety they did not find in their own countries. We
once again pay tribute to Paris, city of lights, city of
freedom.
There is no doubt that success in combating
terrorist acts, the most recent of which took place in
Paris, requires us to deal with their deep-rooted causes.
Purely military or security measures, while essential
and possibly inevitable, will alone not be enough to
put an end to that threat, contrary to popular opinion.
This is in no way a justification for terrorism, quite
the contrary. It is the most certain — and possibly
only — way to deal with the root causes of that scourge.
The reasons for terrorism are many, complex and
overlapping. They include the frustration, alienation,
humiliation and despair that arise from oppression,
marginalization, poverty and persecution. They are
the same feelings engendered in our own region by the
continuing Israeli occupation of Palestinian territories,
with all that it entails in terms of ongoing oppression
and shattered dreams. They are also due to the failure of
all attempts at a settlement, one after another, including
the most recent American efforts, which have all come
up against the political intransigence of the Israeli
authorities, who continue to build settlements, defying
the resolutions of the Organization and the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations. All of that should
be enough to encourage the Council to shake off its
lethargy, finally decide to adopt clear guidelines for the
peace process and establish a mechanism that would
make it possible to put an end to the occupation.
For our part, we as the Arab parties would like to
inform the Council that the Council of Foreign Ministers
of the League of Arab States met in Cairo today and
reiterated their attachment to the Arab Peace Initiative,
initially proposed by the former Saudi Crown Prince
Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud, and endorsed by the
Beirut summit of 2002. I would recall that the Initiative
called on Israel to do the following: first, to withdraw

S/PV.7360

from all occupied Arab territories, including the Syrian
Golan, to the lines of 4 June 1967, and the territories
occupied in south Lebanon; secondly, to find a just
solution to the problem of Palestinian refugees that is
agreed upon and in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 194 (III); thirdly, to accept the emergence of
an independent and sovereign Palestinian State within
the Palestinian territories occupied since 4 June 1967
in the West Bank and Gaza, with East Jerusalem as its
capital.
In exchange, the Arab States would then consider
the Arab/Israeli conflict as having come to an end,
conclude a peace agreement with Israel that would
offer a path to peace for all countries of the region
and establish normal relations with Israel within the
framework of that comprehensive peace. The Initiative
also stipulated, with respect to refugees, that it was
essential to refuse any plan to integrate Palestinians
that was contrary to their special status in the Arab
host countries. Furthermore, the Chair of the Arab
Ministerial Committee for the Arab Peace Initiative,
who visited Washington, D. C., in April 2013, stated,
after his meeting with the American authorities that the
1967 borders, if adopted as the basis for a two-State
solution, could include certain agreed exchanges of
similar territories.
It is important to underscore that the Arab States
have reiterated their commitment to the Arab Peace
Initiative at all the Arab summits that have taken place
since the Beirut summit, including the summits held
in Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt, in 2003; Tunis in 2004;
Algiers in 2005; Khartoum in 2006; Riyadh in 2007;
Damascus in 2008; Doha in 2009; Sirte, Libya, in 2010;
Baghdad in 2012; Doha in 2013; and Kuwait in 2014.
Furthermore, the Arab Ministers for Foreign Affairs
have reiterated their commitment to the Initiative in
every meeting that has been held here in New York and
in Cairo and in their extraordinary meetings. Following
the Riyadh summit of 2007, two Arab Ministers for
Foreign Affairs, specifically those of Egypt and Jordan,
visited Israel and met with Israeli officials with a view to
implementing the Arab Peace Initiative and facilitating
the start of direct negotiations. After the adoption by
the Beirut summit in 2002 of the Arab Peace Initiative,
the States of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
have held five regular and extraordinary summits: in
Putrajaya, Malaysia, in 2003; in Mecca, Saudi Arabia,
in 2005; in Dakar in 2008; in Mecca, Saudi Arabia,
in 2012; and in Cairo in 2013. All of those summits

15-0135733/68

S/PV.7360

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

underscored the importance of the Arab Peace Initiative
as the basis on which the peace process should be built.
All of those facts clearly demonstrate that, since
the Beirut summit of 2002, the Arab approach has been
the path of peace. It is a collective, unanimous, strategic
and constant approach. It has become the approach
adopted by 57 Islamic States. However, that approach,
which is based on the land-for-peace principle, has not
had a partner on the Israeli side. Such a peace would
be a real peace, and not merely a slogan used by Israel
to prevaricate and impose a new reality on the ground.
Indeed, that might explain the failure of all the peace
negotiations over the years. The question is: when will
the Israelis realize that occupation is the antithesis of
peace?
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia): I have the
honour to speak today on behalf of the member States
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC).
At the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting and for personally presiding
over it. I would also like to extend our condolences
and sympathy to the victims of the terrorist acts that
took place recently in Pakistan, Lebanon, Nigeria and
France.
Additionally, I would like to congratulate the newly
elected members of the Security Council — Angola,
Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain, and Venezuela — and
wish them well in fulfilling the important role expected
of them during this critical period in the work of
the Council, especially in conjunction with the
issue discussed today. I would also like to extend
our appreciation to Argentina, Australia, Korea,
Luxembourg and Rwanda for their hard work and
dedication on the Council during their membership.
I wish to convey to you, Mr. President, our gratitude
for convening this open debate on the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question, and for
your country’s commendable position in supporting the
just cause of the Palestinian people. I also thank the
Assistant Secretary-General for today’s briefing.
The OIC reaffirms its commitment and unwavering
support for the Palestinian people’s quest to realize their
legitimate and inalienable rights of self-determination,
freedom from occupation, recognition of their
independent State of Palestine with Al-Quds Al-Sharif

34/68

15/01/2015

as its capital, and the end of Israeli occupation over
Arab lands, including the Syrian Golan Heights and
Lebanese territories. The international community has
demonstrated overwhelming support towards ending
the grave injustices against the Palestinian people,
including in the General Assembly, the Human Rights
Council and the recent Conference of High Contracting
Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention convened by
the Depositary in Switzerland.
The United Nations designation of 2014 as the
International Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People is but one important example of such efforts.
However, in an ironic and most disappointing way, 2014,
the International Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People, ended with the Security Council failing
to shoulder its responsibility towards the peaceful
resolution of this conflict and setting a deadline for
the end of the Israeli occupation of Palestinian and
Arab lands. The OIC regrets that the Council missed a
vital opportunity to pursue a just resolution that would
have addressed the plight of the Palestinian people and
that it has retreated from implementing its own past
resolutions.
All the while, Israel, the occupying Power,
continued to sabotage all negotiation efforts, which
ended in a complete stalemate of the peace process.
Despite the intentional community’s rallying behind
the negotiation process to end Israeli occupation and
achieve a lasting peace based on the two-State solution,
Israel has persisted in its oppressive, apartheid and
colonial policies towards the Palestinian people. Israel,
the occupying Power, continued to violate international
law. This includes the construction of the apartheid wall,
settlement expansion and implanting illegal settlers,
whose number has doubled from 250,000 to over
500,000. The use of excessive and lethal force against
the unarmed civilian population, forced evictions,
forcible transfer of civilians, demolition of homes
and confiscation of properties, coercive detention of
more than 6,000 Palestinians and refusal to prosecute
terrorist Israeli settlers are examples of Israeli brutality.
This is in addition to Israel’s aggression waged against
the Gaza Strip, which resulted in killing more than
2,200 Palestinians and injuring and maiming more
than 11,000 people and destroying many homes. Israel,
the occupying Power, has yet to be held responsible for
its crimes and illegal practices. Rather, it continues to
enjoy impunity and lack of accountability.

15-01357

15/01/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7360

The OIC holds Israel responsible for all its violations
of international law, international humanitarian law
and international human rights law and will continue to
call upon the international community and the Security
Council to hold Israel accountable and to compel it to
cease its illegal acts and policies. We also hold Israel
responsible for the escalation in the city of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif, and we warn against any move towards
changing the demographic make-up and identity of the
city.

Further deterioration, radicalization and spread of
violence can be eradicated only through holding
accountable all those responsible for the bloodshed,
violence, war crimes and crimes against humanity and
paving the way for democracy, freedom, security and
stability.

Today, we are compelled to ask the Council: what
route to peace and justice is left for the Palestinians in
the face of Israeli practices that threaten to undermine
any prospects and viability of the two-State solution?
This is not a rhetorical question but one with serious
implications, not only for the lives of Palestinians living
under brutal occupation, but also for the maintenance
of peace and security in the world.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia affirms that the
Palestinian question is its foremost concern and that
it will spare no effort in providing support to our
Palestinian brethren in their conflict with Israel, the
occupying Power, through political and legal efforts
and economic support. The Kingdom affirms that the
Security Council cannot recuse or dissociate itself from
any responsibility, under any pretext. Rather, it must
make courageous resolutions that lead to restoring the
Palestinian people’s rights and must stand up against
Israeli practices of aggression that aim at eradicating
the Palestinian presence.

Despite all the recent setbacks, it is time for the
Security Council not to impede but rather serve as a
platform to put an end to the Israeli occupation of Arab
lands and realize the Palestinian State with Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as its capital. It is only through courage,
leadership and owning up to moral responsibility that a
just and peaceful resolution to this conflict is possible.
It is time for the Council to show these qualities in this
regard.
The OIC expresses its deep concern over the
continued escalation of violence, destruction, killing
and heinous crimes committed against the Syrian
people, resulting in the rapid deterioration of the
humanitarian situation. According to the United
Nations, Syria is now the worst humanitarian situation
in the world. We call upon all Member States to uphold
the pledges made and further respond to the funding
appeals by United Nations agencies. It is not only a
human tragedy, but a moral catastrophe when Syrian
children are dying because of extreme weather or are
brutally murdered under the world’s eyes.
The OIC reiterates that the only way to end the
Syrian crisis is through a peaceful negotiated solution.
Accordingly, we call upon the Security Council to
exert its power to move the political process forward.
We call upon the relevant Member States to support
the work of the Special Envoy, Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
in his mission. with the aim of helping to establish a
transitional Government with complete executive
powers, in accordance with the Geneva Declaration.

I would like to continue speaking in my national
capacity.
(spoke in Arabic)

A little while ago, we listened to the Permanent
Representative of Israel lecture us on history in a rather
amusing and entertaining manner. His account of
history, however, has absolutely nothing to do with the
truth. Israel’s representative has every right to conduct
a historical debate, but he will fail to divert attention
from the occupation of a military Power which has
lasted over 50 years and whose time to end has come.
If Israel and its supporters say that the solution
must be through negotiations, there have been all kinds
of negotiation in the past 20 years — direct talks,
indirect talks, international conferences, good offices,
understandings, goodwill initiatives — call it whatever
one wants, clearly we have made efforts with regard to
the Palestinian question. But the problem is always the
lack of political will on the part of Israel to take steps to
respond to the Arab Peace Initiative, courageously put
forth by Arab countries in 2002. We ask the question:
would Israel have been able to carry out one act of
aggression after another had the Council adopted a
firm position vis-à-vis holding Israel accountable for
its crimes against the Palestinian people and had it
stood up to its policies of aggression, the building of
settlements, the confiscation of territory and attempts
to Judaize occupied Jerusalem, obliterate its identify
and falsify its Islamic and Christian history, as well as
the serious violations of international law?

15-0135735/68

S/PV.7360

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

15/01/2015

Saudi Arabia will spare no effort until the
Palestinian people have their legitimate and inalienable
rights restored to them, establish their independent
State along the lines of 4 June 1967, with Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as its capital, and achieve a just solution to
the question of Palestinian refugees in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 194 (III), as well as the
total Israeli withdrawal from the Syrian Golan and the
occupied Lebanese territory.

by the representative of the Russian Federation that his
country’s initiative is based on such terms of reference.
Those initiatives must lead to the implementation of an
agreement for a transition Government with complete
terms of reference that makes it possible for the Syrian
people to achieve their ambitions in freedom and
dignity, in a manner that would preserve the country’s
territorial integrity and independence and the rights of
Syrians of all ideologies and sects.

The situation in sisterly Syria over the past four
years is the greatest humanitarian tragedy of this
century. The Syrian authorities are still continuing their
genocidal campaign, using all sorts of conventional and
unconventional weapons, including chemical weapons,
chlorine gas, arbitrary bombing and explosive barrels,
in addition to undertaking sieges and resorting to
humiliation and torture, thereby claiming the lives
of over 200,000 people and creating over 10 million
refugees.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran.

My delegation denounces the presence of foreign
armed groups in Syria. On many occasions, the Saudi
Government has emphasized the danger posed by
terrorist groups transcends borders and that we must
stand up to such groups and eliminate them completely.
That is the most significant way to guarantee the safety
and security of the whole world. Combating terrorism in
Syria means that we have to remove all foreign terrorist
fighters from that country, stop the brutal crimes and
crimes against humanity committed by the Syrian
regime over the past four years, hold all those involved
in shedding the blood of the Syrian people accountable
and ensure they do not enjoy impunity.
We value the major efforts made by United
Nations entities in delivering humanitarian assistance
to the Syrian people. Despite all those efforts, we
are extremely concerned about the deterioration of
the humanitarian situation in Syria. We demand that
sanctions be imposed against all those who impede
the delivery of the humanitarian assistance. We also
call upon donor countries to live up to their pledges,
in addition to responding to the appeal of the United
Nations for voluntary contributions to provide
emergency assistance for more than 12 million people
in Syria.
Saudi Arabia also values the latest diplomatic
efforts aimed at finding a negotiated political solution.
Such initiatives must be based on the terms of reference
of the Geneva process. We also welcome the statement

36/68

Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries (NAM).
I wish to convey to you, Mr. President, the
Movement’s appreciation for convening this open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, at this critical time for Palestine
and the Palestinian people and for the international
community at the start of a new year. I also thank
Assistant Secretary-General ad interim Jens ToybergFrandzen for hiss briefing today.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the new members of the Security
Council — Angola, Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain and
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela — and to wish
them success in their endeavours during their tenure as
members of the Council.
The Non-Aligned Movement takes this opportunity
to reaffirm its long-standing solidarity with the
Palestinian people, and reiterates its support for the
realization of their legitimate national aspirations and
inalienable rights, including to self-determination and
freedom in an independent State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, as well as a just solution for
the plight of the Palestine refugees in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 194 (III).
The question of Palestine has been on the United
Nations agenda for more than 67 years now. Yet, as
regrettably reaffirmed with the failure of the Security
Council to uphold its responsibilities during the vote
on 30 December 2014 (see S/PV.7354), the Palestinian
people have no glimmer of hope for realizing their
right to self-determination and freedom and finally
experiencing the justice and peace so long denied to
them.

15-01357

15/01/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Despite decades of participation in peace efforts
undertaken in good faith and a clear commitment by the
Palestinian people and their leadership to international
law, which was reaffirmed by the recent accession by the
State of Palestine to several international conventions
and treaties, the Palestinian plight and predicament has
worsened on all fronts. That is directly due to Israel’s
illegal policies and practices that have entrenched the
occupation and undermined all peace efforts, to the
point where the viability of the two-State solution has
been cast into grave doubt. As we witness escalating
breaches of international law, including humanitarian
and human rights law by Israel, the occupying Power,
we stress that it is high time to take a historic step
towards ending the occupation of the Palestinian land
and paving the way for a just and peaceful settlement
to the conflict. In doing so, the Council would fulfil its
duty under the Charter of the United Nations for the
maintenance of international peace and security and
genuinely contribute to a solution of the PalestinianIsraeli conflict, the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict,
which remains a source of grave concern for the region,
the international community and for prospects of global
peace and stability.
In 2014, despite its proclamation by the United
Nations as the International Year of Solidarity with
the Palestinian People, the situation deteriorated
dramatically, and the brutalization of the Palestinian
people reached new heights under the Israeli military
aggression waged against a besieged and blockaded
Gaza Strip in July and August. Israel has not been
held accountable for those crimes, despite the fact that
the occupying forces launched tens of thousands of
missiles, bombs, artillery shells and live ammunition
against a defenceless Palestinian civilian population
in an inhuman and criminal onslaught that killed more
than 2,200 Palestinians, the majority of them civilians,
including hundreds of children and women, injured
and maimed more than 11,000, displaced hundreds of
thousands and terrorized the entire population. It also
caused vast destruction of homes and vital civilian
infrastructure, hospitals and schools, including more
than 100 United Nations facilities and the majority of
schools run by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, as well
as mosques, churches and agricultural and industrial
properties, further decimating the Palestinian social
fabric and economy and traumatizing the population.
Another year has passed, and the suffering and
injustice borne by the Palestinian people continue.

S/PV.7360

Another year has taken us farther away from realizing
the just, lasting and comprehensive peace long sought
by Palestinians and other peace-loving countries on
a basis of international law and the relevant United
Nations resolutions.
NAM strongly condemns Israel’s continued and
escalating settlement construction throughout the
occupied Palestinian territory, including in and around
occupied East Jerusalem, in a grave breach of the Fourth
Geneva Convention and United Nations resolutions,
including those of the Security Council. Those and other
systemic violations, such as the demolition of homes,
the forced displacement of Palestinian civilians, the
arrest and detention of Palestinians, including children,
and incessant violence, terror and provocations by
Israeli settlers and extremists, including at sensitive
religious sites, particularly the Al-Aqsa Mosque, have
worsened conditions on the ground, increasing already
grave doubts about Israel’s claim of commitment to this
twisted solution and peace.
Despite serious international efforts and repeated
calls for a peaceful solution in accordance with
international law and the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the Israeli military occupation of Palestinian
and Arab lands continues, as do the denial and violation
of the inalienable rights and freedoms of Palestinians by
Israel, the occupying Power. The failure to resolve this
question continues to undermine the credibility of our
international system and the rule of law. The Security
Council cannot remain on the sidelines in the quest for
a just and peaceful solution to the question of Palestine,
especially when the situation continues to deteriorate
so dramatically and threatens to become completely
destabilized. NAM therefore urges the Council to act
forthwith, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, to end the plight of the Palestinian people and
take resolute action to end the Israeli occupation and
this decades-long injustice.
It was in that context that the Palestinian
Government and the Arab Group took an initiative
designed to mobilize the Security Council to act to
defuse this volatile situation, reaffirm the basis for a
just resolution of the conflict and redress of a historic
injustice, and establish a political horizon capable of
restoring hope to the Palestinian people that the 47-year
Israeli military oppression and occupation of their land
could soon come to an end, by delineating a time frame
for ending the occupation and affirming that justice,
freedom and peace are within reach.

15-0135737/68

S/PV.7360

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

However, the Security Council has again failed
to uphold its responsibility to address the crisis and
contribute meaningfully to a peaceful solution in
the Middle East, even leaving its own resolutions
unimplemented. The results of the recent vote on a
draft resolution (S/2014/916) showed that the Security
Council as a whole is not ready or willing to accept
its responsibilities, contrary to the overwhelming
international consensus on the issue, as reflected in the
vote of 180 Member States in the General Assembly
supporting the right of the Palestinian people to
self-determination and freedom and the many other
declarations from around the globe — governmental,
inter-governmental and non-governmental — calling
for an end to the prolonged conflict.
NAM believes the message is clear worldwide. It
is high time to end the abhorrent Israeli occupation
and impunity that have brought so much suffering,
caused so many crises and sown so much instability
and anger throughout the Middle East, and that
continues to undermine regional and global peace
and security. Besides its manifestation in the annual
resolutions of the General Assembly, that message
was strongly reaffirmed at the recent Conference of
the High Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva
Convention convened by Switzerland, the Convention’s
depositary. It also continues to be reaffirmed in the
motions by numerous European Parliaments calling
for the recognition of the State of Palestine and by
the fact that 135 countries already recognize the State
of Palestine. It is therefore most regrettable that the
Security Council remains paralysed and unable to act
to uphold its own responsibilities in this regard, with
all the implications that has for peace and security in
the Middle East and beyond. Nevertheless, NAM once
again calls on the Council, and will continue to do so, to
act in accordance with its duties under the Charter, and
stresses the important role the NAM caucus members
on the Council can play in that regard.
Lebanon continues to suffer from the persistent
Israeli violations of its borders and incursions into its
territory that were followed by years of occupation
and aggression. Unfortunately, Israel still continues to
violate Lebanese air space, intensifying its incursions
over Lebanon. Such activities are a blatant violation
of Lebanese sovereignty and the relevant international
resolutions, in particular resolution 1701 (2006),
whose provisions should be implemented in a manner
that guarantees consolidation of the foundations of
stability and security in Lebanon and prevents Israel
38/68

15/01/2015

from undertaking its daily violations of Lebanese
sovereignty.
With regard to the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Movement condemns all the measures taken by Israel,
the occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status of the area, and which were
intensified after the outbreak of the Syrian crisis. The
Non-Aligned Movement demands once again that Israel
abide by resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw fully from
the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of 4 June
1967, in compliance with resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973).
I would now like to make some brief remarks in my
national capacity, in response to the allegations made
by the representative of the Israeli regime about my
country.
It is ridiculous that a regime that is famous for
its atrocities and apartheid policies, well documented
by the United Nations, its repeated violations of
internationally recognized borders, war crimes,
crimes against humanity, its attacks and threats of use
of force against its neighbours and beyond; a regime
with an atrocious record of developing, producing
and stockpiling various kinds of inhumane weapons,
including weapons of mass destruction; a regime
that has mass-murdered thousands of Palestinians,
including women and children, in Gaza, as recently
as last summer, should preach peace, democracy, the
rule of law and freedom to the Security Council and
the international community, in order to cover up its
heinous record of State terrorism, aggression and
occupation.
We should not allow this regime to make a mockery
of international institutions any longer. The Islamic
Republic of Iran, by reaffirming the inherent right of
Lebanese and Palestinian resistance forces to oppose
occupation, repel aggression and reclaim their occupied
lands, wishes to see peace and justice prevail in the
Middle East, which requires respect for international
norms and regulations by all, without discrimination.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council. I would like to
say how much I appreciate the constructive positions of
Chile with regard to the situation in the Middle East.

15-01357

15/01/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Today we are discussing once again the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
The region as well as the world recently experienced a
number of very serious incidents, namely, the rise of
international terrorism, which afflicts Egypt as it does
many other countries. We condemn such terrorism in the
strongest terms and are determined to fight it together
with other countries. In that connection, I would like
to note that the continued occupation of the Palestinian
territories provides fertile ground for terrorists and
allows them to thrive. That increases the complexity
of the situation and has an adverse impact on the peace
process, which we would like to see resumed so that the
occupation may be brought to an end and a Palestinian
State may be realized, coexisting in peace with Israel.
We believe that this would contribute to comprehensive
development in the region as well as prosperity for all
of its people. It would also protect us from a range of
dangerous, including terrorism, which has just reared
its ugly head in the form of unjustifiable atrocities in
France.
The Security Council has been the venue for drawnout talks over recent weeks regarding the Palestinian
question. It seems clear that there is consensus
concerning the conditions for a definitive and fair
solution to the Palestinian question. There is consensus
on the need to put an end to the Israeli occupation.
There is also consensus regarding the need to establish
a sovereign Palestinian State extending throughout its
territory within the borders of June 1967. Furthermore,
there is consensus on the status of East Jerusalem
as the capital of such a Palestinian State. There was
further consensus on the need to reach a fair solution
for refugees.
Those points of consensus were reflected in
the Arab draft resolution (S/2014/916) presented
to the Security Council in December with a view to
establishing a timeline for the peace process. Those
points of consensus were also reflected in the French
proposal. However, unfortunately, the draft resolution
did not gain enough support within the Council, in spite
of the international consensus. We wonder, therefore,
why a solution seems so far off despite the existence
of such consensus. The answer to that question is
undoubtedly key to the resolution of the Palestinian
question, and it goes as follows.
First of all, there has to be a real willingness among
the major international actors to achieve a definitive
solution. Some of those countries, at the same time

S/PV.7360

as they ask the parties to the conflict to take difficult
decisions, do not exert pressure on those parties to
change position or try to dissuade them from certain
practices that are harmful and threaten the peace
process, such as the building of settlements. The
witholding of tax revenues by Israel undermines the
Palestinian Authority and prevents it from going about
its business.
Such genuine will must also be exhibited by the
parties to the conflict, instead of electoral calculations,
domestic considerations or internal infighting. The
parties must rise above such considerations and must
not sacrifice the interests of their own people who aspire
for peace. There is no doubt that the Israeli people want
peace just as much as the Palestinian and other Arab
peoples do. It is clear that the Arab Peace Initiative,
proposed into 2002, is undoubtedly the most eloquent
message of peace from the Arab peoples to the Israeli
people. The peace process must therefore not become
a mirage. The initiative must be met with a response.
The international community must also support
the Palestinian Authority to establish its authority in
Gaza in order to rebuild and restore hope to thousands
of Palestinians who are suffering under the weight of
destruction and war. That population must be allowed
to live like other populations around the world. That
is not only a moral duty, but it is crucial for protecting
the Palestinian people from extremism and despair. In
that context, we call on all countries to honour their
commitments to rebuild Gaza undertaken at the Cairo
Conference of last October.
Unfortunately, some members of the international
community approach this conflict without genuinely
trying to address its root causes. That is an unacceptable
approach. We all know that the current situation is so
volatile that it cannot continue. A definitive solution
to the conflict is more crucial than ever. The Security
Council must therefore assume its responsibilities.
What I have just set out is the only way to achieve a
just and comprehensive solution to the situation in
Palestine. If we do not take that into account, stability
will continue to elude the Middle East and the dangers
facing all parties will continue to grow.
I should now like to turn to the situation in the
Syrian Arab Republic, where the people are struggling
in the throes of a crisis that has now lasted for five
years with no hopes for a solution on the horizon. The
conditions for any solution include the preservation of
the territorial integrity of Syria and the need to respond

15-0135739/68

S/PV.7360

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to the legitimate demands of the Syrian people for change
and reform. Terrorism in Syria must be eradicated so
that it does not spread to the neighbouring countries,
which are under unbearable pressure, hosting hundreds
of thousands of Syrian refugees. In that context, we
fully support the efforts of Special Envoy Staffan de
Mistura and hope that his efforts will lead to a political
process bringing together all the parties the conflict.
We also welcome the immense contribution made
by the United Nations and several countries to meet
the humanitarian needs on the Syrian people. We also
appreciate the efforts of the Russian Federation to
establish dialogue between the Syrian Government and
opposition through the conference to be held soon in
Moscow.
We will spare no effort no diplomatic effort to
achieve a political solution. In doing so, we will draw on
our good relationships with all of the parties concerned.
We hope that this will lead to a solution that brings an
end to this bloody conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): Over the past
several months, we have seen both positive and
negative developments with regard to Palestine. The
Palestinian Authority has ratified more than a dozen
major international treaties and conventions, including
the Geneva Conventions, the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and the United Nations
Convention the Law of the Sea. What is more, the
United Nations has accepted Palestinian ratification
of those treaties. Palestine is poised to become a
member of the International Criminal Court in April.
Sweden recognized Palestine. And the British, Irish,
Spanish and French Parliaments voted for Palestinian
statehood. That has created a compelling case for
Palestine’s integration as a fully independent State into
the international community.
Those developments are writing on the wall. Yet,
surprisingly, the Security Council failed to adopt a
draft resolution (S/2014/916) that merely asked for the
endorsement of universally parameters: the recognition
of Palestinian statehood, Israeli withdrawal to the 1967
borders, a Palestinian capital in Jerusalem, a three-year
deadline to end the occupation of the West Bank and
the lifting of the siege of Gaza. The draft resolution,
regrettably, foundered on dictates of realpolitik.

40/68

15/01/2015

Otherwise, there was strong justification for its
adoption.
The absence of engagement between the Palestinian
Authority and Israel, the constant state of fear and
animosity between the Palestinians and the Israelis and
the ongoing violations of the Palestinians’ rights do not
constitute a state of limbo, but rather a very precarious
and perilous situation. Violence and conflict can erupt
at any moment. The Secretary-General, speaking
at an informal meeting of the General Assembly on
8 January said, “We must not resign ourselves to any
further worsening of the conflict between Israelis and
Palestinians”.
Diplomatic efforts have become tenuous and do
not seem to promise either re-engagement between
the parties nor a solution to the conflict. The efforts
being made by United States Secretary of State John
Kerry, the one track that offered some hope, seems to
have lost momentum. Diplomacy must be re-energized
and intensified. Some members of the Council said
in December last year that they might reconsider the
issue of Palestine in 2015. The Palestinian Authority is
considering bringing the parameters draft resolution to
the Council once more. We would encourage Council
members to work on such a draft resolution, which could
pave the way to a clearly marked pathway to peace. It
would put the Council back at the helm of maintaining
peace and security in the Middle East.
Our fresh push towards peace is urgently needed.
Some steps that would help are these: Israel should
immediately release the withheld tax revenues;
the blockade of Gaza should be lifted; pledges for
the reconstruction of Gaza should be honoured by
contributors and donors; and international efforts to
resume the peace process based on internationally
agreed parameters should be re-initiated.
No matter what we say, Palestine and Israel have
a symbiotic relationship. They will have to coexist
for generations to come within the same geographical
neighbourhood. Therefore, the only path to a viable and
sustainable peace is the establishment of the State of
Palestine based on the pre-1967 borders, with Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as its capital, and the evacuation of all Arab
lands by Israel, including the Syrian Golan.
In the four years of the conflict, the past year was the
deadliest in Syria. This progressive deterioration must
be halted. We fully support the Secretary-General’s
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura’s efforts to arrange

15-01357

15/01/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

localized ceasefires and initiate a political process.
Last year saw the destruction of the Syrian chemical
weapons programme, which demonstrated what could
be accomplished when the Council was united. Our
experience of the past four years shows that there are
no shortcuts to peace in Syria, that military means
and killing sprees will not produce a solution and that
intense and results-oriented diplomatic engagement
was the only option we have for pursuing and delivering
peace.
In the past year, the civil war in Syria and a fragile
peace in Iraq have produced an even bigger monster: the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). The world
was caught unaware. Now the poisonous philosophy of
that hydra-headed monster is spreading to other parts of
the world. Pakistan unequivocally condemns terrorism
perpetrated by ISIL against States and individuals and
rejects the notion of the so-called caliphate by ISIL.
Pakistan is fully implementing resolutions 2170 (2014)
and 2178 (2014) in letter and spirit. We must work
together to stop the tide to save our global civilization.
Finally, I would like to say that I participated as
a Council member in the debate on the Middle East
(see S/PV.6894) in late 2012. The atmosphere was
gloomy and one of bewilderment, self-flagellation and
helplessness. Two years down the road, as I prepare
to leave my post, nothing has changed. Palestine was
an issue 100 years ago. It is still a vexing issue that
keeps the entire international community hostage. This
historic impasse must be broken through enlightened
and resolute diplomacy.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate on a
very important topic. As this is my first statement at
the Security Council this year, I would like to offer
congratulations to the newly elected members of the
Security Council — Angola, Malaysia, New Zealand,
Spain and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
My country expresses its serious concern about
the ongoing violations in the Palestinian occupied
territories and in the whole region of the Middle East.
Developments there, such as continuing settlement and
construction processes in the occupied territories, do
not make it possible to speak about any improvement
in the situation of regional and international peace and
security.

S/PV.7360

My country reiterates its recognition of the
legitimate right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination, the creation of an independent State of
Palestine within the 1967 borders, peacefully coexisting
with Israel, and obtaining full-fledged membership in
the United Nations. The two-State solution is the only
viable option for a durable peace reached through direct
and meaningful negotiations.
We therefore call on Israeli and Palestinian leaders
to show wisdom, responsibility and political will
to reach a historic peace agreement that meets the
legitimate aspirations of their peoples. The ultimate goal
of all efforts should be the restoration and promotion of
peace processes in accordance with Security Council
resolutions and other relevant mechanisms. All parties
must fulfil their commitments responsibly as stipulated
by the road map. We commend the internal Palestinian
reconciliation process and the consolidation of the
efforts of the Government of Palestine to alleviate
the situation. Kazakhstan expresses its hope that
international actions led by the United Nations will
contribute to the resumption of further peace talks.
Kazakhstan is very alarmed about the overall
situation in the Middle East. Well-coordinated
international efforts need to be brought to bear to stop
the senseless bloodshed and find an inclusive political
solution. My country strongly condemns atrocities
against civilian populations and foreign citizens and
attacks by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), which pose a major threat to the region and its
population, including children from our part of the
world. We stress that terrorism can be defeated only
by a sustained and comprehensive approach, with the
active cooperation of all States and international and
regional organizations.
We strongly believe that all peaceful means are
appropriate for preventing tension and resolving
conflict. In addition to politicians and diplomats,
religious and spiritual leaders should be involved in
such processes to soften the hearts of enemies.
Kazakhstan has worked hard to build a culture of
tolerance and respect through, inter alia, the regular
convening of the Congress of Leaders of World and
Traditional Religions, where leaders of various beliefs
together seek ways to promote peace based on spiritual
values. As an example, the participants in the fourth
Congress in 2012, in Astana, included the two Chief
Rabbis of Israel — Sephardic and Ashkenazi — the

15-0135741/68

S/PV.7360

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Secretary General of the Muslim World League, Islamic
leaders from the Middle East States, prominent
theologians including from Al-Azhar University,
in Egypt, Orthodox Christian Patriarchs, Holy See
Cardinals and Buddhist, Hindu and Taoist leaders from
different parts of the world.
The fifth Congress will take place in Astana in June.
Its theme will be dialogue among religious leaders and
politicians in the name of peace and development. We
believe that the Congress could serve as a showcase of
ways to contribute to dispute resolution efforts through
mutual respect and understanding.
In conclusion we again urgently call on all parties,
especially those with real political power and influence,
to commit their political will to ensuring lasting peace
and security in the Middle East and freedom and justice
for all people through a genuine multilateral approach.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Ms. Bolaños Pérez (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): First of all, let me commend the leadership
and the work carried out by Chile during its presidency
of the Security Council this month. I would also like
to thank Assistant Secretary-General ad interim for
Political Affairs Jens Anders Toyberg-Frandzen for his
informative briefing.
Guatemala remains steadfast in holding that
diplomacy and dialogue are the best way to achieve a
long-term solution in each of the conflicts affecting
the Middle East. We continue to believe that a political
solution to the differences that have divided the region
for years, is the only solution that can provide stability
and lasting security. That could not be truer than
in the case of Palestine. Since the suspension of the
latest peace talks in April 2014, we have witnessed the
rapid deterioration of the situation between Israel and
Palestine. Moreover, the essential two-State solution
seems increasingly elusive. In that respect, we agree
with the many voices saying that a political future is
necessary to fulfil the legitimate needs of both peoples
and lead to a final and fair agreement. However,
achieving that goal will require the necessary measures.
That is why the international community must play
an active role in supporting and promoting the peace
process. We value the principle of shared responsibility
and therefore believe that the active participation
of both the Quartet and the Security Council in the
peace process can serve to generate new momentum
42/68

15/01/2015

and thereby enable the parties to take further steps
with greater responsibility towards a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace. The parties must make genuine
and renewed efforts including, inter alia, the total
lifting of the blockade, an end to the construction of
illegal settlements, refraining from provocative acts,
a cessation of rocket-fire, and ensuring the legitimate
security concerns of Israel and the existence of two
States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace
and security.
Finally, as is well known, Guatemala strongly
values and supports all international instruments
established to protect human rights and fundamental
freedoms, especially the Rome Statute. That is why
we support the universalization of those instruments
and reject any attempt to prevent other States from
accessing them. In that regard, we do not see Palestine’s
accession to the Rome Statute as an obstacle to peace
or to direct negotiations seeking a final agreement on
all underlying issues. The promotion of an environment
conducive to peace, accountability and respect for
human rights cannot but help to relaunch the peace
process between the parties.
We recognize the enormous challenges facing the
parties in their search for a political solution, both
nationally and internationally, but that is the only road
available. It is our political and historical responsibility,
as States members of the international community, to
support all measures that can help in achieving the goal.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iceland.
Mr. Sveinsson (Iceland): First of all allow, me to
thank Chile for convening this open debate. We are
seeing a period of exceptional instability in the Middle
East. The vicious conflict in Syria has become the
epicentre, and the intractability of certain conflicts in
the region makes it all the more important to look for
places where progress can be made.
The long-standing conflict between the Palestinian
people and Israel should be possible to solve. Indeed,
a solution has been on the table for many years — the
two-State solution. There are viable parties on both
sides who can make the deal, but both sides need to
commit in word and deed to the two-State solution and
they must refrain from actions which undermine the
viability of the only solution which will bring peace. The
expansion of Israeli settlements and the expropriation
of land in Palestine continue. This is a clear breach of

15-01357

15/01/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7360

international law. We join others in calling on Israel to
stop all settlement activity. In particular, we urge Israel
to reverse the decision on the forced resettlement of
Bedouins in the West Bank.

his briefing earlier today. And we warmly welcome the
new members that joined the Council this year: Angola,
Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela.

The humanitarian situation in Gaza remains dire,
with recent news of people dying from exposure.
The situation must be urgently improved through
constructive cooperation between the Israeli authorities
and the Palestinian authorities. The blockade must
be lifted immediately and Gaza needs to be allowed
to function as a normal economy. At the same time,
security concerns on both sides must be addressed. It
is important that the Palestinian authorities take on real
governmental responsibility for Gaza. Militant action
from Gaza is unacceptable and will lead to further
suffering and away from a negotiated solution.

This quarterly debate is important in that it gives us
an opportunity to take stock of the developments in the
Middle East peace process. We would like to reiterate
our support for an amicable resolution of this longstanding issue. We are concerned that the debates here
in the Security Council have not achieved the objective
of such a peaceful solution. The effectiveness of the
Council has therefore been brought into question.

Iceland recognized the State of Palestine in 2011.
We welcome the recent recognition by our fellow Nordic
State, Sweden. That signal, added to that of many other
States Members of the United Nations, encompasses
the vision of a State based on the 1967 borders. Iceland
is pleased to see that the State of Palestine has ratified
several international agreements. In particular, the
decision of the State of Palestine to accede to the Rome
Statute should be applauded. As a long-time supporter
of the International Criminal Court, Iceland encourages
all United Nations Member States to put themselves
under the jurisdiction of the Court, whose purpose is to
help end impunity for crimes deemed especially serious
by the international community. Iceland also welcomes
the State of Palestine to the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea, which continues to be of utmost
importance to Iceland and will undoubtedly come to
benefit Palestine as a coastal State.
The time to negotiate all final status issues is long
overdue. The failure of the Security Council to provide a
timeline that might assist in bringing about a solution is
disappointing. There is consensus on the urgency. This
is a conflict that can be resolved, but if that is to happen
the Security Council needs to be more proactive.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Mukerji (India): We congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council and for personally presiding over this quarterly
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. I would also like to thank the
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs for

We are particularly worried that there was a
downward trend last year in the peace process. Efforts
for serious negotiations between the parties were
inconclusive. In addition, we were faced with the
unfortunate situation of a resumption and escalation in
the tragic conflict in Gaza, which resulted in a large
number of civilian casualties and heavy damage to
property.
India’s deep association with, and continuing
commitment to, Palestine is rooted in our modern
history, which goes back to our struggle for
independence. India’s position on the issue of Palestine
is very clear. As Prime Minister Narendra Modi wrote
in his message on the occasion of the International
Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People, on
21 November 2014, India reaffirms its support for the
cause of Palestine and solidarity with the Palestinian
people in their struggle for a sovereign, independent,
viable and united State of Palestine, within secure and
recognized borders, side-by-side and at peace with
Israel and with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Apart from political support to the Palestinian
cause, India continues to support the development and
nation-building efforts of Palestine by consistently
extending technical and financial assistance to
Palestine. We contribute $1 million annually to
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East. India recently
pledged $4 million in response to the national early
recovery and reconstruction plan for Gaza. We are also
implementing development projects in Palestine jointly
with Brazil and South Africa, within the framework
of the India, Brazil and South Africa group, and have
pledged $1 million for a new project to reconstruct the
Atta Habib Medical Centre in Gaza.

15-0135743/68

S/PV.7360

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Addressing the ministerial-level meeting of the
Non-Aligned Movement’s Committee on Palestine
in September 2014, our Minister of External Affairs
reiterated that India welcomed the ceasefire between
Palestine and Israel and called upon all sides to exercise
maximum restraint, avoid taking any actions that may
lead to a violation of the present ceasefire and work
towards a comprehensive resolution of the Palestinian
issue. We remain firmly convinced that dialogue
remains the only viable option that can effectively
address the issue.
We are deeply concerned about rising tensions
in East Jerusalem. The imperative need is for urgent
de-escalation, restraint, an avoidance of provocation
and a return to the peace process. Diplomacy and
statesmanship must prevail over hatred and violence.
There is no other road to a lasting peace.
We are deeply concerned with the activities of
radicalized and extremist groups in the northern parts
of Iraq and Syria, as their dangerous exacerbation of
sectarian and extremist tensions has a critical impact
on the peace and stability of the region. We note
that a proscribed terrorist group has twice targeted
United Nations peacekeepers in the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force. Efforts must be taken
by all parties and stakeholders in the region to curb that
trend. Member States must comply with resolutions
that proscribe terrorist groups operating in that region.
The early and effective prosecution of such groups is
essential.
Only such action endorsed by the Council will deter
such groups in other parts of the world from committing
acts of terror. We believe that the consolidation of
political processes and solutions while building durable
State institutions will be the most effective way of
addressing such extremism and radicalism in the region.
We have consistently supported a Syrian-led,
comprehensive political solution to the ongoing crisis
in Syria, in alignment with the Geneva communiqué
of 2012 (S/2012/522, annex). We would like to add our
voice of support for the efforts of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, and
continue to urge all parties to demonstrate the requisite
political will, exercise restraint and commit to seeking
common ground in accommodating their differences.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Ioannis Vrailas, Deputy

44/68

15/01/2015

Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations.
Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on behalf of
the European Union (EU). The candidate countries the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania, and the EFTA country Liechtenstein
align themselves with this statement.
I would like to congratulate Chile on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council.
I will read out a shortened version of our statement.
The full version is being circulated in the Chamber and
will be posted on our website.
The European Union is deeply concerned about the
tense situation on the ground, which threatens to take
the parties further away from a negotiated solution. The
decision of the Israeli Government to halt the transfer
of tax revenues to the Palestinian Authority runs
counter to Israel’s obligations under the Paris Protocol.
An effective Palestinian Authority that is committed to
non-violence and a peaceful resolution of the conflict is
a key element for a two-State solution.
In that regard, the European Union is providing
considerable support, including financial assistance, to
Palestinian State-building efforts. Those achievements
should not be put at risk by not meeting obligations
regarding the timely and transparent transfer of tax and
custom revenues.
It is a well-known and long-standing fact that the
European Union supports the United Nations system and
the widest application of its multilateral conventions.
An effective system of international criminal justice is
based on the broadest possible participation in the Rome
Statute, and the European Union remains committed to
promoting its universality. On 2 January 2015, Palestine
deposited instruments of accession to the Rome Statute,
which was welcomed by the President of the Assembly
of States Parties to the Rome Statute on 7 January.
The European Union calls again on the Palestinian
leadership to use its international status constructively
and not to weaken efforts by partners to bring the
parties back to the negotiating table.
The European Union deeply deplores and strongly
opposes the announced expropriation of land near
Bethlehem, the implementation and announcements
of plans for new settlement construction, notably in
East Jerusalem, the plans to displace Bedouins in the

15-01357

15/01/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7360

West Bank and the continued demolitions, including
of projects funded by the EU and its member States.
We urge Israel to reverse those decisions, which run
counter to international law and directly threaten the
two-State solution. Recent settlement activity in East
Jerusalem seriously jeopardizes the possibility of
Jerusalem serving as the future capital of both States.

rapid reactivation and possible extension in scope and
mandate of the EU Border Assistance Mission in Rafah
and the EU Coordinating Office for Palestinian Police
Support missions. The European Union urges all the
relevant parties to create the conditions to allow it to
play such a role. We also urge all Palestinian factions to
end internal divisions.

The European Union renews its call for both parties
to resume negotiations towards a peace settlement and
to refrain from any actions undermining the viability
of a two-State solution or the prospects of a resumption
of negotiations. Actions that call into question stated
commitments to a negotiated solution must be avoided.

The unsustainable situation in Gaza, the recent
violence in Jerusalem and the deteriorating regional
context underline the need for a comprehensive
peace, ending all claims and fulfilling the legitimate
aspirations of both parties, including those of Israelis
for security and those of Palestinians for statehood.
The European Union calls on the parties and on all
major stakeholders — including the Quartet, the
League of Arab States and the Security Council — to
take the necessary steps to that end. In this regard,
the EU reaffirms its strategic interest in seeing an end
to the conflict and is willing to play a major role and
actively contribute to the immediate resumption of
negotiations aimed at achieving a negotiated solution
of all final-status issues without further delay. It recalls
its parameters agreed in the July 2014 EU Council
conclusions.

The European Union also urges both sides to renew
their commitment to the two-State solution and to
build the trust needed for meaningful direct talks. We
are committed to promoting and supporting efforts to
achieve a lasting peace based on the two-State vision,
together with international partners, including in the
region.
The European Union underlines its concern at the
dire humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip, which
still remains to be adequately addressed. It welcomes
the international community’s pledges towards the
reconstruction of Gaza and calls upon countries to
swiftly honour them. The European Union urges the
parties to fully implement the temporary monitoring
mechanism as an important step towards the necessary
urgent opening of all crossing points. Obstacles to the
effective functioning of the temporary mechanism
must be removed quickly. The alleviation of the grave
humanitarian situation of the people in Gaza must be
given absolute priority.
The European Union notes with grave concern
the inflammatory statements made by Hamas and its
attempts to rearm. The disarmament of all militant
groups in Gaza and the assumption of full Government
functions by the Palestinian Authority are critical
for a lasting improvement of the situation in Gaza.
We reiterate our call for a fundamental change of the
political, security and economic situation in the Strip,
including the end of the closure.
The parties should urgently make progress towards
a durable ceasefire, based on their August agreement
in Cairo, to reach an agreement that ends the closure
and addresses Israel’s legitimate security concerns. We
stand ready to play a key role in international efforts
to support a durable ceasefire, including through the

The European Union remains gravely concerned
regarding the continued deterioration of the
humanitarian and security situation in Syria. The EU
is committed to fully supporting the Special Envoy De
Mistura’s efforts to achieve a strategic de-escalation of
violence as a basis for a broader sustainable political
process. We stand ready to support concretely the
development of his proposals.
A reduction of violence will not be achieved
without effective monitoring, preferably anchored in the
Security Council. Cases of forced surrender imposed
by the Al-Assad regime through starvation sieges
have been labelled fallaciously as local ceasefires in
the past. We are seriously concerned at the intensified
military action by the Al-Assad regime against areas
held by the opposition, which threatens Special Envoy
De Mistura’s initiative. We will seek ways to provide
practical support for his efforts, notably by contributing
to the revival of local governance and administration,
to the restoration of basic services, and to the return to
normalcy in areas of reduced violence, in particular in
Aleppo, as conditions allow.
The overall objective remains an inclusive and
Syrian-led political process leading to a transition
that meets the legitimate aspirations of all the Syrian

15-0135745/68

S/PV.7360

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

people, based on the Geneva communiqué of 30 June
2012 (S/2012/522, annex)and in line with relevant
Security Council resolutions. We call on all Syrian
parties to show clear and concrete commitment to this
process, and to ensure the involvement of civil society
and women. We are ready to engage with all regional
and international actors with influence over the
Syrian parties, and call on them to use their influence
constructively towards this end.
The European Union recalls that the moderate
opposition, including the National Coalition of Syrian
Revolutionary and Opposition Forces, is a vital element
of both a future political settlement and in fighting the
extremist groups on the ground in Syria. We encourage
internal and external opposition groups alike to unite
behind a common strategy in order to present an
alternative to the Syrian people. We will seek ways
to enhance our political and practical support to the
moderate opposition.
We condemn the continued widespread and
systematic violations and abuses of human rights and
international humanitarian law perpetrated in Syria,
in particular by the Al-Assad regime and terrorist
groups, as reported by the Commission of Inquiry. The
EU recalls in this regard that some of the violations
and abuses committed in Syria may amount to war
crimes and crimes against humanity. We will spare
no effort to ensure that all perpetrators of such acts
are held accountable, and we reiterate our call on the
Security Council to refer the situation in Syria to the
International Criminal Court.
The EU urges the Al-Assad regime to fully implement
resolution 2118 (2013) and the Chemical Weapons
Convention, and to take the measures necessary to
eliminate its chemical weapons programme completely
and irreversibly. We condemn the use of chlorine gas as
a chemical weapon by the Al-Assad regime, which is a
clear breach of the Chemical Weapons Convention and
of resolution 2118 (2013).
The EU urges all parties to fully and immediately
comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law. We condemn the continuing and
new impediments to the delivery of aid, for which the
Al-Assad regime bears the primary responsibility. We
urge all parties, in particular the Syrian authorities,
to fully and immediately implement all the provisions
of resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191
(2014) and presidential statement S/PRST/2013/15 of

46/68

15/01/2015

2 October 2013. We also encourage the United Nations
humanitarian agencies and their implementing partners
to use border crossings as effectively as possible and
to scale-up, to the extent possible, the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to all people in need in Syria,
in particular in hard-to-reach and besieged areas.
The European Union and its member States
continue to play a leading role in the provision of
humanitarian aid in response to the crisis, having
mobilized so far €3 billion. We will sustain our efforts
to provide humanitarian aid to the people affected
by the crisis and to build their resilience. We were
seriously concerned about the severe lack of funding
for the United Nations appeals for 2014, and call on
the international community to step up its funding and
assistance in view of the winter and in response to the
forthcoming 2015 appeals.
The European Union commends the considerable
efforts of Lebanon and Jordan, as well as Turkey, in
sheltering refugees from Syria. We will spare no
effort to continue to help them. The European Union
remains fully aware of the immense security challenges
that the crisis in Syria poses to Lebanon and Jordan
in particular. We reiterate our commitment to seeking
ways to further enhance this support to both countries
to meet those challenges.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Patriota (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I congratulate the brotherly Republic of Chile
on having organized this meeting, chaired by Minister
for Foreign Affairs Heraldo Muñoz.
(spoke in English)
I thank Assistant Secretary-General ad interim Jens
Toyberg-Frandzen for his briefing. Brazil also wishes
to acknowledge the interventions of the Permanent
Representative of Israel and the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.
Brazil regrets that 2014, the year proclaimed by
the General Assembly as the International Year of
Solidarity with the Palestinian People, was marked by
the impossibility of realizing the self-determination
of the Palestinian people and by further suffering
and distrust among Israelis and Palestinians. We
witnessed the repetition of acts that reinforced a long
and deplorable cycle of violence. Peace talks collapsed
after months of dialogue with few commitments.

15-01357

15/01/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Israeli settlements and other illegal unilateral activities
continued in occupied Palestine. Rockets were
launched from the Gaza Strip against Israel. Another
round of disproportional use of military force ensued,
resulting in a deeply shocking number of Palestinian
civilian fatalities in Gaza. Tensions in Jerusalem and
the West Bank escalated sharply and violence erupted.
In particular, Brazil was concerned with the religious
provocations in the old city of Jerusalem, with attempts
to violate the status quo of the area around the Dome
of the Rock.
While it has been unanimously claimed that the
status quo is unsustainable — and it is indeed — we
have failed so far to deal with the fundamental aspects
of the Palestinian question. Brazil reiterates its appeal
for a change in the way we approach the conflict,
especially in the Council. The Security Council not
only fell short of engaging in promoting a durable
peaceful solution to the crisis, but it also failed to act
when a draft resolution (S/2014/916) with that goal,
broadly based on previous resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Council, was brought to a vote. It was
another missed opportunity for the Council to discharge
its responsibilities, weakening the Organization and
continuously shrinking its relevance to the Palestinian
question.
Surely, no resolution will, on its own, resolve
this lasting issue. Good faith, political will and direct
negotiations are essential elements in moving a credible
process forward, but an active and constructive role
played by the Council is also instrumental in order to
achieve peace and stability. We were heartened by the
statement made by the representative of New Zealand
that subscribed to the same view, and we encourage the
Council to consider the suggestions that were made in
that regard by Ambassador McLay.
Brazil welcomes the decision of the State of
Palestine to join a new batch of international treaties
and to accede to the Rome Statute. As a strong supporter
of the International Criminal Court’s universality as a
means of promoting peace and justice, we commend the
Palestinian initiative and encourage States that have not
yet done so to become parties to the Statute. The resort
to multilateral mechanisms, especially those that can
provide a measure of justice, redress indignities and
overcome double standards, should not be met with
reprisals and sanctions. We urge Israel to immediately
release all financial resources due to Palestine.

S/PV.7360

The unrelenting spiral of violence and destruction
in Syria continues after almost four years of conflict.
The violations of human rights committed by all
sides, as consistently denounced by the Human Rights
Council’s Independent Commission of Inquiry, deserve
our strongest condemnation. Brazil firmly believes that
the State has a duty to protect its citizens and in no
circumstances should violate their rights, mainly using
violent measures.
In recent months, the humanitarian situation
further deteriorated and now more than half of Syria’s
population is either internally displaced or seeking
refuge abroad. In that sense, we welcome the extension
of the measures determined by resolution 2165 (2014)
and all the ongoing international efforts to cope with
the increasingly dire humanitarian situation.
The insistence in the benefits of militarization and
the use of force to purportedly resolve the Syrian crisis
have resulted, among other regrettable consequences, in
the displacement of millions of people who were forced
to leave their homes in order to escape brutality from
all sides, especially the heinous attacks and executions
perpetrated by the so-called Islamic State of Iraq and
Syria (ISIS). We reiterate our strongest condemnation
of such atrocities.
Brazil supports the work and innovative efforts
brought by Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura, with a
view to reduce violence, alleviate the people’s suffering
and build trust for the resumption of negotiations. We
reiterate the urgent need to resume the political process
and to immediately cease the flow of weapons to all
parties in the conflict as a crucial preliminary step in
that direction. We associate ourselves with Minister
Heraldo Muñoz’s expression of support for the efforts
of the Government of the Russian Federation to convene
a peace dialogue, to which various opposition groups
have been invited.
Once again, we commend the outstanding generosity
of many countries in the region, including Lebanon,
Jordan, Turkey and Egypt, to receive thousands, and
even millions, of Syrian refugees. Brazil praises the
hard work done in that regard by Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator Valerie Amos and by the High
Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. Antonio Guterres.
While encouraging the international community to
support that honorable effort, Brazil has received more

15-0135747/68

S/PV.7360

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

than 1,500 refugees from the Syrian conflict and has
donated over 4,000 tons of grain to feed people in Syria.
Brazil is concerned about the security and stability
in Lebanon. Recent episodes of violence, such as the
twin suicide bombing at a crowded cafe in Tripoli
last Saturday, reinforce the need to fully support the
Lebanese policy of disassociation from regional crises
agreed in the Baabda Declaration of June 2012.
Brazil will always support Lebanon in its fight
against terrorism and in its pursuit of stability and
development. Our participation in the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon, whose Maritime Task Force
has been led by a Brazilian official since 2011, therefore
plays a prominent role in translating our commitment
into practical action.
Brazil remains concerned about the security and
humanitarian situation in Iraq. Unfortunately, 2014 was
the deadliest year in the country since 2007. Tens of
thousands innocent civilians were killed and wounded
and millions of people were displaced. The barbaric
acts committed by ISIS shocked the world and were the
subject of our strongest condemnation.
Brazil commends the steps taken by the new
Government in Baghdad and the Kurdish Regional
Government in order to solve their disputes concerning
oil revenue and budget payments. To succeed in its fight
against terrorism and the extremist groups, Iraq has to
remain united. The international community should
also support Iraq in combating terrorism in a way that
is fully and strictly compatible with the Charter of the
United Nations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mamabolo (South Africa): South Africa would
like to congratulate your country, Sir, on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of January, and to thank you for convening this
important debate. Furthermore, my delegation wishes to
express its appreciation to AssistantSecretary-General
ad interim for Political Affairs Jens Toyberg-Frandzen
for his insightful briefing. I also take this opportunity
to congratulate all the new members of the Security
Council.
South Africa wishes to align itself with the
statements to be delivered by the representative
of Zimbabwe on behalf of the Southern African
Development Community and by the representative

48/68

15/01/2015

of the Kingdom of Morocco on behalf of the African
Group, as well as with the statement delivered earlier
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
During the commemorative year of the seventieth
anniversary of the United Nations, despite the
Organization’s numerous achievements, it still remains
to be seen when there will be a resolution to the decadeslong Palestinian and Israeli conflict. This decade’s long
conflict is a stain on the very purposes and principles of
the United Nations as enshrined in the Charter.
Last month, the Council had an opportunity to take
decisive action on an issue that has long eluded it and to
provide a ray of light to the Palestinians in the occupied
territories, who endured a horrible year that witnessed
a human tragedy of unprecedented proportions,
particularly after the tragic events that took place in
Gaza. Unfortunately, once again, to the dismay of the
Palestinian people and the international community,
the Security Council failed to take decisive action on
a Palestinian Government-led initiative that sought to
provide a time frame and parameters for ending the
illegal occupation of the Palestinian lands.
My delegation wishes to commend Council
members that took a principled step by voting in
support of the draft resolution (S/2014/916), which
had as its sole purpose the peaceful resolution of the
conflict and the realization of the two-State solution.
While disappointed that the Security Council fell short,
South Africa nonetheless welcomes the increasing
support and recognition of the Palestinian statehood,as
reflected in various national assemblies around the
world. such as in the United Kingdom, Ireland, Spain,
France and Sweden.
My delegation believes that the only way to
bring about genuine and ever-lasting peace between
Israel and Palestine is by having comprehensive
and unconditional negotiations to deal with all the
final-status issues, including the unrelenting and
illegal expansion of Israeli settlements in the occupied
territories of Palestine as well as the lifting of the Gaza
blockade and the continuing illegal occupation of the
Palestinian territory. My delegation is supportive of all
international efforts aimed at brokering a just resolution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and urges all parties
to the conflict to negotiate in good faith in order to
reach a permanent and just solution to the conflict.

15-01357

15/01/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

South Africa expresses its appreciation to the
Government of Switzerland for convening the recent
Conference of the High Contracting Parties to the
Fourth Geneva Convention, as well as all participating
High Contracting Parties for reflecting the
overwhelming importance of ensuring the protection of
the inalienable human rights of the Palestinian people.
The holding of the Conference was an important step in
ensuring respect for the provisions of the Convention
and international humanitarian law. Last year’s
violent incursions in Gaza illustrated the need for the
international community to do more to protect civilians
in that conflict.
We are also concerned by reports that the
Israeli Government decided to freeze the transfer of
$127.6 million in tax revenue collected on behalf of
the Palestinians following the Palestinian leadership
decision to become a State party to the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court. South Africa
respects the sovereign right and wishes of the State of
Palestine to accede to the Rome Statute and calls upon
all Member States to refrain from punitive steps in
retaliation to that sovereign right.
South Africa would like to call for the redoubling
of efforts to rebuild homes and infrastructure destroyed
during the war. We remain committed to supporting
international efforts to assist the peoples of Palestine
and Israel in finding lasting peace in the context of the
two-State solution through a negotiated settlement.
With regard to Syria, my delegation is concerned
about the humanitarian crisis brought about by nearly
four years of Syrian conflict. The conflict in Syria has
been characterized by a high number of human casualties
and a large number of internally displaced people and
refugees fleeing into neighbouring countries, which
has had a destabilizing impact on the entire region.
The only hope for the Syrian people lies in the
willingness of the parties to the conflict to immediately
put an end to the violence and engage each other
constructively in a dialogue with a view to reaching
an agreement on the political transition based on the
Geneva communiqué of June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex).
It is the responsibility of the Syrian Government and
the opposition to sincerely engage each other in the aim
of making difficult decisions concerning the future of
Syria.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to extend
its deepest condolences to the Governments and peoples

S/PV.7360

of France, Yemen, Nigeria, Australia and Pakistan, who
in recent weeks have suffered inhumane and barbaric
terrorist attacks. The South African Government joins
the international community in condemning all these
attacks, and reiterates its stance that terrorism in any
form and from whichever quarter cannot be condoned.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.
Mr. León González (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): We
support the statement made by the representative of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The conflict in the Middle East is an issue of
concern for all States Members of the United Nations. A
just and lasting peace is the only option for the peoples
of that region, and we should focus all of our efforts
on achieving that goal. The year 2014 was marked by
negative developments for Palestine and Syria, whose
peoples suffered the vicissitudes of aggression and
war. Cuba reaffirms its unequivocal solidarity with the
Palestinian people and its robust and decisive support
for all efforts aimed at promoting the recognition of the
State of Palestine based on the pre-1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, as well as the right of the
State of Palestine to become a full-fledged Member of
the United Nations.
Cuba reiterates its demand for an end to the
prolonged and illegal Israeli occupation of Palestinian
territories and other Arab lands, and the immediate,
complete and unconditional lifting of the cruel and
illegal blockade of Gaza, including the opening of
border crossings and control points, in order to enable
the free access of humanitarian assistance, supply of
goods, and the transit of persons to and from the Gaza
Strip on a permanent basis. The building and expansion
of illegal Israeli settlements, the separation wall in
occupied Palestinian territory, the destruction and
confiscation of Palestinian land and property, the forced
displacement of hundreds of thousands of Palestinian
families, and the transfer of settlers to occupied
Palestinian territory are unacceptable. We demand an
immediate and complete halt to all Israeli settlement
activities in Palestinian territories and respect for the
right to return. We also demand an end to reprisals
against and blackmailing of the Palestinian Authority,
and respect for agreements signed between it and the
State of Israel. The colonial policies and practices
of Israel against the Palestinian people should end.
Israel must once and for all end its provocations and
incitements to hatred and terror, crimes of aggression,

15-0135749/68

S/PV.7360

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

arbitrary detention and mass imprisonment, and the
genocide against that people.
The Cuban people and Government are proud of the
fact that Cuba was one of the first countries to recognize
the Palestinian State, following its proclamation in 1988.
The number of recognitions has continually grown over
the past 26 years. This is an unstoppable process that
the Security Council should have supported long ago.
Cuba demands without further conditions or delay the
acceptance of the request for recognition as a State
Member of the United Nations submitted by Palestine.
The Security Council also has the responsibility to
take specific measures to prevent the assassination of
innocent Palestinian civilians and the destruction of the
legacy of that heroic people, which has, despite all the
tests imposed upon it, struggled to defend its legitimate
right to self-determination.
Cuba supports the draft resolution (S/2014/916)
that the Arab Group submitted for the consideration
of the Security Council, and we denounce the inability
of this organ to ensure respect for international law
and to defend truth and justice. The Security Council
must honour its obligation to promote a negotiated
settlement to the Israeli occupation of the State of
Palestine. It should establish a definite timeline to end
that occupation and turn the resolve of the international
community to see the peaceful coexistence of two
independent States into reality. The anti-democratic
right of veto in the Security Council, which has allowed
impunity with regard to the actions of Israel, must end.
It will not be possible to end the Syrian conflict or
establish a true and lasting peace that is acceptable to
its people and Government will not be possible under
the precepts of the regime change policy that has been
promoted and publicly supported from the outside. Cuba
reiterates its concern for the loss of innocent life as a
result of the Syrian conflict, and condemns once again
all acts of violence taking place in that country against
the civilian population. The supposed protection of
human life and the struggle against terrorism cannot
be used a pretext for foreign intervention. The Security
Council must adopt measures that would genuinely
promote a solution to the conflict and combat terrorism
against the Syrian people. Its members should reject
without hesitation the illegal trafficking in arms to
non-State actors in Syria and any other action that
prolongs the violent conflict affecting that country.
The sovereignty of the Syrian people should
be respected as they exercise their right to self50/68

15/01/2015

determination. We pay tribute to the efforts of the
Russian Federation to come up with a negotiated solution
to the conflict, and we appeal to other interested parties
to adopt a similar attitude. All peoples of the Middle
East have the right to live in peace and enjoy progress.
Cuba reiterates its condemnation of all forms and
manifestations of terrorist acts, methods and practices,
including State terrorism, wherever they take place and
by whomsoever they may be perpetrated.
As a peace-loving country committed to the
elimination and prohibition of weapons of mass
destruction, Cuba reiterates its support for the
establishment of a zone free of nuclear and other
weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East, and
demands that a conference on the establishment of such
a zone be convened without further delay, pursuant to
the conclusions and recommendations adopted at the
2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
Cuba reaffirms its willingness to cooperate in
achieving a peaceful, just and lasting solution to the
conflicts in the Middle East. It is our hope that in 2015
we shall achieve the desired peace in that region and
make the Security Council a genuinely effective organ
in achieving fair and concrete results leading to the
well-being of all peoples of the Middle East.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Mr. Seck.
Mr. Seck (spoke in French): I would first like
to congratulate you, Sir, on Chile’s accession to the
presidency of the Security Council and the outstanding
way in which you humanitarian led its work this month.
I also congratulate the Permanent Representatives of
Angola, Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain and Venezuela
whose countries have just joined the Council. I wish
you and them every success in the execution of your
duties.
I take this opportunity to express, in no uncertain
terms, the Committee’s firm condemnation of the
terrorist attacks that occurred in Paris on 7 January and
the equally heinous acts of terrorism that recently took
place in Nigeria, northern Cameroon, northern Mali,
Pakistan and, of course, the Middle East. Through
me, the Committee would like to express its heartfelt
sympathy and condolences to the victims’ families, as
well as to their bereaved people and Governments.
The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian people observed with great
15-01357

15/01/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

interest the debate organized by the Council on
30 December (see S/PV.7354). Although the debate
did not lead to the adoption of practical measures, as
recommended by the Committee in its statement, all
members of the Council reaffirmed their commitment
to the principle of a peaceful settlement of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, based on the two-State solution and
the exercise of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian
people in a viable and independent Palestine, living
side by side with Israel in peace and security. We take
this opportunity to commend the important role played
by the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, as representative
of the Arab countries to the Council, and to encourage
it to pursue its commendable efforts to find a peaceful
solution to the conflict, in the knowledge that the status
quo is no longer tenable.
With the failure of direct negotiations and the
Security Council’s inability to act, the State of Palestine
has seen fit to join several international treaties,
including the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court, in order to strengthen the fight against violations
of international law and international humanitarian
law, as well as impunity. The Committee regrets that,
in response, the occupying Power has chosen to flout
its obligations to Palestinian people by holding — who
knows for how long? — the tax revenues it collects on
behalf of the Palestinian Authority, in accordance with
the Oslo accords. This attitude is counterproductive,
as is Israel’s threat to impose new punitive measures.
Furthermore, it is regrettable that the international
community, including the Council, has remained silent
and inactive on this matter.
Fortunately, at this session States members of
the General Assembly have reaffirmed their strong
commitment to a settlement based on established
principles and the relevant United Nations decisions.
A more significant number of States — most recently
Sweden — have also recognized Palestine, while
several parliaments — including those of Spain,
France, Ireland, Belgium, Portugal and the United
Kingdom — as well as the European Parliament, have
voted in favour of such recognition, reflecting the
resolve of the international public opinion to see an end
to this conflict.
While the Committee welcomes the progress made
on the ground to date, in particular with regard to the
reconstruction of Gaza, as provided in the temporary
tripartite mechanism, it believes that much more
remains to be done and as soon as possible. More goods

S/PV.7360

and services must be allowed to enter Gaza because
tens of thousands of Gazans continue to live in flimsy
tents or damaged buildings, exposed to the elements
of a rainy and particularly cold winter. In this regard,
while we welcome the generous support of donors, the
Committee urges Israel to assume its responsibilities as
the occupying Power under the Geneva Conventions.
The General Assembly judiciously proclaimed 2014
the International Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People in its efforts to reinforce Member States’ support
for the Palestinian people and enhance the possibility
of reaching a peaceful settlement of the decades-long
conflict. Unfortunately, our hopes were dashed during
the Year of Solidarity when direct negotiations failed in
the spring and the situation’s rapid deterioration led to
the devastating war in Gaza in the summer.
The framework of the problem remains the same.
Israel continues to occupy the Gaza Strip and the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem. Settlement
construction in the West Bank and East Jerusalem
continues. Palestinian religious buildings continue to
be attacked. In 2014 alone, there were at least 36 attacks
on mosques and churches, in addition to the total
destruction of 73 mosques and churches in Gaza during
the summer’s crisis. Moreover, acts of provocation and
incitement to violence by settlers and other Israelis
remain commonplace.
Alarmed by the current situation, the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
people joins many speakers here today in stressing
that the status quo cannot continue, for the situation
is unacceptable and threatens international peace and
security. With a view towards the future, the Committee
hopes that the Security Council, the supreme organ
responsible for international peace and security, will
assume its Charter obligation to provide the means to
settle the seemingly endless Israel-Palestinian conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): First, I should like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on Chile’s presidency of the Security
Council this month. I should also like to thank Foreign
Minister Muñoz for presiding over this meeting. I
congratulate Malaysia, Venezuela, Angola, New
Zealand and Spain on their election as non-permanent
members of the Security Council and wish them every
success.

15-0135751/68

S/PV.7360

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The United Nations bears a historical and legal
responsibility for the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State with full sovereignty over its entire
national territory. This responsibility is based on
the provisions of General Assembly resolution 181
(II) which, as we all know, concerns the partition of
Palestine, and resolution 273 (III), which defined the
terms of Israel’s membership of the United Nations,
conditional on its compliance with resolution 181 (II)
providing for the establishment of the State of Palestine,
as well as resolution 194 (III) concerning the return of
Palestinian refugees to their homes.
Regrettably, what happened thereafter was quite
the opposite. On the one hand, the United Nations
implemented half of its resolution 181 (II), and
completely set aside the implementation of resolution
194 (III). On the other hand, Israel has launched
continuous acts of aggression against the peoples and
countries of the region, backed by the unprecedented
military, political and economic support of its
protectors and sponsors, including by supplying it with
various types of sophisticated weaponry, assisting it
in acquiring nuclear technology and weapons, and
providing it with submarines equipped with missiles
capable of carrying nuclear warheads.
Moreover, following its creation, Israel followed
a policy of expansion and ethnic cleansing, in spirit
and in letter, that led to its occupation of Arab
territories in 1967. According to Israeli historians
themselves, successive Israeli Governments have
committed systematic and documented violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law
that are tantamount to war crimes and crimes against
humanity. Settlement activities represent a top priority
in the policies of all Israeli Governments, despite
the fact that, according to everyone — including
Israel’s own apothecaries of the elixir of life and
survival — such activities undermine any chance for
the establishment of a geographically contiguous and
viable Palestinian State and the Palestinian people’s
right to self-determination. Israel has not stopped there.
It has imposed racist laws and desecrated Christian and
Muslim holy sites, expelled Palestinians from their
homes, and conducted campaigns of arbitrary arrest
and human torture, including against children, women
and the elected leaders of the Palestinian people.
Today, in spite of all of this, some Council
members continue to deny Palestinians even the right
to demand their most fundamental rights, including the

52/68

15/01/2015

establishment of their desired State on their national
soil and setting a date for ending the occupation. All
the while, they continue to protect Israel from any
accountability for its unjust, illegal and aggressive
policies.
In the framework of that same barbaric Israeli
policy, Israel continues its occupation of the Syrian
Golan since 1967. Syrian citizens living under the yoke
of this occupation suffer a bitter, intolerable reality.
We therefore demand that United Nations shoulder
its responsibilities by addressing this reality with the
seriousness and attention it deserves, in implementation
its own relevant resolutions, in particular Security
Council resolution 497 (1981). It is unacceptable that
the United Nations should remain powerless to compel
Israel to implement these resolutions, including those
related to the cessation of its systematic and gross
violations of human rights, or indeed to put an end
to the settlement policy, terrorism, repression, racial
discrimination and arbitrary detention against Syrian
citizens under occupation that restrict them in all walks
of life. Israel is also planning to steal the Golan’s natural
resources, including water, oil and gas. Recently, the
Israeli Supreme Court lifted the ban on prospecting for
oil in the occupied Syrian Golan, thereby permitting
exploration companies to begin drilling activities in
violation of international law.
Facing international silence about its practices,
Israel has gone into deeper alliance with the hordes of
Takfiri ideologists spreading destruction and chaos in
Syria. Israel has waged more than one active aggression
on Syrian territory in violation of international law and
the 1974 Disengagement Agreement. Such aggressions
have increased tension in the region to unprecedented
levels in a way that threatens large-scale consequences.
What is truly outrageous is that we have heard no
condemnation of such acts of aggressions from the
Security Council, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, or the Spokesperson of the SecretaryGeneral.
During the current crisis in Syria, Israel has added
yet another new chapter to its record of violations by
providing support for terrorists in the area of separation
in the Golan, including through the treatment of
injured terrorists in Israeli hospitals, in violation of the
Disengagement Agreement, in a way that endangers the
very lives of United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force (UNDOF) personnel. That is documented in
the Secretary-General’s recent report on UNDOF

15-01357

15/01/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

(S/2014/859), as well as in Israeli media reports. Such
support has increased the freedom of movement of
terrorist groups, including in particular the Al-Nusra
Front, affiliated with Al-Qaida, in the area of separation,
and their ability to continuously kidnap UNDOF
peacekeepers. We must address this dangerous reality
with the required seriousness and attention and without
delay, especially since stakeholders in the Department
of Peacekeping Operations have demonstrated an
unjustified disregard for our warnings and information
that we have provided over many years.
I have not touched on the involvement of some
well-known regional Arab and international parties
in dealing with the terrorists in the area of separation
in order to focus exclusively on the item under
consideration, dedicated to the Arab-Israeli conflict.
For the same reason, I will not respond to the misleading
allegations made by the representatives of the United
States, United Kingdom, France, Saudi Arabia and the
European Union. It is quite obvious to everyone that
such allegations merely seek to divert attention from
Israeli crimes and to decrease international pressure
on Israel, in spite of the fact that the aforementioned
Member States in particular do not respect Security
Council resolutions related to countering terrorism,
specifically resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014).
The ink is still wet on those documents.
Despite the difficult circumstances prevailing in
Syria, I emphasize here and now that the Syrian Golan
is and will remain Syrian territory. We will continue to
struggle for its independence until it is fully restored
to the borders of 4 June 1967. That right is not subject
to negotiation, bargaining or any statute of limitations.
No Israeli action will change anything in that regard.
Israeli actions, including the so-called decision to annex
the Golan, which is in fact the crime of annexing the
Golan, are null and void. They have no legal effect, as
reaffirmed in the relevant United Nations resolutions,
particularly the Security Council’s own resolution 497
(1981). What we would like to state and stress about the
inevitability of Israeli withdrawal from the occupied
Syrian territory also applies to the occupied Palestinian
territory and the area that remains under occupation in
southern Lebanon.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Khiari (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,

S/PV.7360

on Chile’s assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month, and to thank you for convening
this meeting on the situation in the Middle East and
the question of Palestine. As we begin this new year,
I would also like to congratulate the new members of
the Council — Angola, Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain
and Venezuela — and wish them every success, as well
as to congratulate their predecessors — Argentina,
Australia, Luxembourg, the Republic of Korea and
Rwanda — on their efforts over the past two years.
My delegation aligns itself with the statements
made by the representatives of Saudi Arabia, on behalf
of the Islamic Organization of Cooperation, and of the
Islamic Republic of Iran, on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
During the briefing of the Council on 15 December
last year, it was said that 2014 had been a disastrous
year for the peace process in the Middle East. In the
words of Mr. Serry, the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East, “I feel that 2014 changed the course of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict and that the future is more
uncertain than ever” (S/PV.7339, p. 5). And this came
at a time when in January of last year we were hoping
that 2014 would be the year when hope returned that
we might reach a comprehensive and lasting solutions
to the conflict, in line with the vision of two States
based on international law and the international terms
of reference, including the relevant Security Council
resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative, the Madrid
framework and the principle of land for peace. That
hope was reinforced with the proclamation of 2014 as
the International Year of the Palestinian People.
However, in 2014 the peace negotiations came to
a halt, despite the efforts of the United States between
July 2013 and April 2014. In July and August 2014 we
witnessed the destructive aggression of the occupying
Power in the Gaza Strip, which resulted in more than
2,000 casualties including more than 400 children, as
well as the wholesale destruction of infrastructure and
economic and humanitarian damage on an enormous
scale. We also saw a return to violence and tension
in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, owing
to the occupation forces’ continued construction of
settlements and the Israeli colonists’ violations of
Muslim and Christian holy sites, including the Al-Aqsa
Mosque, by preventing people who wished to pray from
entering them, a flagrant violation of international law
and an act of aggression against the religious feelings of
Muslims around the world.

15-0135753/68

S/PV.7360

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Furthermore, the Security Council, the body
charged with maintaining international peace and
security, has been unable to live up to its responsibilities
with regard to the Palestinian question. On 30 December
it was unable to adopt a draft resolution (S/2014/916)
introduced by Jordan, our brother nation, on behalf of
the Arab Group, designed to establish a firm timetable
for the negotiations on putting an end to the Israeli
occupation and realize the legitimate aspirations of
the Palestinian people to live in dignity and freedom
in a viable sovereign State within established and
recognized borders, living peacefully alongside other
countries in the region.
The Palestinian people have been living under the
yoke of occupation for more than 48 years and have had
to deal with many violations and acts of aggression.
That has not deterred them from their commitment over
the past 25 years to negotiating within the framework
of the relevant resolutions of international law and
choosing peace, so that the rights their people have been
deprived of can be restored to them, something that was
demonstrated in particular by Palestine’s accession to a
number of international treaties.
In the face of all this, the Israeli side has continued
to impose the status quo. The occupying Power has
expanded its settlement and occupation activities,
increased its aggression against Palestinians in the
West Bank and Gaza and their religious sites. It has
blocked any attempt to launch serious peace initiatives,
particularly those of the United States, begun in July
2013. The Israeli Government has illegally blocked
Palestine’s tax income, which represents more than
70 per cent of the Palestinian Government’s revenues.
We would like to reiterate the call to the entire
international community, including the interested
parties and the Security Council, to put an end to
Israel’s occupation of the Palestinian territory and to its
illegal practices against the Palestinian people and their
financial resources.
It is high time for changes to be made in how we
deal with the Palestinian question in the light of a twoState solution. The continuing practices will exacerbate
extremism. We therefore demand that the unjust
blockade of Gaza be lifted and that humanitarian aid be
allowed to enter in order to provide essential assistance
to those living in the Gaza Strip in the wake of the
Israeli aggression. We also reaffirm the importance
of fulfilling the commitments made at the donor
conference in Cairo on reconstructing Gaza as soon as

54/68

15/01/2015

possible. A just and comprehensive peace process in the
Middle East can be achieved only through Israel’s retreat
from all the occupied territories, both in Palestine and
the Syrian Golan, as well as the remaining occupied
territory in southern Lebanon.
In conclusion, I would like to express our deep
concern about the deterioration of the situation in Syria,
our brother State, and its grave repercussions for Syria,
its future, and for the entire region. In that regard, I
would like to reaffirm Tunisia’s hope that Mr. De
Mistura’s efforts will result in a political solution that
meets the aspirations of the Syrian people to peace and
democracy and that at the same time preserves Syria’s
sovereignty, territorial integrity and social cohesion.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): I join other speakers in
commending you, Sir, for convening this important
open debate.
Sri Lanka associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
I congratulate the new members of the Security
Council on their elections.
We had hoped that in the year 2014 the world would
have witnessed a much-needed breakthrough resulting
in a just and durable solution to the situation in the
Middle East. Instead we witnessed a series of setbacks,
including the breakdown of peace talks followed by a
devastating humanitarian crisis in Gaza. However, in
the midst of much hardship, we were encouraged by
the unwavering support for the people of Palestine
worldwide.
The formation of the Palestinian unity Government
was indeed a positive development. It is important
that the international community continue to strive
for a peaceful solution through continued diplomatic
engagement with the parties concerned. Peace
negotiations need to be conducted expeditiously, and
a solution reached consistent with the principles of
international law and the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and Security Council.
One of the key challenges this year is rebuilding
following the destruction caused in Gaza. The
international community must also assist the Palestinian
people in meeting their day-to-day existential challenges.
The Cairo conference on Gaza reconstruction held last
15-01357

15/01/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7360

year saw the pledging of significant resources for the
Palestinian people’s rebuilding efforts. It is our fervent
hope that, with the help of the global community, the
people of Palestine will rise up to rebuild their lives and
livelihoods.

for the advancement of a peaceful solution to the Middle
East peace process. It is our hope that the international
community will continue to support initiatives for
sustainable peace and that both sides will demonstrate
the necessary political will required to achieve that end.

We urge the Governments of Israel and Palestine
to utilize the international goodwill that exists to
facilitate the peace process. The cost of failing to reach
a peace accord is too high for the countries concerned,
as well as for the region and beyond. The cessation
of settlement activities in the occupied territories and
ending the Gaza blockade are important measures that
must be taken while respecting the security needs of
the people of Israel. These are important measures for
confidence-building. They would be consistent with the
expectations of the world, the norms of international
law and accepted practice. The security needs of the
people of Israel must be respected.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.

Sri Lanka supports a negotiated solution, resulting
in a sovereign, independent and viable State of Palestine
with East Jerusalem as its capital, living within secure,
recognized borders, side by side and at peace with Israel,
as endorsed in the Arab Peace Initiative, the Quartet
road map and the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Sri Lanka also supports Palestine’s application for
admission as a full Member of the United Nations.
Sri Lanka also supports a two-State solution on
the basis of the 1967 borders. The viability of the twoState solution will depend upon the political unity and
economic advancement of the Palestinian people. The
lifting of the Gaza blockade within the framework of the
resolution 1860 (2009) would contribute significantly to
the economic advancement of Gaza and the well-being
of the Palestinian people. At present, the United Nations
is hard-pressed to keep the vast majority of the people
of Gaza supplied with their minimum necessities. We
underline strong support for the work of the United
Nations agencies in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
Terrorism originating in the Middle East region has
the potential to pose a serious threat to the security and
stability of many countries. In today’s interconnected
world, it is very easy for agents of extremism to spread
their ideologies across national borders. One of the key
excuses of terrorists is the Palestinian issue. We must
not provide any excuses for terrorism. We hope that
every effort will be made in 2015 to lay the groundwork

Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I express my condolences to the people and the
Government of France and to the victims of the terrorist
attacks in Paris, which my Government has denounced.
We condemn any such attacks targeting civilians and
violating humanitarian and moral principles.
I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the present
month. We express our appreciation to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Chile for having participated in
this meeting. We also thank the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for his briefing this morning.
We align ourselves with the statements delivered
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
and the Non-Aligned Movement.
We regret that the Security Council was unable
to adopt the Arab draft resolution on the situation in
the Middle East (S/2014/916), including the question of
Palestine, not only because it was a missed opportunity
for making progress on implementing peace, but also
because the principal elements in the draft resolution
were in line with international consensus. There is no
disagreement on the right of the Palestinian people to
establish an independent State within the 1967 borders
and put an end to the Israeli occupation of the Arab
territories.
The Arabs and the Palestinians have taken very
flexible steps towards international initiatives in
keeping with the basic rights of the Palestinian people,
their national unity and their right to establish an
independent State. But such steps need support and
encouragement from the international community in
a number of ways, including by putting an end to the
Israeli occupation of all occupied Arab territories,
supporting the building of the institutions of the
Palestinian State, putting an end to the unjust blockade
against the Gaza Strip, assisting in Gaza reconstruction
and providing opportunities for a dignified life for all.
The State of Qatar has played and continues to play
a positive and effective role with a view to achieving a

15-0135755/68

S/PV.7360

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

just, lasting and sustainable solution to the Palestinian
question. We were at the forefront of the States that
took important steps to support the opportunities for
achieving a peaceful settlement of the Palestinian
question. We are also part of the international consensus
in support of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people, especially their right to self-determination. That
consensus is embodied in several relevant resolutions of
the General Assembly and in the successive recognition
by most States of the State of Palestine.
In that context, we reiterate our call on the Security
Council to implement its previous resolutions and
respect international consensus by adopting a binding
resolution that obligates Israel to end its occupation
of Palestinian and Arab territories, end its settlement
activities and all other practices that violate international
law and take the necessary actions to implement a clear
and time-bound political plan to realize the two-State
solution based on well-established principles, including
the Arab Peace Initiative.
Peace, stability and security in the region, including
the security of Israel, will require genuine steps
towards that goal — that is to say, the establishment
of a Palestinian State on the basis of the 1967 borders,
with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, living side-byside in peace with Israel; guarantees for the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people; and the withdrawal
from all occupied Arab territories, including the
occupied Syrian Golan, the Sheba’a farms and the
Lebanese village of Ghajar. Moreover, all violations of
the freedom of worship and of holy sites in Palestine
by the Israeli authorities must stop. The Israelis have
been implementing a dangerous policy against these
places, and we denounce such actions, which bring
more violence to the region.
Several months have passed since the Cairo
international donors conference on the reconstruction
of the Gaza Strip, yet the Strip still awaits the fulfilment
of reconstruction efforts, which are very important
in the light of the destruction of its infrastructure,
housing, public facilities and basic services caused by
the recent Israeli aggression against that territory. The
State of Qatar responded to the dire humanitarian needs
by announcing at the Cairo conference that it would
provide $1 billion. We are now working to implement
the mechanisms for delivering that grant.
This year, the region has witnessed waves of
extreme cold that have had a painful and indescribable
impact on millions of Syrian and Iraqi refugees and
56/68

15/01/2015

internally displaced persons (IDPs). The situation
requires the international community to fulfil its moral
and humanitarian obligations towards these vulnerable
populations and to increase its support for them. This
very difficult situation must serve as an added incentive
to put an end to the crisis. The State of Qatar has
responded to the call of the United Nations to continue
providing humanitarian and emergency relief for the
refugees and the IDPs. We are now at the forefront
among donor States for the emergency response fund
created by the United Nations for the Syrian crisis, and
we call on Member States to respond to the call as well.
The crisis in Syria has entered its fifth year. It
is up to all of us to try to put an end to the horrible
crimes and terrorism carried out by the regime in Syria,
which have promoted instability in the region and the
growth of the problem of foreign terrorist fighters. We
all agree that the main element of a solution for the
Syrian crisis is a political transition, pursuant to the
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/523, annex), in order to
fulfil the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people. It
is alarming that various Security Council resolutions,
especially resolution 2118 (2013), remain unfulfilled.
The most recent report of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and its fact-finding
mission concerning the use of chlorine gas in Syria
established the use of poisonous chemical elements,
such as chlorine, in a systematic manner in various
attacks. The report has proven that there have been
bottle bombs that include chlorine that were thrown
from various helicopters. That is a systematic war crime
for which the perpetrators must be held responsible.
In conclusion, we reiterate the position of the State
of Qatar in support of Syria and its independence and
unity based on the Geneva communiqué.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Eler (Turkey): At the outset, let me congratulate
the newly elected members of the Security Council and
wish them every success.
Developments in the Middle East remain a high
priority on the global agenda and continue to affect
Turkey in many ways. The Palestinian question still
lies at the heart of the challenges in the region and
undermines the prospects for lasting regional and global
peace and stability. The situation in Palestine remains
a major source of concern to us for humanitarian
and political reasons alike. The immediate needs of
15-01357

15/01/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestine in general, and Gaza in particular, constitute a
priority for the international community. The situation
in Gaza remains fragile and returning to the status quo
is not an option. Further steps should be taken to sustain
the current ceasefire. The Palestinian Government of
National Consensus should operate in Gaza without
obstacle, and the illegal blockade must be lifted.
The need to find a negotiated political settlement
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, based on two States
living side by side in peace and security within the
pre-1967 borders and in accordance with the relevant
United Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace
Initiative, remains an urgent priority. Palestinian
unity is also imperative to reach a lasting solution. We
should all support President Abbas and the Palestinian
Government of National Consensus.
Israelis have enjoyed their statehood since 1948,
whereas Palestinians have been denied such an inherent
right for years. That historical injustice should be
remedied. Further expansion of the illegal settlements,
settler violence, arrests, forced displacement, house
demolitions, excessive use of force against civilians,
military raids and incursions, disrespectful and illegal
acts targeting the holy sites, and attempts to change
the historical status quo of Al-Haram Al-Sharif
demonstrate the insincerity of Israel about the peace
process. We strongly condemn those provocative acts
and will continue to voice our concern in international
forums.
It is time for the international community to renew
its engagement in seeking a solution to the problem. In
that regard, we welcome Sweden’s recognition of the
State of Palestine and the resolutions adopted by the
European Parliament and the national parliaments of
some European countries. The ongoing positive trend
in Europe demonstrates that it is no longer an option
to maintain the status quo. Having said this, we were
disappointed by the recent failure of the Security Council
to adopt a draft resolution (S/2014/916) that would
have paved the way for a solution. The Council missed
another opportunity to fulfil its primary responsibility
vis-à-vis international peace and security.
The subsequent decision of the State of Palestine
to accede to international conventions and protocols,
including the Rome Statute, is a sovereign decision and
should be respected. On the other hand, the decision
of Israel to withhold the tax revenues of Palestine
as a reaction to that step is unacceptable and runs
counter to its obligations. Turkey will maintain its

S/PV.7360

support for finding a just, comprehensive and lasting
solution to the conflict and the establishment of a
sovereign and independent Palestinian State within the
pre-1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital.
We reaffirmed our commitment to this vision during
President Abbas’s recent official visit to Turkey.
Turkey is gravely concerned by the continuing
deterioration of the situation in Syria. We increasingly
feel the strain of the current state of chaos due to
the grave humanitarian and security situation on
the ground. Instability in the region, and Daesh in
particular, continue to represent a national security
threat for us. As the crisis enters its fifth year, the
international community shows signs of Syrian fatigue.
The focus is shifting from addressing the root causes
of the crisis towards dealing with its side effects. In
Syria, the regime, which has taken advantage of the
international community’s preoccupation with Daesh,
has significantly increased its attacks on cities and
civilians. It tries to portray itself as a partner in the
fight against Daesh and tests the determination of the
international community.
The extent and scope of destruction in Syria are
unprecedented. With each passing day, the humanitarian
toll gets worse. The situation in the north of Syria,
particularly in Aleppo, keeps deteriorating, which may
lead to another large-scale population exodus. Three
million Syrians are in neighbouring countries; half of
those are in Turkey. In the face of the enormity of this
challenge, I must reiterate that active and meaningful
burden-sharing is the collective responsibility of the
international community. The international community
needs a comprehensive and coordinated strategy
with political, security and humanitarian pillars to
re-establish stability in Syria. A comprehensive strategy
to protect the population from the regime’s attacks and
to accommodate large-scale refugee movements is
necessary. Unless the international community makes
the conflict in Syria a common priority and addresses
the root cause of the problem through a comprehensive
plan and a strategy to reach a genuine political transition,
we will continue to face the threat of extremism and all
kinds of other problems in the region and elsewhere.
We will continue to support any endeavour to
stop the bloodshed in Syria. In that regard, we support
Special Envoy De Mistura’s efforts. From the security
perspective on the matter, I also need to highlight
that the destruction of the chemical stockpiles in
Syria should not be perceived as accomplished. The

15-0135757/68

S/PV.7360

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

international community and the Security Council
should remain seized of the matter.
Let me conclude by reiterating that our strong
commitment to the peace and security of the overall
region and our full solidarity with the Palestinian
people will continue.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): As the
Council holds its first quarterly open debate on the
situation in the Middle East of this year, my delegation
is disheartened by the continuing instability in the
region. Despite all the efforts made by the Security
Council over the years to curb the threat of terrorism,
in particular through the adoption of resolutions 2170
(2014) and 2178 (2014) last year, the threat posed by
radical terrorist organizations such as Al-Qaida and the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), continues to
spread around the world.
Along with the rest of the international community,
the Republic of Korea was shocked and dismayed by the
terrorist attack on the Paris office of Charlie Hebdo. We
strongly condemn such acts of terrorism and offer our
deepest condolences and consolation to the bereaved
families of the victims and the people of France for
their losses. In the aftermath of that tragedy, what is
clear to us now is that the volatility in the Middle East
affects us all. None of us is free from the long reach
of radical extremists. That was the message carried by
my Foreign Minister as he traveled to the region last
month. Through his meetings with the Prime Minister
of Palestine and the Foreign Ministers of Jordan, Israel
and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, he highlighted
the importance of the Middle East to Korea’s foreign
policy and reaffirmed Korea’s continuing commitment
to making constructive contributions to bringing peace
and prosperity to the region.
Turning to the situation in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem, the Republic of Korea remains concerned
about the ongoing tension in those areas. Terror attacks,
violent protests and harsh security reprisals remain
a daily reality for the civilians living there and have
the potential to spill over into a larger conflagration.
Although the Gaza ceasefire is being maintained, we are
also disconcerted by the slow speed of reconstruction
and Gaza’s continued isolation.

58/68

15/01/2015

While working diligently to ease the humanitarian
burden in Gaza and promote the lessening of tensions
in the West Bank, we must keep in mind, however, that
the only long-term solution to the ongoing conflict is a
negotiated settlement with the two-State solution as its
essence. Unilateral actions will not achieve that vision,
and we urge all parties to respect previous agreements
and return to the negotiating table with a view towards
ensuring a brighter future for all.
On Syria, the Republic of Korea continues to be
deeply concerned about the unprecedented scale of
impunity and terror. The international community,
including the Council, simply must do more to end the
conflict and lessen the suffering of the Syrian people.
The current humanitarian situation is extremely grim,
with over 7.6 million Syrian internally displaced persons
and 3.8 million Syrian refugees living difficult lives in
neighbouring States. Humanitarian access within Syria
remains hindered by all parties, in spite of the series
of resolutions adopted to address the problem. On our
part, the Republic of Korea delivered 300 temporary
housing units to Syrian refugees in Jordan in December,
bringing our total humanitarian assistance for Syrian
refugees to $13 million.
ISIL remains a global scourge that ruthlessly
controls sizeable territory in two States through terror
and is inspiring the actions of radicalized extremists
beyond Syria and Iraq. Recent images of conscripted
child soldiers taking part in executions, as well as the
sexual enslavement of ethnic minorities, are extremely
disturbing. The international community must do its
utmost to end that tragedy.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Let me begin by joining
previous speakers in welcoming Mr. Heraldo Muñoz,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Chile, and thanking
the Chilean presidency for convening this open debate.
I would also like to thank the Assistant SecretaryGeneral ad interim for his comprehensive briefing.
Allow me also to congratulate the new
non-permanent members of the Security Council:
Angola, Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain and Venezuela.
Indonesia associates itself with the statements
delivered by the representatives of the Islamic Republic
of Iran and Saudi Arabia on behalf of the Non-Aligned

15-01357

15/01/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Movement and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
respectively.
I wish to focus my statement on the question of
Palestine and underline the importance of the debate
with a view of devising a way forward after the
Council failed to adopt the draft resolution on Palestine
(S/2014/916) in its deliberations on 30 December last
year (see S/PV.7354).
When the General Assembly declared the year
2014 as the International Year of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People, it was our fervent hope that the
year would witness a substantial breakthrough in
the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. What we witnessed,
instead, was the collapse of the peace process and the
rise of an explosive situation at the expense of many
civilian casualties, especially in Gaza. Sadly, we also
witnessed the insufficient response of the Council.
Nonetheless, wider recognition of the State of
Palestine, as well as other expressions of support on the
part of the international community last year are true
testimony to the legitimate struggle of the Palestinian
people. With all of those in mind, as we enter the year
2015, I would like to reiterate Indonesia’s view that it is
high time for the Security Council to fulfil the demand
of the Palestinian people to set a deadline for Israel to
end its occupation.
Indonesia deeply regrets the failure of the Security
Council to adopt the draft resolution on Palestine in
December. We sincerely believe that it was indeed
an opportunity lost when the draft resolution, which
resulted from deliberations between Palestine and
other important key actors and aimed at realizing
the inalienable rights of the Palestinians, failed to be
adopted. The refusal of the Council to look favourably
on the request of Palestine clearly calls into question the
very principles of justice and humanity upon which the
United Nations is founded. Such action — or inaction,
if one prefers — of the Council on that critical agenda
item may also be interpreted as an authorization of the
odious practices of occupation and the subjugation of
people. There can be no argument against the point
that such conduct is counterproductive to the efforts to
create stability in the occupied Palestinian territory and
end the cycle of violence in Palestine.
Indonesia is unceasing in its belief that a
comprehensive, just and lasting settlement must be
attained peacefully, based, inter alia, on relevant
United Nations resolutions, the road map of the Quartet

S/PV.7360

and the Arab Peace Initiative. It is therefore important
for the United Nations not to remain on the sidelines
in pursuit of a comprehensive, peaceful solution to the
question of Palestine. The United Nations must play a
more substantial role within the Quartet to ensure that
the peace process is restarted.
On a different matter, the United Nations must
also shoulder the international responsibility to protect
civilians on behalf of the Palestinian people, including
by considering the urgency of Palestine’s proposal
to be placed under the United Nations protection
mechanism. Furthermore, the international community
should support the work of the Human Rights Council’s
commission of inquiry on Palestine.
In conclusion, Indonesia shall remain unyielding
in its support for the independence of the Palestinian
people and for East Jerusalem being their capital.
Indonesia will continue to support the Palestinian
initiative to strengthen its engagement in the global
arena and search for international support through
membership in various organizations. For people who
have long been subjected to occupation and oppression,
those peaceful means are a courageous move, and they
deserve to be rewarded by encouragement and not
criticism, let alone punishment.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I would like to express
my sincere appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting on the situation in the Middle
East. As this is the first time that I address the Security
Council this year, I would like to congratulate the five
newly elected members on their membership in the
Council and to wish them good luck in their work in
the Council.
The Gaza conflict that occurred in July 2014 was the
third major conflict in six years. The ensuing tensions
on the ground have served to underscore the need for a
just, durable and comprehensive peace between Israel
and Palestine based on a two-State solution.
Faced with that difficult situation, the international
community has not stood idly by. The Gaza
reconstruction conference hosted by Egypt and Norway
in October 2014 demonstrated the strong international
commitment to reconstruction. Japan, for its part, has
already disbursed the $20 million it pledged at the
conference. That is part of the $200 million commitment
announced by Foreign Minister Kishida in March 2014.

15-0135759/68

S/PV.7360

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Furthermore, starting tomorrow, my Prime
Minister, Mr. Shinzo Abe, will embark on a visit to the
Middle East. In Israel and Palestine, Prime Minister
Abe will call on the leaders of both sides to work
towards a resumption of the peace negotiations. In a
policy speech to be made on 17 January in Cairo, he
will also confirm Japan’s commitment to assist with the
attainment of peace and prosperity in the region.
I would like to mention with great appreciation
the concerted efforts that the United States has been
making towards the resumption of peace negotiations.
However, the recent series of events have made the
prospects for the resumption of peace talks increasingly
precarious.
The Middle East peace process will only be
successful once a consensual and negotiated agreement
is reached between the parties. Nonetheless, in the
light of the impasse on the ground, we welcome and
value the efforts of a number of Member States seeking
to bring the Security Council to play a constructive
role. Although the Council was not able to convey a
concerted message two weeks ago, we look forward
to the Council engaging constructively in the peace
process as appropriate and when necessary.
No amount of support by the international
community, including the Security Council, can
substitute for Israel and Palestine’s own efforts
and political will to achieve peace. To that end, we
underscore the need for both sides to nurture an
environment propitious to the resumption of peace
negotiations.
Unilateral measures and punitive countermeasures
lead only to a vicious cycle of mistrust. We therefore
call on Israel to resume the transfer of tax revenues
to the Palestinian Authority, as agreed to under the
Paris Protocol of 1994. We also reiterate our call to
completely cease settlement activities, which are illegal
under international law. In turn, we call on Palestine
to refrain from taking any unilateral measures that
could undermine efforts for the resumption of peace
negotiations.
The current impasse and tensions on the ground
should not dissuade us from looking ahead. Efforts to
build a sustainable economy in Palestine and promote
mutual trust between the two peoples will reinforce
the political process, and therefore must continue. In
the light of that, Japan has been steadfast in providing

60/68

15/01/2015

support in those areas from a mid- and long-term
perspective.
Due to time limitations, I will not go into the
details of our efforts, which are reflected in the written
text of my statement, which I believe has already been
distributed to the Council.
I would also like to refer to the situations in Iraq
and Syria, which are of great concern. But for the same
reason, I would refer members to the written text of my
statement.
Japan is mindful of the unique and constructive
role it can play in assisting countries in the region
to achieve peace and prosperity. We stand ready to
continue our cooperation with the United Nations and
the international community in that regard.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Thornberry (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to welcome the holding of this open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, and to express my appreciation
for the briefing by the Assistant Secretary-General ad
interim for Political Affairs, Mr. Jens Anders ToybergFrandzen.
With regard to the question of Palestine, my
country has consistently maintained a clear position
of respect for the norms and principles of international
law, in particular peoples’ right to self-determination.
Therefore, Peru recognizes the urgent need to implement
the resolutions of the General Assembly aimed at laying
the foundation for the creation of two States, one Arab
and one Jewish, living side by side, within secure and
mutually recognized borders, in a climate of peace and
security.
Based on our belief in the inalienable right of
the Palestinian people to self-determination and on
our conviction that the establishment of a Palestinian
State is the key to a peaceful and definitive political
solution to this conflict, Peru recognizes Palestine as
a State. We therefore sponsored General Assembly
resolution 67/19, through which Palestine was granted
non-member observer State status.
Peru condemned Israel’s use of disproportionate
military force against densely populated urban areas in
the Gaza Strip last year and the rocket fire from Gaza
directed against Israeli civilians. However, despite the

15-01357

15/01/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

calls for a ceasefire by the international community,
over 2,100 people were killed in the Gaza Strip, mainly
Palestinian civilians, including women and children.
Consistent with our strict respect for human rights and
international humanitarian law, therefore, Peru voted
for resolution S-21/1 of the Human Rights Council, in
which, in addition to deploring the attacks, the Council
called on Israel to put an end to its illegal settlement
activities and its blockade of the Gaza Strip.
My country recognizes the inalienable right
of Israel to protect its own existence and security,
including by making use of their right to legitimate
self-defence. However, we believe that the exercise of
that right must be carried out based on international
humanitarian law, taking into account in particular the
principles of proportionality and legality.
On that last point, my delegation reiterates that
the acquisition of territory by force is inadmissible
under international law. Therefore any action to
impose laws, jurisdiction and administration in such
settlements is null and void. In this regard, we reiterate
our call on Israel to immediately cease the practices
of settlement-building, house demolitions and evictions
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem.
Consistent with its unwavering commitment to the
peaceful settlement of disputes, Peru reaffirms its full
support and encourages the search for a lasting peace in
the Middle East. After decades of an unsustainable status
quo, we consider it urgent for the Council, pursuant
to its obligations and responsibilities for maintaining
international peace and security, to effectively promote
the peace process. Peru recognizes that the ultimate
solution can be achieved only as a result of negotiations
among the parties in the framework of the obligations
set out in the Madrid principles, the road map of the
Quartet and other agreements, and with full respect for
international law, including the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council and the Organization.
The Security Council should promote a minimum
framework of understanding that would allow the
parties to resume direct negotiations. My delegation
therefore regrets that the Council was unable to adopt
a decision in December. The result of the voting on
30 December (see S/PV.7354) should be construed not
as a license to maintain the status quo, but as a call to
action, negotiation and compromise. In this regard, my
delegation reiterates its call on the parties to resume, on
the basis of good faith, the peace process in the Middle

S/PV.7360

East. Only thus will the goal of General Assembly
resolution 181 (II) of 29 November 1947 — Palestinians
and Israelis living in peace in two States within secure
and internationally recognized borders — be finally
achieved.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I should like to congratulate Chile on its
accession to the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I wish you full success, Sir, in fulfilling
your mandate.
We commend Chad for the way in which it
discharged its duties as President of the Council last
month.
Kuwait aligns itself with the statements made by
the representative of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on
behalf of of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
and by the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
More than six decades have elapsed with the
question of Palestine on the United Nations agenda.
It has been repeatedly debated and many resolutions
have been adopted thereon. However, the situation
remains unresolved and the relevant decisions have
gone unimplemented because the occupying Power,
Israel, is intransigeant and openly refuses to implement
the resolutions of international legitimacy, while
the international community has proved regrettably
powerless to compel the occupying Power to implement
its resolutions.
The rejection on 30 December 2014 of the Arab
draft resolution (S/2014/916), which reaffirmed the
resolutions of international legitimacy demanding
an end to the occupation, gave Israel a green light to
pursue its practices by entrenching the occupation.
Indeed, it undermined any opportunity to achieve a
genuine peace that would restore the legitimate rights
of the Palestinian people, including their rights to
independence, sovereignty and a dignifed existence,
which are the most fundamental of basic rights.
The illegitimate and illegal Israel practices in
the occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, continue unabated. They have exacerbated
the suffering of the Palestinian people, who are
experiencing extremely trying economic and social
conditions, particularly in the Gaza Strip, which has

15-0135761/68

S/PV.7360

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

been regularly subject to aggression, including air
raids and tank attacks, leading to ever-growing human
and material losses. The pursuit of such attacks and
aggressions and the maintenance of the inhumane siege
imposed on Gaza are the inevitable outcome of the
Security Council’s failure to take any step to deter Israel
and compel it to end its repeated attacks and to respect
its international commitments as the occupying Power,
in accordance with the Fourth Geneva Convention
of 1949.
Israel is also perpetrating the most heinous of
practices and flagrantly violating human rights and
international humanitarian law. Houses and other
property are being expropriated and demolished;
thousands of civilians are being arrested and detained;
and illegal settlement activities continue in the occupied
Palestinian territories. New settlements are being built
while old ones are expanded and Palestinian landowners
dispersed. In that context, we call on the Security
Council to shoulder its Charter responsibilities for the
maintenance of international peace and security and to
take the steps necessary to relaunch the peace process.
Some days ago, Israel, the occupying Power, refused
to transfer Palestinian tax revenues to the Palestinian
Authority, in clear violation of its obligations, in
response to Palestine’s legitimate quest to accede to
a number of international treaties and agreements,
including the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court. While we welcome the declaration issued at the
Conference of High Contracting Parties to the Fourth
Geneva Convention, held in Geneva last month, we
stress the importance of its implementation and of
launching an investigation into all Israel’s violations
of international humanitarian law and bringing the
perpetrators to justice.
A just, lasting and comprehensive peace will not
be achieved by resuming sterile, direct and openended negotiations or by remaining silent vis-à-vis
grave policies that represent a major obstacle to any
genuine opportunity to end the occupation. The desired
peace must be based on the resolutions of international
legitimacy, the principle of land for peace, the road map
and the Arab Peace Initiative. The Security Council is
bound by the Charter of the United Nations to assume
its responsibilities to that end.
Concerning the situation in Syria, we believe that
there is a definite need for a political settlement to the
crisis based on the Geneva communiqué of 30 June 2012

62/68

15/01/2015

(S/2012/522, annex), calling for a transitional authority
with full executive powers to meet the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people. In that regard, we
support the efforts of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
and his Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura.
We express our deep concern over the unprecedented
humanitarian tragedy being endured by more than
12 million Syrians in the gravest humanitarian crisis
since the Second World War.
On the basis of its moral and humanitarian
responsibility vis-à-vis the suffering of our brother
Syrians, the State of Kuwait will host the third donors
conference to confront the humanitarian crisis. We
call on Member States to participate in the conference
and to be generous in the face of the overwhelming
humanitarian needs, which the United Nations
estimates to amount to $8.4 billion. Coordination will
be undertaken with the Organization in the coming
weeks to set the date for the conference.
In conclusion, Kuwait reiterates its call on Israel
to implement resolution 497 (1981), calling for its
withdrawal from the occupied Syrian Golan and
return to the lines of 4 June 1967. We also reiterate
our commitment to standing by the Government of
Lebanon. We support all steps to maintain the security,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon and
call on Israel to end all violations of that country’s
sovereignty, pursuant to resolution 1701 (2006).
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): My delegation
aligns itself with the statement delivered earlier by the
observer of the European Union. I will add only a few
words, on the subject of criminal accountability.
Liechtenstein welcomes the recent ratification of
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) by the State of Palestine. As an active State party
to the Rome Statute, we are fully committed to the goal
of an ICC with universal reach. Palestine’s ratification
is especially important and significant given the small
number of States parties in the Middle East. Other
States from the region should follow that example.
We are aware of the long and complex history
that provides the political context for this ratification.
Nevertheless, any ratification of the Rome Statute
should first and foremost be seen as what it is: a legally
binding, multilateral commitment to ending impunity

15-01357

15/01/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

for genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes,
with a view to preventing such crimes from occurring
in the first place.
The ICC is not a one-sided political tool that can be
employed by a party to a conflict. The ICC cannot be
used to sue any specific person or country. Should an
investigation be opened in Palestine, any and all Rome
Statute crimes committed on Palestinian territory
can be scrutinized, no matter who committed them.
Furthermore, the principle of complementarity applies.
The ICC — because it has to under the Rome Statute —
will yield to investigations and prosecutions genuinely
undertaken by States with jurisdiction over the crimes.
We believe that the recent ratification will open the
door for the rule of law to make its mark in this longstanding conflict. Will the politics on the ground get
in the way of justice taking its course? Will the States
concerned cooperate with a potential investigation by
the Court? It is too early to tell, but we are convinced
that the Court itself, as an independent and impartial
institution, is fully equipped to fulfil its mandate in
accordance with the rule of law.
Almost exactly two years ago, 58 States, including
my country, requested the Security Council to refer
the situation in Syria to the ICC. Regrettably, that
request was answered with a double veto. That cannot
be the end of the conversation about accountability
in Syria. Recently, the General Assembly transmitted
to the Council all of the reports of the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on Syria. The
Council must not close its eyes to the overwhelming
evidence of massive and heinous crimes being
committed. That would be an affront to thousands of
victims and their families.
While the demand for an ICC referral remains
as valid as ever, we must explore all options that can
contribute to bringing some measure of justice to
the victims of crimes in Syria. One can find some
thoughts on this matter in the summary on our webside
concerning the small workshop hosted by Liechtenstein
last November at Princetown University. For example,
domestic prosecutions based on the “passive/active
personality” principle or on universal jurisdiction could
make a meaningful contribution. ICC States parties
could also refer the situation in Syria to the ICC to the
extent that crimes are committed by their nationals as
foreign fighters.

S/PV.7360

There can be no lasting peace without justice. If
we are to find solutions for the seemingly intractable
conflicts that plague the Middle East, accountability
for the most serious crimes under international law
must form part of them.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Zimbabwe.
Mr. Ntonga (Zimbabwe): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of members of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC).
As this is the first time we take the floor during
your presidency of the Security Council, Sir, allow
me at the outset to congratulate you on assuming the
presidency for the month of January. I also thank you
for convening this open debate at a critical time for the
Palestinian people. May I also take this opportunity
to congratualte the new members of the Council on
their assuming membership of this organ. I welcome
the constructive ideas they have offered for finding a
resolution to the long-standing Palestinian question.
I would also like to express gratitude to Assistant
Secretary General ad interim Jens Toyberg-Frandzen
for his insightful briefing.
SADC aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
SADC wishes to take this opportunity to reaffirm
and support the Palestinian people’s legitimate national
aspirations and inalienable rights, including to selfdetermination and freedom, in their independent State
of Palestine based on the two-State solution.
It is regrettable that the Security Council has once
again let down the Palestinian people by failing to
uphold its responsibility under the Charter of the United
Nations during the voting on Palestine on 30 December
2014 (see S/PV.7354). The result of the recent voting
on the draft resolution on the independence of
Palestine (S/2014/916) demonstrated that members of
the Security Council are divided on the need for the
Council to shoulder its responsibilities despite apparent
consensus within the Council itself and overwhelming
international consensus that the status quo is not
sustainable.
The draft resolution demanding an end to the
Israeli occupation of the occupied territories by 2017
was in line with the United Nations proposal on the
two-State solution based on the pre-1967 borders.

15-0135763/68

S/PV.7360

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

15/01/2015

Despite Security Council consensus on the matter and
declarations around the globe calling for an end to the
47-year Israeli military occupation and oppression of
the Palestinian people, the Security Council remains
paralysed and unable to act to ease their suffering. A
draft resolution delineating a time frame to end Israeli
occupation would have restored hope to the Palestinian
people that their oppression would soon come to an end.
The recent accession by the State of Palestine to several
international conventions and treaties, including
the Rome Statute, is a testimony of the Palestinian
leadership’s commitment to international law.

that the dialogue will contribute to finding a solution to
that conflict.

It is regrettable that the Security Council is failing
to meaningfully contribute to a peaceful solution
in the Middle East even as the situation continues to
deteriorate and threaten the stability of the region and
global peace and security.

At the very outset, we wish to align ourselves with
the statement made by the representative of Zimbabwe
on behalf of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC), as well as the one to be delivered
by the representative of Morocco on behalf of the
Africa Group.

Israel, the occupying Power, undermines all peace
efforts supported by some within the Council, under the
guise of the right to self-defense. The occupying Power
also continues to escalate settlement construction,
in violation of various United Nations resolutions,
including those adopted by the Council. SADC
condemns the occupying Power’s flagrant, systematic
violations of international law in the occupied territory.
We reiterate our call to the Security Council to play a
more active role to encourage the resumption of peace
talks. SADC supports negotiations towards a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East
leading to the restoration of the Palestinian people’s
legitimate right to establish an independent State
coexisting peacefully with the State of Israel.
The recent wave of motions by numerous European
Parliaments to recognize the Palestinian State is
affirmation that international consensus demands an
end to the occupation of Palestinian land. SADC urges
the Security Council to honour its Charter obligations by
acting resolutely to end the suffering of the Palestinian
people and ending the decades-long injustice at the
hands of the occupying Power.
SADC reaffirms its unflinching support and longstanding solidarity with the Palestinian people in the
quest to realize their inalienable rights and legitimate
national aspirations for freedom, justice, dignity and
peace.
We wish to conclude by expressing our support for
the initiative by the Russian Federation to convene a
meeting of all parties to the Syrian conflict. We hope

64/68

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Botswana.
Mr. Nkoloi (Botswana): Let me express my
delegation’s profound gratitude to you, Sir, for convening
this crucial debate. We appreciate this opportunity to
continue to engage the Security Council on matters of
international peace and security. Our appreciation also
goes to the Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs for his comprehensive briefing this morning.

We welcome the Council’s tradition of discussing
the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, in an effort to engage the
international community and to share ideas on how we
can work together to contribute to peace and prosperity
in the Middle East.
My delegation ha and continues to follow with keen
interest the socioeconomic and political developments
in the Middle East, particularly in Syria and Iraq and on
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Of particular concern is
the fact that extremist activities and terrorist attacks
perpetrated against innocent civilian populations in the
region and the world continue unabated.
My delegation will remain steadfast in condemning
all forms of human rights violations, whenever and
wherever they occur. As the custodian of international
peace and security, we urge the Security Council to
work in unison to condemn such violations and bring
the perpetrators book.
The recent bomb attack of 7 January 2015 at the
Police Academy in Sana’a, which killed at least 37 and
injured many more, as well as the terrorist attack in
Lebanon on 10 January, is not only horrific but should
be condemned in the strongest possible terms.
On the situation in Syria, my delegation would
like to express its continued support for the people of
Syria and to call for an end to the humanitarian tragedy
besieging the people of that country. We are particularly
concerned about the plight of the millions of women and
children who have been displaced and are without food,
15-01357

15/01/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

shelter and medical care. We call on the international
community, as well as on humanitarian organizations
the world over, to respond in kindness and care to the
refugees of Syria.
On the question of the Palestine, Botswana
continues to believe that there is no alternative to the
two-State solution. The importance of the coexistence
of Israel and Palestine living side by side as two
sovereign States cannot be overemphasized. That will
not only be of value to the Israeli and the Palestinian
peoples, but will contribute to the regional stability
and offer new opportunities for the region as a whole.
My delegation believes that the peace process, where
all parties, including the international community, are
involved, could usher in the desired peace and stability
so longed for in the region.
The reality is that violence is not sustainable and
cannot bring about peace. The people of Israel and
the people of Palestine both need sustainable peace
and development if they are to prosper. That can be
attained only if there is opportunity and growth in
an environment of peace in the Middle East. It is my
delegation’s belief that this should be augmented by both
regional and international support. We furthermore call
on the parties to create an environment of mutual trust
throughout the negotiations in order to safeguard the
integrity of the negotiations, lest they be undermined.
In conclusion, Botswana believes that a stable
and peaceful Middle East is in the broader interests of
the peoples, the region and the world community as a
whole.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I also thank you for your initiative
to hold this debate on a subject to which my country
attaches the utmost importance based on our Arab
and Islamic commitment. We would also like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General ad interim ToybergFrandzen for briefing this morning on the most recent
developments in the Middle East, especially concerning
the Palestinian question.
Today’s meeting is being held following yet another
year when the Palestinian people held out the hope for a
better future and for fulfilling their dream to establish
an independent Palestinian State along the 4 June 1967

S/PV.7360

borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital. That hope
was engendered by the peace talks launched in July 2013
under the auspices of the United States of America, and
it was encouraged by the General Assembly’s adoption
of a resolution to declare 2014 as the International Year
of Solidarity with the Palestinian People. That hope was
also fuelled by the fact that Palestinians came together
to establish the Government of National Consensus to
faciliate the two-State solution. However, hope is now
illusory. This issue is still unresolved and the situation
is worsening. As a poet once said, existence is a heavy
burden and there is no hope. However, there is still
hope in the hearts of peace-loving people.
Talks have stalled owing to Israeli obstinacy. The
world saw unjustified aggression against the Gaza Strip
that resulted in more than 2,000 martyrs, including old
people, women and children. It also produced thousands
of wounded and displaced persons whose homes and
property were destroyed and who now are exposed to
the elements. Worse yet, in violation of the Charter of
the United Nations and the principles of international
law and international humanitarian law, it was civilians
themselves who were targeted. Schools, even those
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East in which the
displaced had taken refuge, were targeted. All of this
has produced a disastrous humanitarian situation from
which the Palestinian people continue to suffer. We
reject those actions, which will lead only to greater
extremism, violence and hatred.
The systematic plans to clamp down on the
Palestinians extend as well to religious practices,
including opening up access to the Al-Aqsa Mosque to
incompatible use. Efforts are also being made to Judaize
important religious sites. That is a major provocation to
the religious sentiments not just of Palestinians, but of
Muslims throughout the world.
From the beginning, Morocco’s King, Government
and people have condemned this Israeli aggression
against the Palestinian people in Gaza. At the instruction
of His Majesty King Mohammed VI, Morocco has
provided humanitarian and financial assistance to the
Palestinian people as a sign of solidarity, in particular
in the context of rebuilding Gaza.
His Majesty, who chairs the Al-Quds Committee,
is very concerned about the situation of the Palestinian
people, especially the situation in East Jerusalem. That
concern extends to the Judaization of the Holy City, the
ongoing settlement policy, the displacement of people

15-0135765/68

S/PV.7360

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and the repeated violations against the sacred nature
of the Al-Aqsa Mosque and against worshipers. We
are also gravely concerned about attemps to obliterate
the legal status of East Jerusalem as established under
international law: since 1967, East Jerusalem has been
considered as occupied Palestinian territory.
On ideological terms, all of this is giving rise to
questions of a religious nature. It is for that reason that
His Majesty the King convened a meeting of the Al-Quds
Committee at Marrakesh last January. The meeting’s
final communiqué reiterated the central nature and the
role of East Jerusalem for the Muslim Ummah. That is
a key element of any political resolution to the crisis.
Any violation of the Al-Aqsa Mosque will lead only to
further violence and tenstion.
Following the ministerial meeting of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, a futher coordination meeting
was held in Rabat on 12 November 2014, which issued
a call to influential parties as to the need to defend the
Al-Aqsa Mosque. The meeting also reasserted the right
of the Palestinian people to establish a State for the
sake of peace and and security.
On numerous ocassions, both bilaterally and
at international events, His Majesty the King has
emphasized the need to put an end to the occupation and
Judaization of Jerusalem. He has also sent a message to
the Pope in which he expressed the seriousness of the
situation.
On 30 December 2014, the international community
had an important opportunity to consider a draft
resolution on ending the occupation (S/2014/916),
which was submitted by Jordan. Unfortunately, that
opportunity was missed. The Kingdom of Morocco will
continue to support all efforts to create a Palestinian
State along the June 1967 borders.
The Syrian situation is growing worse by the
day at every level. That has repercussions not only
for the Syrian people but for all States in the region
in the Middle East. It is therefore necessary to bring
and end to this crisis, the price of which is being paid
by the people of Syria. Thousands of people have
died, while millions have been displaced. Policies
are aimed at producing displacement, famine, hunger
and the destruction of infrastructure and the means
of survival. We demand that access be granted for
humanitarian and medical assistance. In that regard, we
support the implementation of resolutions 2139 (2014)
and 2165 (2014).

66/68

15/01/2015

In that regard, Morocco has helped to set up a
mobile hospital in the Za’atari refugee camp. Through
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, we are also supporting efforts to alleviate the
suffering of the Syrian people.
We reiterate the need to preserve the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Syria. We
support Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura in finding a
political solution and launching a democratic transition
on the basis of the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex), so as to prevent any further destruction.
Morocco has not changed its position with regard
to its support for the independence and territorial
integrity of Lebanon. We commend the entire Lebanese
people for their patriotism and responsible attitude
in safeguarding the country’s security, stability and
sovereignty. We are convinced that Lebanon’s wisdom
will prevent that country from being drawn into the
Syrian crisis. In that regard, we condemn the recent
terrorist bombing in Tripoli, which resulted in many
innocent victims.
The situation in Yemen remains of great concern.
Terrorist acts are increasing. Senior political, security
and military officials were recently assassinated. Cadets
were also attacked recently at the police academy.
Such acts of sabotage and terrorism are serving
only to worsen the situation. They are undermining
the consensus and coooperation that made possible
an agreement on the National Dialogue. This will
hamper the holding of the constitutional referendum
and the presidential and parliamentary elections. We
therefore call upon all Yemeni political stakeholders
to safeguard their State, implement the outcome of the
National Dialogue, support the initiative of the Gulf
Cooperation Council in its entiretly and to support the
efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
so as to realize the aspirations of the people of Yemen
to create a democratic and modern State that respects
human rights and freedoms and meets the aspirations
for economic and social development. We call upon
brotherly and friendly States to provide support to
Yemen so that it can overcome the current situation and
achieve stability and development.
We cannot talk about the Middle East today
without dealing with the scourge of terrorism, which
is a threat not just for the region but the entire world.
The growth of the so-called Islamic State in Iraq and
Syria (ISIS), along with its crimes, attacks and killings,

15-01357

15/01/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

is an illustration of that threat. Terrorist groups that,
whatever they are called — Al-Qaida, Al-Qaida in
the Islamic Maghreb, Daesh, ISIS, Boko Haram or
the Nusra Front — cloak themselves in religion to
justify their expansionist and exclusionist political and
ideological goals in fact have nothing whatever to do
with Islam — to the contrary, they go against a religion
that calls for unity and coexistence.
Let us be vigilant. Let us not allow the terrorists
create disagreement among States or religions. We
reiterate our condemnation of terrorism in every form.
We also reiterate the need not to associate terrorism
with any State, people, ethnic group or religion. We
must face up to this scourge through cooperation. In
that connection, the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters must be confronted robustly so as to eradicate
it, and we emphasize resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178
(2014) in that regard.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of Israel has asked for the floor to make
a further statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Nitzan (Israel): At each and every open
debate, the representative of Saudi Arabia uses this
platform arrogantly to accuse my country of abusing
human rights and violating the freedom of religion.
And yet the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is a world leader
in abusing human rights. In the Islamic State of Saudi
Arabia, nine people were beheaded so far this year. We
are not talking historically, we are talking about just the
past two weeks. In the Islamic State of Saudi Arabia,
a blogger was sentenced to 1,000 lashes for running a
website promoting free speech. And in the Islamic State
of Saudi Arabia, 87 people were executed last year,
while 78 people were executed in 2013.
In response to the Syrian statement, I would like
to quote the figures published today by Special Envoy
for Syria Staffan de Mistura. The Syrian Government
is solely responsible for the deaths of 220,000 Syrians.
Twelve million people are in need in Syria. Seven
million six hundred thousand people are displaced. And
3.3 million refugees have left Syria. No inflammatory
statements or barage of lies can disguise those facts.
In his briefing this morning, the Assistant
Secretary General ad interim referred to a letter that
my delegation wrote regarding Hizbullah’s military
capabilities. I note that the Secretariat did not report that
the missiles and weapons being supplied to Hizbullah
were coming directly from the Islamic Republic of Iran,

S/PV.7360

and it is very important to emphasize that point. The
Iranian Revolutionary Guard is a Security Councildesignated entity responsible for the murder of the tens
of thousands of civilians in the Middle East, and behind
countless terror attacks around the world.
Mr. Gálvez took the Chair.
Even as the Security Council was debating the
situation in the Middle East today, Hizbullah chief
Hassan Nasrallah was making more threatening
statements on Lebanese television. He said that
“despite the current preoccupations, Hizbullah is
completely ready to face Israel... Hizbullah is ready
to invade Israel’s Galilee and beyond during any
upcoming war... Hizbullah is working to contrive
the greatest victory in its wars against Israel”.
Nasrallah said this only a few hours ago. Iran and its
proxies, be it the Syrian Government or Hizbullah, are
a threat to international peace and security, and it is
time to seriously address this threat.
I also found it amusing that the Turkish
representative said that the Palestinian issue is a
priority for Turkey. Turkey is currently providing a
platform for the terrorist activities of Hamas. Hamas
terrorists freely operate on Turkish soil, instructing and
financing Hamas terrorist operations against Israel.
As we speak, Turkey’s sponsorship of terrorism in the
Middle East should also be a priority for the Council.
Israel is fully committed to finding a political
solution with the Palestinian Authority. Israel is
committed to the solution of two States for two peoples
through, and only through, direct negotiations between
the parties. There is no alternative to negotiations.
Many have talked today about the importance of direct
negotiations, but let me also remind the Council that it
was President Abbas who flew to Doha, Qatar, a few
months ago, despite the efforts of the United States, and
chose Hamas over peace talks with Israel.
That was not the first time that this has happened;
it happened also in 2012 when, just as we were on the
verge of a breakthrough, Abbas abandoned the talks
and flew to Doha to sign a unity deal with Hamas. I
would remind the Council that Hamas is a designated
terrorist organization and recognized as such around the
world. Still in 2012, a few months later the Palestinian
leadership went to the United Nations seeking to
bypass direct negotiations. That also happened at the
end of last year with the draft resolution presented by

15-0135767/68

S/PV.7360

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the Palestinians (S/2014/916) and other unilateral steps
taken by the Palestinians — all to avoid direct talks. It
is much easier to travel to New York than to negotiate
directly with the Prime Minister of Israel in Jerusalem.
Finally, I would like to conclude by reminding a
certain Security Council member who referred to
the work of the Council in 2014 that the Council also
worked on a draft resolution to bring a solution to
the Gaza Strip by facilitating the entry into Gaza of
construction materials. However, that draft resolution
was singlehandedly rejected by the Palestinian
Authority.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The representative
of Saudi Arabia has asked for the floor to make a further
statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Alyas (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): I find
it strange that as we meet today to discuss the issue of
the Middle East and the question of Palestine, and the
representative of Israel has openly attacked countries
that have stood on the side of right and against his
country’s aggressions, the delegation of Israel has
raised domestic issues that are none of its concern. That
is hardly surprising, considering that Israel is known
to misrepresent the truth and to violate the rights of
the Palestinian people and international law on a daily
basis.

68/68

15/01/2015

I congratulate the representative of Israel for
returning, towards the end of his statement, to the topic
under discussion today. Unfortunately, he also mocked
those present here by claiming that Israel is committed
to the peace process.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The representative
of Israel has asked to speak one last time. I give him the
floor, while urging him to be very brief.
Mr. Nitzan (Israel): I would like to reply to the
statement made just now by the representative of
Saudi Arabia. If we are talking about the situation in
the Middle East, we cannot ignore the Saudi Wahabi
radicalism that is at the heart of Middle East terrorism.
Saudi Arabia supports, finances and supplies arms to
terrorist organizations in the region, and not only in the
region. The terrorist organizations in Africa that have
been mentioned earlier today — Al-Shabaab in Somalia
and Boko Haram — are all born and sponsored out of
Saudi radicalism.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.

15-01357
