UNITED NATIONS

I

NA TlONS UNJES

SECURITY COUNCIl.
OFFICIIIL RECORDS
1'HIRTEEN1'H

828

YEAR

Ih MEET IN G: 15 JULY 1958

Ime SEANCE: i5JUlLLE1' 1 9 - 5 8 - - - - - - ----1'REIZIBME ANNEE

CONSEII. DE SECURITE
DOC1JMENTS OFFICIELS
NEW

YORK

TABLE OF

CONTENTS
Page

Provislonal agenda (SjAgenda/823)
Adoption of the agenda

,

,

,

.
.

,

1
1

Letter dated 22 May 1958 from the repl'escntative of Lebanon to the President
uf the Security Council concerning "Complaint by Lebanon in respect

of a situation arising from th.e intervention of the United Arab RepUbliC
in the internal affairs of Lebanon, the continuance of which is likely to
endanger the maintenance of international peace and security" (5{4007.
S/1047)
.

TABLE DES

1

MATIERES

Ordre du jour pTovisoire (SJAgcndaj828) , , ' , , ,

.

1

,.,

1

Lettre, en date du 22 mai 19GB, aures~ee au Prc8ident clu Conscil de sccnritc
pDr le representn.nt du Libarr, coneeTnanl la. qnes[jon sniva:1te : {( Plainte
du Liban touchant une situation crMe par J'intervenLion de la Hepublique
arabe uute dans les aflaires interieures du Liban, et clont la prolongation est
su<;ceptible de menacer le maintien de la paix et de la scclIriLe il1tCl'llationales» (S(4007, S/40/17)
,
"
,
.

1

A.doption de l'ordre du jour" '"

( 16 p. )

,

,

,

'

,

S/PV.828

-'

I;>

)

~

.
'.
I,
I.
r,
I

,

Relevant documents not reproduced in full in the records of the meetings
of the Security Council ~rf'. pllblishcd in quarterly supplements to the O{flcial
RWJrds.
SgmlJOls of Uniled Nations documents are composed 01 capital leilers combined
with figu:cs. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference la a Unill'.d Nnlions

r

,

document,

•••
Les documents pertinents qui ne sont pas reproduits ill extenso dans (cs
comptes Tcndlls des seancesdu Conseil de seeurite sout publies dans des supplements trim~triels aux Documents ofTiciels.
Les CQh.~ des documents de i'Organisalion des Nations Unies se composenl de

lcltres maJuscules et de chiflrcs. La simple mmtion d'(1ne cote dans un lexle signifie
qu'il s'agi! d'un documenl de l'Organisalion.

f

r

l'•
I

!
•

(
it

I

I

>

r

i,
f

r
~:
,
r ..

1

r

EIGHT HUNDRED AND TWENTY-EIGHTH MEETING
Held in New York, on Tuesday, 15 July 1958, at 3 p.m.

HUIT CENT VINGT-HillTIBME SEANCE
Tenue it New-York, le wardi 15 juillet 1958, a 15 hemel!.

President: Mr. A. ARAUJO (Colombia).

President: M. A. ARAUJO (Co]omlJic).

Pl'c8cnl: The representatives of the following COUlltries: Canada, China, Colombia, France, Iraq, Japan,
Panama, Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.

Pfli.sents : Les representants des PllYS sUlvanLs
Canada, Chine, Colambie. France, Irak, Japan, Panama,
Suede, Union des Republiques socialistcs sovi~tifJ\l~s,
!loyaume-Uni de Grancle-BreLaglle et d'Irlaml<' du
Noed, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

Provisioool agenda (S/Agendaj828)

Ol'dre dn jour proviaoire (SjAgendaf82~)

1.

Adoption of the agenda.

1.

Adoption. de l'ordre dll jour.

2.

Letter dated 22 May 1958 from the representative

2.

Lettre, en dete du 22 mai 195&, udressec au President du ConseU de sccurjtc pflr le representant Uti
Liban, conccrnant la question suivante ; «Plainte
du Liban touch~nt une siLuntion Cl'cee par I'intervention de la RepllbJique arabc unie dans les
affaires interieures du Liban, et dont In prolongation est susceptible de menaeer le maintien de
la paix et de la securite internationales II (S/4007).

of Lebanon La the President of the Security C{luncH
concerning "Complaint by Lebanon in respect
of a situation arising from the intervention of Ule
United Arab Republic in the internal affairs of
Lebanon, the continuance of which is likely to
endanger the maintenance of international peace
and sec\lfity " (5/4007).

Adoption of the agenda

Adoption de I'ordre du jour

Thr. agenda was adopted.

L'ordre du jour est adopte.

Letter dated 22 May 1958 from the representative
of Lebanon to the Pre~lident of the Security Council
concerning "Complaint by Lebanon in r4':.!lpect
of a situation adsing from the intervention of the
United Arab Republic in the internal affair!! of
Lehnnon, the continuance of which i.B likely to
endanger the maintenance of international peaee
Dnd 8ecurity" (5/4001, 8/4(47)

Lettre en dote dn 22 rnai 1958, adressce an President
dn COD8cil de sccwite par le representant dn Lihan,
concernant la que8tion suivante : «( PIllwte du Lihan
touchant une situation creee par I'intervention
de la Repnbliquc llrobe unie dan8 le>! affaires interieul'es dll L:ilian, et (lont la prolongation est 8U8ccptible de menacer le maintien de la pais: et de
la securite inlcrnationalcs» (8/4007, 5/4041)

ill the invitation 0/ the President, Mr. Karim Azkoul,
representative 0/ Lebanon, and Mr. Omar Loul(i, representative 0/ the United Arab Republic, took places at the
Council table.

Sur l'invitalion du President, M. Earim Azkoul,
representant du Liban et Al. Omar Loutf!, representant
de la Republique arabe unie, prennent place cl la iahlc
du Conseil.

The interpretations into English and French 0/ the
stalement made by Mr. Sf/bolev (Union 0/ Sovid Socialist
Republics) at the 827fh meelin.1J were given.

11 est donnl leCture dcs intuprUalions en anglais et
en Iran~ais de la declaration faile par M. Sobolev (Union
des Republiques socialistes SOVieliqllCS) d la 8{27e seance.

1. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I
respecUully draw the attention of the members of the
Council to the draft resolution submitted at thc pre·
ceding meeting by the delegation of the Soviet Union,
which appears in doenment S/4047.

1. Lc PRESIDENT (tradult de l'espagnol) .' Je
signale a l'attention des membrl:s du Coneeil de securite
le projet de resolution presenle a la pre.cedente se811ce
par la deleg8tion de rUnion sovietirplc. qui a ete
publie sous la cote Sj·1047.

1

"I

2. Mr. DE VAUCELLES (France) (translated from
French): For two months now Lebanon, an independent,
sovereign State and a Member of the United Nations
which has always most scrupulously observed its obligations under the Charter, has been struggling against
a revolt which would certainly have ended by now, if
it had not been supported from outside.

2. M. DE VAUCELLES (France) : De[mis deux mois
deja, le Liban, Etat independant et souverain, Membre
de I'Organisation des Nations Unies qui a toujours
respecte avec le soin le plus scrupuleux les obligations
de la Charte, lutte contre une rebellion qui aura it sans
doute deja pris fin si elle n'etait pas appnyec de l'exterieur.

3. The Lebanese Government found it necessary Lo
bring this problem before the Security Council, which
considered it at several earlier meetings. During these
discussions, the French delegation has already had
occasion to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to the magnitude and inadmissible character
of this foreign intervention in Lebanon's internal
affairs.

3. Le Gouvernement libanais a estime indispensable
de saisir de ce probleme le ConseB de securite, qui en a
traite dans plusieurs seances anterieures. Au cours de
ces debats, la delegation fran<;aise a deja eu l'occasion
d'attirer l'attention des membres du Conseil sur
l'importance et le caractere inadmissible de l'ingerence
etrangere dans les affaires interieures libanaises.

4. The Security Council could not tolerate a state of
affairs which was contrary to the principles of international law and to the obligations of States Members
of the United Nations. In a resolution adopted on
11 June 1958, the Council decided, by 10 votes to none,
with 1 abstention, to send observers to the Lebanon
.. to ensure that there is no illegal infiltration of personnel or supply of arms or other materiel across the
Lebanese borders" [8{4023].

4. Le Conseil de securite ne saurait tole1'er un etat
de choses contraire aux principes du droit international
comme aux obligations des Etats Membres des Nations
Unies. Par une resolution votee le 11 jnin dernier, par
10 voix contre zero, avec une abstention, il a decide
l'envoi au Liban d'observateurs charges de « faire en
sorte qu'aucune infiltration illegale de personnel ni
aucun envoi illegal d'armes ou d'autre materiel n'aient
lieu a travel'S les frontieres libanaises)) [5/4023].

5.

In pursuance of that resolution, the SecretaryGeneral immediately took the necessary steps to send
to Lebanon more than 100 observers, from eleven
dilIerent countries, who began their activities without
delay. I am happy on this occasion to express to
them and to the Secretary-General our appreciation
for the fine work they have already done.

5. En vertu de ceUe resolution, le Secretaire general
a immectiatement pris les mesures IH~cessaires pour
l'envoi au Liban de plus de 100 observateurs appul'tenant it 11 pays dillerents, qui se sont mis immCdiatement a l'reuvre. Je suis heureux, a cette occasion,
de leur exprimer, ainsi qu'au Secretaire general, notre
appreciation de l'reuvre meritoire qu'i!s ont deja
accomplie.

6. It is apparent, however, from the report submitted
by the Group [8/4040 and Add.l] that it has been
unable to carry out its task completely because of the
difficulties encountered by it and, in particular, because,
at least until the last few days, it had access to only
one-tenth or so of the Lebanese-Syrian frontier.

6. Il ressort pourtanL du rapport presellte par la
mission [8/4040 et Add.i] que celle-ci n'a pu rcmpIir
completement sa tfiche en raison des difficultes qu'elle
a rencontrees, et notamment du fait qu'elle n'a pu
contrtller, au moins jusqu'a ces tout derniers jours,
qu'environ la dixieme partie de la, frontiere libanosyrienne.

7. In view of the deterioration of the situation as a
result both of the obstacles placed in the way of the
observers and of the recent events and bloodshed in
Iraq, the Lebanese Government yesterday appealed to
other States Members of the United Nations to support
its action.

7. Devant l'aggravation de la situation resultant tant
des obstacles opposes aux observateurs que des evenements sanglants qui viennent de se derou[er en lrak,
le Gouvernement libanais a fait hier appel a d'autres
Membres de I'Organisation des Nations Unies pour le
soutenir dans son action.

8. As the United States representative announced this
morning [827th meeting], the Government of his country
decided to respond to that appeal immediately.

8. Ainsi que l'a annonce ce matin le representant
des Etats-Unis d'Amerique [827 e seance], le gouvernement de son pays a decide de repondre immediatement a cet appel.

9. The Government of the French Republic notes
this decision which is, in its opinion, justified under the
provisions of Article 51 of the Charter. In this respect,
my delegation has noted with special interest the information given by the United States representative concerning t~~ spirit in v.:hic~ h!s Government is acting and
the conditIons to which It mtends to subordinate that
action.

9. Le Gouvernement de la Republique franfllmise prend
acte .de cette decision, qui trouve, a ses yeux, sa justificatIOn dans les dispositions de I'Article 51 de la
Charte. A cet egard, ma delegation a releve avec un
intefl~t particulier les indications fournies par le representant des Etats-Unis sur l'esprit et les conditions
dans lesquels son gouvernement entendait exercer
son action.

10. My Government earnestly hopes that the mere
announcement and initial effects of the United States
decision will be sufficient to create the conditions
necessary for a lessening of tension and the restoration
of public order and constitutional legality.

10. Mon gouvernement espere vivement d'ailleurs,
que la seule annonce et les premiers effets de la decision
des Etats-Unis suffiront a creel' les conditions necessaires a l'apaisement des esprits et au retablissement
de 1'0rdre public et de la Iegalite constitutionnelle.

2

•

r

l

L1. The French Government, for its part, is continuing to give earnest consideration to the request submitted to it by the Lebanese Government. The many
links which have bound France and Lebanon in the
past, and which still bind today, amply explain the
French Government's very grave concern at the present situation.

11. En Cl'. qui le conccrne, le Gouvernement franr;ais
continue a examiner avec la plus grande attention la
demande qui lui a tite presentee par le GOllvernement
lib anais. Leg IlQmbreux liens qui ont uni dans le passe
et qui continuent a unir la France et le Liban cxpliquent
suffisamment les preoccupations trcs graves que lui
cause la situatiOn actuclle.

12. My Government llas, moreover, an imperative
duty to protect France's considerable moral and material inlercsts in a traditionally friendly country and to
ensure the safety of its many nationals in the area.
It is in this spirit thftt my Government reserves its
right to take any measures within tlle i'rameworl, of
the United Nations Chllrter which it may deem n<:cessary to safeguard its interests.

12. Mon gOllvernement a, d'autrc part, le devoir
impcrieux de veiller a la protection des interets moraux
et matericls importants de la Fl'llnce dans un pays
traditionnellement ami, ainsi que d'assurer la .~ecurite
de ses nombrcux ressortissants. C'est dans cet esprit
qu'll se reserve de prendre, dans le cadre de la Charte
des Nations Unies, loutes mesures qui lui paraitraicnt
incJispensables jlQ\ll" la s311vegarde de ccs interets.

13. Mr. HOLMES (Canada): I need not say that the
Canadian Government shares in the concern expressed
by other members of the Security Council over the
situation which has developed in tJle Middle EnsL.
This is not the time to enter inlo an examination of
all the many factors which have contributed to the
present dangerous tensions. Rather, we must address
ourselves to the urgent task of seeking how best the
United Nations can assist tIle people of the area in
fillding solutions for their difficulties.

13, lH. HQLMES (C::lllada) [traduil de l'anglaisJ : le
n'ai pas besoin de dire que le Gouvernt:ment canadien
partage !'inquietude exprimec par cl'autres membres
elu COI;seil de sccllritc all slljet de la .~iluation qui
s'esl ereee all Moyen-Orie.nt. Ce n'est pas le moment
d'examiner en detail le~ nombreux factellrs qui ont
contribue a faire naitre la dangereuse tension actuelle.
Nous devons plut6t nous appliqucr immediatement a
rechercher de queUe manierc J'Organisation des Nctions
Unies pCLll'rait le mieux aider la population de ceUe
region a resoudre ses dimculb~s.

14. Since the Lebanese question was first brought to
the attention of the Security Council, my Government
has given fIrm support to United Nation~ action in
that area. We Jluve contributed men to [Jle observcr
group in Lebanon as we have previously COlltributed
men to the United Nations Truce SupCl'vision Organization in Palestine and to the Uniled Nations Emergency Force. We continue to believe in the purposes
of the United Nations activit.ies in the area, Wc are
proud of what has been accomplished, and we continue
to hope that in this and other ways the United Natiolis
can maintain Its good influence in that part of the
world.

14. Depuis que la question du Liban a ponrla premiere
fois ete portee a I'attention dn Conseil de sec'Jrite,
mon gouverr.ement a fermement appuye radion de
l'Organisation des Nations Unies dans cette region.
Nous avons foumi des hommes pour le Groupe d'observation qui s'est rendll all Liban, comme nous I'avions
deja fait pour l'Organisme des Nations Unies charge
de la surveillance de la treve en Palestine et la Force
d'urgence des Nations Unies. Nous cOntillUons a avoir
foi dans l'action entreprLse pal' l'Organisation des
Nations Unics duns la region. Nons sommes fler.'! de
cc qni a deja ete accnmpli et nous continuons a esperer
que, de cette manicre notamment, l'Organisation
continuera a exercer son influence bienfaisante dans
ceUe region du monde.

15. Wc trust thal whatever furthcl' measures may have
to be taken will huild on the good work already dOlle
as a foundation. Wc trust also that due concern
will be paid to the well-being of the many agents of the
Llniled Nalions who are now serving in this area.

15. QueUes que soient le.~ mesures que oous pourrOlls
encore avail" a appliquer, elles prendront appui, nous
en sommes convainclls, sur l'ceuvre deja accomplie et
la renforceronL Nous sommes egalement persuades
que 1'00 se preoccllpera cl'assurer la securite des nombreux agents de J'Organisation actllellement en poste
darls cetle region.
16. Devant la gravite de la situation actueIJe. le
Gouvernement libanais a demandC llnc aide directc a
ceux qui etaient en mesure de la lui fournir. COmme
I'll. explique le representant du Uban a la precedente
seance, cette reque.'te a eLe faite conformement nux
dispositions de I'Article 51 de la Charte des Nations
Ullies.
17. Il n'y a, scion 1l0US, aucune rai.son pour que les
mesures exposees au Conseil par le representant des
Etats-Unis ne soient pas considerees comme venant
completer la mission que l'Organisatiou des Nations
Unies a deja entreprise. Si, pour nolre part, nouS
sommes persuades qu'il pellt en ~tre ainsi, c'est avant
tout parce que nous somm{',s convaincus que les EtatsUnis ne visent au MoyenvOrient aucun bllt egoiste.

16. In this present grave situation, the Government
of Lebanon has called on direct assistance from those
in 11 position to give that assistance. As the representntive of Lebanon had explained at the preceding
meeting, this call was made in accordance with the
provisions of Article 51 of the United Nations Cl1arler.
17. In our view, there is no reason why the action
reported to tIJe Council by [Jle representative of the
United States should not be considered as complementary to the mission whieh the United Nations has
already inaugurated. Our confidence that this can be
so is based primarily on our confidence that the United
States is not pursuing selfish interests in the Middle
East. but is seeking to assist the people of the Middle

3

East towards a more peaceful and a more prosperous
life. It is also based on the specific terms on which
the United Stat£;s representative has interpreted the
intentions of his Government to the Council [8271h

mais s'efforcent d'aider la population de cette region

a mener une vie plus paciflque et plus heureuse. Notre
conviction repose egalement sur les termes memes qu'a
cmpLoyes le representant des Etats-Unis [827 e seance]
pour definir devant le COllseil les intentions de son
gouvemement.

meeting].
18. Clear proof that tlIe United States is not seeking
ends incompatible with the purpo!>es of our Charter is
to be found in Mr. Lodge's firm statement that the
United States is not only willing but anxious to withdraw its forces when its mission can be taken over by
the United Nations.

18. La prcuve 6vidcnte que les Etats-Unls ne poursuivent pus des fms incompatibles avec les buts de la
Charte nous est fournie par la declaration tres ferme
de M. Lodge, scion laquelIe les Etats-Unis sont non
seulement disposes it retirer leurs troupes aussitM que
l'Organisation des Nations Unies pourra les re-.lever,
mais encore sont tres desireux de le faire.

19. Wc musl face the facts of the situation. The
principles of international law, to which the Soviet
representative somewhat inconsistently appeals, must
he applied to actual situations and not appeal to an
abstraction.

19. n convient de considerer les faits en face. Les
principes du droit international, auxqueLs le repre.
sentant de l'Union sovietique se rCrere quelque peu
inconsidcrement, doivent s'appliquer a des situations
reeDes, et non a des abstractions.

20. It is clear to all that the rights of States and the
rights of persons are threatened by the violent disturbances which are shaking the area. We do not presume
La judge the causes of this violence, but we cannot
allow violence to spread dangerously.

20. 11 est evident pour tous que les droits des Etats
et ceux des personnes sont menaces par les troubles
graves qui bouleversent la region. 11 ne nous appartient
pas de juger les raisons de eette violence, mais nous 1lC!
saurions permettre que celle-ci s'etende dangereusement.

If the intervention of the United States at the
request of the duly established Government of Lebanon
can hold the ring, check the violent disorders and
enable us to help the Lebanese people to find political
rather than military solutions to their troubles, I believe
that it will serve our purposes. This is not a time,
therefore, for this Council to relax its efforts. It is
up to llS to meet this new challenge and this new
opportunity. That is the ldnd of job for which the
Seeluity Council was created by the founders of the
United Nations.

Si l'intervention des EtatSwUnis. demandee par
le gouvernement legitime du Liban, pament a jouer
le rMe stabilisateur voulu, n meUre un tcrme aux actes
de violence et it aider le peuple libanais il resolldre "es
problemes par des moyens politiques I~t non mititaires,
j'eshme que cctte inte.rvention aura send les fms de
l'Organisation des Nations Unies. L'heure n'est pa3
venue cependant pour le Conseil de reH\cher ses efforts.
11 nous appartient de faire face .a cette nouvelle difficulte et de saisir cette nouvelle possibilite. C'est lit
le genre de t€tches pour lesqueIles le Conseil de securite
a Cte cree par les fondaLeurs de l'Organisation.

22. Mr. KIANG (China): In the absence of our permanent representative I shall make a very brief statement.

22.. M. IGANG (ClIine) [lradllil de l'anglais] : En
l'abgence du chef de mn delegation, je ferai une tres
breve declaration.

23. It is shocking to my delegation that Mr. Fadhil
AI Jamali, who is so well known and mucll respected
in the United Nahons, is reported to have been murdered. It was only a few weeks ago that we in this
Council heard the remarkable speech that Mr. Jamali
delivered on 10 June [8Ulh meetingJ. 111at speech
is now the last time his voice will be heard in the
United Nations. I remember our permanent; representative saying in this Council that Mr. Jamali's speech
deserved not only the attention of this Council, but also
the attention of all people interested in the cause of
peace and freedom [824lh meeting\.

23. C'est avec Hne profonde emotion que ma dclegation a n.ppris que M. Fadhil AI Jamnli, si tannu
et si respecLe il. l'Organisation des Nations Unies,
aurait ete assassine. Il y a seulement qucJques semaines
- c'etait le 10 juin -- nOU3 avons entcndu le discours
remarquable prononce par .M. Jamali devant le Conseil
[824<l seance]. Ce discours est done le dernier qu'il lui
ail t\te donne de faire a l'Organisation. Le chef de la
d~legation chinoise, je m'en souviens, a declare ici
m~me que le discours de M. Jamali meritait non seulement l'attention du Conseil, mais encore celle de tous
les peuples auxquels la cause de la paix et de la LibertC
est chere [8241: Seflr1C~J.

24. When the Lext which later became the re,~olutiott
of 11 June [S140231 was discussed in this Council, my
delegation regarded that resolution as the minimum
which the Security Council could do in the discharge
of its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
peace and security in the world [824th meeting]. Since
the adoption of the resolution, my delegation has
hoped, and is still confident, that the United Nations
Observation Group will exert its vigorous efforts in

24. Lorsque le textc qui devint la resolution du
11 juin [814023J 6tait discutc au Conseil, ma delegation a estime que le Conseil de securite ne pouvait
moins faire que l'adopter pour s'acquitter de sa respon w
sabilite principale : le mainhen de la puix et de la
securitc du monde [8Ue seanr:e]. Depuis l'adoption
de eette resoLution, ma delegation a espere, et elle
continue de le faire, que le Groupe d'observation des
Nations Unies ne negligerait aUCUll effort pour rectuire,

21.

r
,•

r•
f •

,,

21.

4

••

"
•
•

•

'(

r•
r
"

/'

the most effective way so as to reduce interference
from across the border.

de la maniere la plus efficace, tonte illgerence a travers
les fronHeres.

25. At the preceding meeting tlle representative of
the United States advised this Council that his Government has responded positively to the request of the
President of Lebanon for the help that is needed to
preserve Lebanon's integrity and independence.

25. A la precedente seance, le representant des Eta15Unis a fait savoir au Consei! que son gouvernement
avait repondu favorablement a la requete du President
du Liban, qui demandait qu'on lui accorde l'aide
ncccssaire pour aSSlITer l'integrite et l'independance
de son pays.

21).

States has now taken is in full accord with the prin~
ciples and purposes of the United Nations and will
certainly promote the cause of peace and freedom.
Therefore, my delegation wholeheartedly supports the
action that the United States has taken, with vision
and courage, at this most critical turning point in llistory.

26. A cette demande, les Etats-Unis ont repondu
avec beau coup de noblesse et de desinteressement. Ma
delegation estime que les mesures que les Etats-Unis
viennent de prendre sont confonnes aux buts et prill~
cipes des Nations Unies et serviront la cause de la
paix et de la liberte. C'est pourquoi nOllS appuyons
sans reserve les mesures que, nvec sagesse et courage,
les Etnts-Unis ont prises en ce tournant critique de
l'histoire.

27. Mr. LOllTFI (United Arab Republlc) (translated
from French): I must confess that it was with some surprise that my delegation heard that an emergency
meeting of the Security Council had been called for
today. I have listened very carefully to the statement
of the United States representative, who requested
this meeting of the Council on behalf of his Government.
Although not a member of this Council, I have the
honour to come from a country which is in the area
of the world concerned and, for this reason, I feel
bound to make certain remarks about the fail accompli
with whicll we are confronted today and the charges
that have been made against us,

27. M. LOUTFI (Republique arabc unie) : Je dois
aVOUtr que e'cst avee surprise que ma delegation a
entendu dire que le Conseil de securite etait convoque
d'urgence aujourd'hui. J'ai ecoute avec beaucoup
cl'attention l'intervention du representant des EtatsUnis, qui a demande, au nom de son gouvernement,
la convocation du Conseil. Sans etre membrc de ce
Conseil, j'ai l'honneur d'appartenir a un pays qui
fait partic de la region du monde inreressee, et c'cst
pOllr ce motif que je me vois ohlige de presentG quelques
observations sur ce fait accompli en face duquel nous
nom; trouvons aujonrd'hlli et sur les accusations dont
nous sommes l'objet,

28. It appears to me, in any event, that there was no
reason for holding an emergency meeting of the Council
and still less for landing United States troops. The
situation in Lebanon has greatly improved and the
disturbances tllere have considerably decreased in
magnitude. Moreover, the fighting between the forces
of the Government and those of the Opposition has
virtually ceased.

28. II me semble, tout au moim, qu'it n'y avait pas
de motifs ponr cette convocation urgente du Conseil,
ni surtout pour le debarquement des forces des EtatsUnis, La situation au Liban s'cst beallcoup amelioree,
et les troubles qui s'y deroulaient ont sensiblement
diminue. De rneme, les combats entre les forces du
gouvernement et ceUes de l'opposition ont presque
cesse.

29. In addition, negotiations were taking place among
the Lebanese themselves in an attempt to reach a
political settlement of the question. All the official
documents before us, the report of the Observation
Group and even the statements appearing in most of
the world press, have emphasized clearly and umnistakably that the Lebanese problem is a domestic issue
concerning only the Lebanese themselves and that it
is for them to fmd the solution.

29. En outre, des negociations pOUf trouver une
solution politique entre les Libanais eux-memes etaient
en cours pour le reglement de cette qllestion. Tous les
documents officicls dont nOllS disposons, le rapport des
olJservateurs, et meme les declarations de la plns
grande partie de la presse mondiale, ont, d'une fa\-on
llette et precise, souligne que la question du Liban
etait 11l1C question interne qui ne concernait reellement
que les Libanais el\x-m~mcs, et que c'est a eux seuls
qu'il apparlient de trouver UllC solution.

30. The armed in tervention of the United States
Government, at the request of President Chamoun, can
only serve, unfortunately, to increase tension and to
mal{c the situation in that part of the world evcn more
critical.

30, L'intervention (ll"lnec du Gouvernement des EtatsDnis, sur la requlne du president Chamoun, ne pent,
malheureusement, qu'aggraver le malaise et rendre la
situation plus critique dans cette partie du monde.

31. I do not wish to quote here - I do not think tllat
it would be appropriate to do So - the comments made
by the international press and by responsible politiciang
in the United States, such as Mr. WaIter Lippmann,
Senator Hubert H. Humphrey and Senator Theodore
F. Green, showing that tile results of this intervention
are unlikely to contribute to the maintenance of peace
and stability in that part of the world.

31. Je ne voudrais pas citer ici - et je pcnse qlle ce
n'est pas le moment - les commentaires qui ont ett
faits par la presse internationale et par des politiciens
raisonnables des Etats-Unis, comme M. Waiter Lippmanu, le senateur Hubcrt H. Humphrey, le senateur
Theodore F. Green, qui ont demontre que les consequences de ces interventions ne peuvent pas contribucr
a la paix et a la stabilite dans cetLc region du monde.

The response is indeed a good and sel ftess deed.

My delegation believes that the action which the United

5

32. I felt that the Security Coullcil resolution of
11 June 1958 [S/402.J] was calculated to improve the
situation in Lebanon and to enable the Lebanese to
settle their differences themselves. It was in that spirit
that my delegation did not oppose that resolution of
the Council. It is therefore with great regret that we
note the stand taken by the Unit.ed States Government,

J'e~timais que la resolution du Conseil de securite
du 1] juin dernier [SI4023] etait de natme a ameliorer
la situation au Liban et a permettre aux Libanais
de regler p.ux-memes leurs differends. C'est dans cet
esprit que ma delegation ne s'etait pas opposee a celle
resolution du Consdl. C'est done avec beaucoup de
regret que nous constatons I'attitnde prise par le
Gouvernement des Etnts-Unis.

33. In the light of the circumstances I have described,
there would seem to have been no reason for the uni~
laboral decision of the United Stale~ Government to
intervene. Indeed, in our view, Article 51 of the
United Nations Charter does not permit such an intervention, As you are aware, Article 51 mentions anned
altack as :l condition for its application. In addition,
there is Q.lready a Council decision which should be
carried out and which is in fact 'being carried out by
the Ohservation Group set up by the CounciL

33. n resulte de tout ceb que ricn ne semblait militer
en faveur de la decision unilat~rale du Gouvernement
des Etats-Unis d'intervenir. 11 nOllS semble meme que
l'Article 51 de la Charle des Nations Unies ne pennet
pas cette int.ervention. En effet, it exige, comme vous
le savez, une agression armee. En oUlre, it y a deja
Hne decision du Conseil qui doH ctre mise en ceuvre,
et qld est mise en ceuvre par le Groupe d'observation
crM par le Conseil.

3'1. From Lhe very first day, however, it became clear
that this Security Council resolntion of 11 June 1958
did not sOltisfy the present Government of Lebanon.
We noted, for example, that the Observation Group
and the observers themselves were subjected to severe
criticism by the President of the Lebanese ncpublic,
who stated in an interview with the Uniled Kingdom
newspaper, the Daily Mail, that the observers were
not carrying out their duty. He said, jn particular;
" It is dilficult for me to commenl OllUle activities of observers because they appear to be doing
noth..ing. As far as I can see, they spcnd their time
at the Aero Club in Beirut and on beaches and up
at the mountain resort." I
He went on to say:
"The observers contented themselves with quick
picnics in crrtain Lebanese areas and at banquets
given in their honour here and there." 1

Des le premier jour, il s'est avere que la resolution
du II jllin '958 n'a pas satisfait le gouvernement
netuel du Liban. Aussi aVOIlS-IlOllS rcmarque que le
Groupe d'observation et les obscrvateurs eux-memes
ont etc l'objet de critiques severes de la part du President de la Republique libanaise, qui a declare, dans
une interview au joufrlal .anglais Daily Mail, que ces
derniers n'accomplissaienl pas leur mission. Il a notam~
ment dit :
(111 m'est difficile lie commentc]' les activites des
observateurs parce que ees observatr:urs semblenl ne
rien faire ; Autant que fen puis jugcr, ils passent
leur temps a l'Aero~Club de Beyrouth, sur les plages,
a la station estivale, ou dans les montagnes I, '

32.

34.

Et plus loin ;
«( Les
observateurs se sont contentes de rapide,
piql\e~niqucs dans certaines regions du Liban et de
banquets donnes en leur honneur ici ou la 1. 11

35. It is obvious why the President of the Republic
and the members of his Government took this attitude.
They were displeased by the foct that the United Nations
observers, and in particular Mr. Ga~o Plaza, the Chairman of the Observation Group, reported that llley
were wilnessing a Lebanese civil war.

35. Le moW qui a amene le President de la Repu blique
et les membres de son gouvcrnement a prendre celle
al.titude est tres clair. lis n'ont pas ete s3tisfaits du
fait que les observateurs des Nations Unies, notammenl
M, Gala Plaza, president du Groupc d'observation, onl
declare qu'ils avaient a fRire lace a line guerre civile
lib3naise,

36. What is more important, however, is thal the
matter was brought before the Security Council and
tlmt thc Coullcil adopted a resolution whicll the Secretary-General is now carrying out. In his statement
this morning (827th meeting], Mr. Hammarskjold stressed
the efforts made by the Observation Group to implement the Council's resolution of June. He informed
us in particular that freedom of access has been granted
by the Opposition forces in lhe Tripoli and Bckaa
areas. An agreement has apparently been reached
with the Opposition whieh controls this part of the
territory. It is therefore surprislng to see that, at a
time wh~n the Council's resolution is being implemented, a member of the Council who voted in favour
of it is taking this attitude and has decided to intervene
unilaterally.

36. Cl" qui est le plus important, c'est que le Conseil
de securite a ere saisi de la question et a adopte une
r6solution, que le Secretaire general est en train de
metb'e en ceuvre. Ce matin meme, dans son intervention
[827C seance], M. HammarskjOld a mis l'accent sllr les
efforts qui ont ete developpes par le Groupe d'observatioll pour appliquer la resolution adoptee par l~.
Conseil le 11 juin. Il nous a dit notamment que, dans
la region de Tripoli, le libre acces a etd accorde par IBS
forces de I'opposilion, de meme que dans la region de
la Bekaa. Un atr:ord avec l'opposilion, qui contr~le
cette partie du tcrritoire, aurait ete concIu. Aussi est-il
elonllant de voir que, pendant que la resolution du
Conseil est appliquee, nn membre dn Conseil qui a
vote en sa favenr prenne cette attitude d decide
d'intervenir unilateralement.

•

•

I

"

,
•

,

I

-

,

"

•

•

"

>
,~

•

-

,

•

,·
•

l.

The speaker read the quotation in English.

1

6

Texte cite en anglals par l'orateur.

37, In this connexion, charges ngainst us, which were
never proved, are being revived. I have already
shown that these charges are unfounded in my two
statements to the Council (S,?3rd and 824til meetings]
at the meetings at which the Lehanese question was
<liscllssed. I also showed that the question before
us was a dispute among Lhe Lebanese themselves. I
must repeat that the events in Lebanon are of concern
only to the Lebanese. It is for them alone to bring
them to an end. I should not even hke to revelt to this
question. The evidence which I submitted to show
that this was a purely Lebanese problem can be found
in the records of our meetings.

37. On rcprend contre nOlls, a cette occasion, des
accusations dont I~ bien-fond6 n'a jamaLs ete etabli.
Jel'ai deja demontrli au cours de roes deux interventions
au COllseil de secllrite l823 c et 8t4" seances), lors des
seances ou nous avons discute de la qllestion libanaise.
J'ai aussi demolltrc qu'il s'agLssait, en I'occurrence, d'un
differend entre les Libanais. Les 6venements du Liban
ne eoncement, encore une fois, que Ies Libanais, A
eux sellls, i]incombe d'y mettre fin, Je ne voudrais
pas meme revenir sur ceUe question, mais les prellves
que j'ai apporMes, prouvant qu'il s'agissait d'une
question purement libanaise. se trouvent dans les
proces-verbaux.

38. In )jlS statement today [827lh meeting], Mt'. Azkoul
tmfortunately repeated the same charges. I shall not
reply to the academic exercisc in logic, which he dis·
played in his interpretation of the Report of the Observation Group [S/1010 anri Add.l!. My delegation did
so immediately after his slaLement to the press, of
which you have been informed. I should simply like
Lu add that whatever the logic used, it cannot be valid
so IOllg as it is contrnJicte<1 by the facts given in the
Report of the Observation Group, with which you are
all familiar.

38,

M. Azkoul, aujourd'hui, dans son intervention

[827'0 seance], a repris malheureuseml':nt

If'A~

m~mes

acwsatiolls. Je ne repondrai pas a l'effort de logique,
cl'un caractere d'ailleurs a..:adcmique, dont i1 a fait
preuve dans son interpretation du rapport du Groupe
d'obscrva.tion [5/4040 et Add. 1]. NOlis l'avol1s deja
fait immediatement apres SOil expose a la presse,
qtli vous a Ate commlllllqlle. Mais je voudrais Lout
simplemenl ajoutcr que, queUe que soit cette logiquc,
eIle ne pe ut avoir de valeur tant qu'elle est contredite
par les faits qui se trouvent dans le r"pporl que vous
connaissez tous.

39. Tile Observation Group itself, in a communique
issued to the press, which I have before me, declared
as follows (Press Helease LEB/9 of 26 June 1958):
"The Observation Group believes that the progressive implementation of that mandate will contribute greatly to the creation of conditions within
1.ebanon whieh will make possible the solution by the
Lebanese people themselves of the internal problems
which face the country at the present time." 2
Nothing could be more clear and I do not know what
I could add.

39. Le Groupe d'observation a declare lui-meme,
dans un communique a la presse dont j'ai Lll texte sous
les yeux (Press Release LEE/9, du 26 juin 1958) ;
« Le Groupe d'observation cmit que I'application
progressive de ce mandat contribuera grandement it
cnier au Liban des conditions rendant possible la
solution, par le peuple libanais lui-meme. du probleme
inteme dans lequel le paYfi se troltve pris en ee
moment 2.»
Cela ne peut pas etre plus clair, et je ne sais pas cc que
je pourrais ajouter.

40, No evidence llas been produced that the United
Arab Republic has intervened in the domestic alfairs
of the Lebanon. Unfortunately, what is happening
now does, in our opinion, constitute an intervention
in the domestic afTairs of Lebanon. I can only express
regret at the fael that Mr. Chamolln and foIr. Malik
should themselves have requested the intervention of
foreign armed forces in their country. History will
hold them responsible for this action which may have
very grave repercllssions in this part of the world.

40. 11 u'a pas ete etabli que la Republique arabc unie
salt intervenue dans les aITaires int6rieures du Liban.
C'est malheureusement ce qui se passe aujourd'hui
qui, it notre avis, constitue une intervention dans les
affaires intericures du Liban. Je ne puifi que regretter
que MM. Chamoun et Malik aient demande eux-memes
une intervention des forces ctrangeres dans leur pays.
Ils assumeront ue.vallL I'histoire 111. re"p()nsabLlite de
ceLte action, qui peut elltrainer des repercussions tres
gmves dans eette partie dn monde.

41. There can be no doubt that the great Power
which took this decision, tl decision which is far from
justified, when it, marc than any other State, is responsible for the maintenance of international peace and
securiLy, has thereby set a very dangerous precedent.
No one can arrest the course of history. The peoples of
the Middle East, like the peoples of Asia and Africa,
are fully aware of their responsibilities; they are equally
consciuus of L1leir rights. their right to liberty and
their right to independence, without pressure from the
grent Powers or intervention by them. AllY attempt
to ignore these factors in the relationships between
the great Powers and the countries of that part of the
world will make it difficult to maintain peace and

41. Il ne fait pas de doute que la grande puissance
qui a pris cettc decisioll, deeifiion qui est loin d'etre
iustifH~e, et qui a, plus que tous les autres Etats, la
responsabilite du maintien de la paix et de la securite
internfltionales, a tree par ceHe decision lln precedent
tris dangereux. Pcrsonne ne peut arreter le cours de
I'histoirc. Les peuples du Moyen-Orient, comme les
peuples d'Asie et d'Afrique, comprennent actuellement
lellr re.~pon.~abilite; ils savent aussi qu'ils ont des droits
_ droit l'inrlependance, droit la Jibertc, sans pression
des grandes puissances et sans intervention de ces
dernieres. Si ron cherehe a ne pas respecter ces facteurs
dans les relations des grandcs puissances avee lcs pays
de cette partie du monde, il sera difficile d'y faire

~

a

a

Texte cite en anglais par l'ora.t(,;\lr.

The speaker read the quotation in English.

7

•

I

stability in the area. Obviously, and indeed this is
clear from the statement of the United States representative, it was the revolution in Iraq which led the
United State~ to take this grave decision. That revolution, however, is purely internal affair of Iraq,
a fact no one can deny. It cannot therefore possibly
give rise to an intervention which may endanger the
peace and stability of that part of the world.

regner Ill. paix et la stabilite. 11 est evident, comme cela
resulte d'ailleurs de la declaration du representant des
Etats-Unis, que la revolution en Irak a amene les
Etats-Unis a prendre cette grave decision. C'est pourtant une question irakienne completement interne, et
je crois que personne ne peut contester ce fait. Celte
revolution ne saurait done, en aucun cas, donner lieu
a une intervention, qui peut porter atteinte it la paix.
et a la stabilite de cette partie du monde.

42. I was surprised at the unfounded accusations
levelled against us by the United States representative;
there is no evidence to support these charges, which
are in fact flatly contradicted by the report and the
statements of the Observation Group and even by the
press. It is regrettable that such statements should be
made by a country with which we want to have good
relations. If anyone wants to intervene in Lebanon,
for motives which I do not know and which in any case
are not justified, be it for the sake of prestige or on
behalf of private interests, that is still no reason for
making unsupported accusations against another State.
The United States Government has taken this grave
decision; it will be responsible for it. For our part,
as I have already told the Council on several occasions,
our only wish is for Lebanon's independence and prosperity.

42. ]'ai ete s'Jrpris des accusations du representant
des Etats-Unis a notre egard, accusations qui ne sont
pas fondees, qui n'ont pas ete etablies, et qui sont
ncttement contredites par le rapport des observateurs
et leurs declarations, et meme par la presse. II est
regrettable que ces declarntions emanent d'un pays
avec lequcl nollS desirons avoir de bonnes relations. Si
l'on veut intervenir au Liban. pour des motifs que
j'ignore et qui en tous cas ne sont pas justifies, que
ce soit pour des raisons de prestige ou pour des interHs
particuliers, on n'a pas besoin pour cela d'aCCllser un
autre Etat sans apportel' de preuves. Le Gouvernement
des Etal:.<;-Unis a pris cctte grave decision; c'est lui
qui en assumera la responsabilite. Nous ne demandons
pour notre part, comme je rai deja affirme ici it plusieurs
reprises, que l'independance et la prosperite du Liban.

e

43. I reserve the right, Mr. President, to speak again
at a later stage.

43. Je me reserve, monsieur le President, de prendre
la parole a un autre moment.

r.

44. Mr. AZKOUL (Lebanon) (translated from French):
Mr. President, with your permission and that of the
members of the Council, I should like to take II few
minutes simply to clarify some points and to reply to
some of the comments made about my country.

44. M. AZKOUL (Liban) : Avee votre permission,
monsieur le President, et celle des membres du Conseil,
je voudrais prendre quelques minutes, simplement pour
precis er certaines observations qui ont ett! faites concernant mon pays et y repondre.

45. First of all, I should like to comment on the statement attributed to Mr. Chamoun, the President of the
Republic of Lebanon. in his interview with the Daily
Mail. I should inform the Council that the Lebanese
Minister in charge of liaison with the Observation
Group has recently told the press that the statements
attributed to the President have been distorted. With
regard to the statement attributed to the Chairman
of the Observation Group, Mr. Galo Plaza, who is
alleged to have said that he did not believe that there
was any infiltration of armed men or material into
Lebanon, I should like to ask the Secretariat, if possihle, to read out the exact text of that statement,
I do not believe I have seen any such statement by
Mr. Galo Plaza in any publication. The most he can
have said, in any event, is that during the short time
it had spent in Lebanon and at the preparatory stage
of its work, his Group had not been able to establish
the existence of such infiltration. Bul he cannot possibly have said that such infiltration was non-existent.
I would like to have, either today or at another meeting,
confirmation of the exact text of the statement attri~
buted to Mr. Gala Plaza.

45. D'abord, je voudrais commencer par preciser la
declaration attribuee au President de la Republique
du Liban, M. Chamoun, dans !'interview qu'il aurait
accordee au Daily Mail. Je dois informer le Conseil
que le Ministre libanais charge de la liaison avec le
Groupe d'observation a declare dernierement a la
prcsse que les declarations attribuees all President
etaient deformees. En ce qui concerne la declaration
attribuee au president dll Groupe d'observation,
M. Galo Plaza, selon laquelle il aurait dit qu'it ne croit
pas qu'il y £lit aucune infiltration d'hommes armes Oil
d'envois de materiel au Liban, ie voudrais demander
au Secretariat de nous lire, si c'est possible, le texte
exact de cetto declaration. Il ne me semble pas avoir
lu dans nucune publication line declaration semblable
emanant de M. Galo Plaza. Tout ce qu'it aurait pu
dire, dans tous les cas, c'est que son groupe, pendant
le pell de temps qu'iJ. a passe au Liban et dans IllllO
periode preparatoire, n'aurait pas constate l'existence
il'une infiltration, mnis il n'aurait certainement pas
pu dire que cette infiltration n'ex.istait pas. Je voudrais,
si cela est possible, maintenant ou a une autre seance,
avoir confirmation du texte exact attribuc il M. Galo
Plaza.

46. As regards the statement in the first press release
(Press Release LEB(9) issued by the Observation Group
at Beirut, the last paragraph admittedly says that
the progressive implementation of the Group's mandate
would contribute to the creation of conditions which
would make it possible for the Ll'.banese people to

46. En cc qui concerne la declaration qui se trO\IVll
dans le premier communique que le Groupe d'observation a publie a Beyrouth, il est vrai que le dernier
paragraphe de ce communique (Press Releasc LEB/9)
dit que la mise en application progressive du mandat
du Groupe permettrait de creer de!> conditions suscep-

8

I

•
I
(

(

~'

r-

">

,>

r

(

("

(

I~

•

,

!
"

,

r

r

solve their internal problems. The interpretation
placed on this text by the representative of the United
Arab Republic seems to me, however, inconsistent
with the true facts, to say the least. The text aclualIy
conftrms our thesis - namely, tllatif the mandate of
the Obser....ation Group were·· implemented, Le., if the
presence of the observers put an end to infiltration,
then conditions would be established on the purely
internal plane which would make it possible for the
Lebanese people to settle their problems themselw.s.
We believe that Once infiltration from outside is
stopped, we are capable of settling our own problems.
ThLs paragraph, which has been adduced as evidence
that there is no infiltration in the Observation Group's
opinion, is, on the contrary, a very clear proof that
such infiltration does eXist and that only when it has
been stopped will the Lebanese people be able to settle
their internal pr oblems,

tibles de donner au peuple libanais la possibiliti de
resoudre ses problemes interieurs. Cependant, le repre~
sentant de la RepubJique arabe unie a donne a ce
lexte lme interpretation qui me semble Hre, pour le
moins, non eonforme a la realite, Ce texte confirme
notre these selon laquelle, si le mandat des observateurs
est realise, c'est-a'-dire si l'observation abolltit a faire
cesser I'infiltration, it y auralt des conditions purcment
interieures qui permettraient all peuple libanai~ de
negler ses problemes lui-m~me. Notre theorie est que,
une fois arretee !'infiltration extericure, naIlS sommes
capables de resoudre nos problemes. Ce paragraphe,
invoque pour prouver qu'il n'y a pas d'infiltration dans
I'opinion du Groupe d'observation, est, au contraire,
une preuvc tres claire de ['existence de cette infiltration,
et que seul l'arr~t de cette infiltration permettra au
peuple libanais de rcsoudre ses problemes interieurs.

47. I should lih to conclude my statement by asSo_
ciating myself fully with my friend, Mr. Loutfi, when
he speaks of the right of peoples to independence and
of the need to ensure that this right is respected by
the great Powers and Llle major countries.

,17. Je voudrais terminer en m'associant Cl)mpletement
avec mon ami, M, Loutfi, lorsqu'il pade du droit des
peuples a l'indcpendance et au respect de ce drDit
par les grandes puissaaces et par les grand. pays.

48, 1 am speaking as the representative of a very
small country and I am addressing myself to the representative of the United Arab Republic whicll is, COm~
pared to Lebanon, a great Power, and 1 fully agree
with his principles concerning respect for the right of
peoples and the fact that the small countries must be
respected by their neighbonrs and by those countries
which are, by comparison, large and all-powerful.

48. Je pade maintenant en tant que representant
d'un tout petit pays et je m'adresse au representant
de la Republique arabe unie, pays qui, par rapport au
Liban, constitue une grande puissance, el je sui.
completement d'accord avec lui en ce qui concerne ses
principes du respect du droit des peuples, pour que
taus les petits pays soient respectes par leurs voisins
et par cellX qui, par rapport a eux, sont eonsideres
eomme grands et tout-puissants.

49, The SECRETARY~GENEHAL:Therepresentative
of Lebanon referred to a statement by the represen~
tative of the United Arab Republic which, in turn,
referred to a statement made in a press conference by
Mr. Gala Plaza. It will be a pleasure for us to clleck
what was really said by Mr. Galo Plaza and put it. at
the disposal of the two gentlemen who have talked
aboul the statement. I myself do not recall exactly his
wording, but I think that this matter can be cancelled
out by giving the exact text to the two gentlemen,

49. Le SECRETAfRE GENERAL (Iruduil de l'an~
glais) : Le representant du Liban a mentionne unc
declaration du representant de la Republique arabe
unie, qui, a son tour, a rappeIe une declaration faite
lors d'lIne conference de presse par M. Galo Plaza.
Le Secretariat ne manquera pas de verifier le texte
exact de la declaration de M. Gala Plaza et de le mettre
a la disposition des deux representants qui en ont
fait mention. Pour ma part, je ne me souviens pas
des termes exacts que M. Plaza a employe., mais je
crois qu'it suffira, pour regler la question, de donner
le texte verifie aux deux representants.

50. Since I have the floor, 1 might perhaps add one
word about sometlling which it has been said that 1 have
said myself. The represenlative of the Soviet Union
referred to a statement according to which I would have
said that the events in Lebanon were "the domestic
affairs of the Lebanese people" [827/h meeting, para. 971.
I have never made a publie statement to that effect.
I thinl~ that the Soviet representa~ive has been misled
by somewhat imaginative and free interpretatLons in
the press of what was a statement with an entirely
different overtone and undertone.

50. Puisque j'ai la parole, qu'il me soit perm is d'ajouter un mat all sujet d'une declaration que J'on m'a
pretee. D'apres le. representant de I'Union sovilWque,
j'aurais dit que les evenements qui se deroulent au
Liban sout " des affairf'.'l interieures du peuple libanais ))
[827" seance, par. 97], Je n'ai jamais fait pareille
declaration. Je crols que le representant de l'Union
sovietique s'est laisse induire en erreur par l'interpre_
talion un peu trop libre et fantaisiste que la presse a
donnee d'unc declaration faite dans un esprit enti~­
rement different.

51. Mr. SOBOLEV (Union of Soviet Socialist Repub~
lies) (translaled from Russian): In my statement
[827t1l meeting], I quoted a statement made by Mr. Gala
Plaza. The Lebanese representative said that he was
unaware of any such statement and asked for confirmation of it. 1 should like once again to quote tills
statement from the United Nations Press Release
LEBJ15 of 7 July 1958.

51. M. SOBOLEV (Union des Reptlbliques socialistes
sovietiques) [traduil du russe] : Au cours de mOll intervention [827 8 seance], rai cite une declaration de
M. Gala Plaza, Le representant du Liban a affirme
qu'il n'avait pas connaissance de cette declaration et
il a demande qu'on lui confirme son existellce. Je
me permets de donner lecture de cette declaratlon
telle qu'ellc figure dans le communique de presse de

9

,Ii
t

,f

i

•
rOrganisation des Nations Unies en date uu 7 juillet
1958 (Press Release LEO/1S).
52, At a certain point in Uti!!> press release, the fol~
lowing statement is made:
.. Mr. Plaza was asked whether the Lebanese
Government had provhleu information which the
Group had not yet been able to i.nve~tigate but
which, if substantiated, would justIfy Its charges.
He answered: 'We have not bad anything from the
Lebanese Government which would lead us to say
there is massive infiltration.' " 3
That is exactly what I quoted, nothing more.

54. The statement by Mr. Galo Plaza is entirely acceptable to the Lebanese Government for the simple reason
that my Government has never claimed that there
was massive infJltmtion into Lebanon. No represell~
tative of Lebanon, no spokesman of the Lehnnese
Government, has used the term" massive infiltration ".
The expression wc have used is "massive intervention
in the internal affairs of Le!:lanon " and we maintain
that this massive intervention is taking place in the
six forms which I described at the preceding meeting
and whicll add up to what we call "massive intervention". What we have in mind is the supply of
arms, the training of personnel, radio propaganda, propagandA by the press, etc. Infiltration by armed men
is only one of the forms of massive intervention.

54. La declaration de M. Galo Plaz,a est parfaitemcllt
acceptable pour le GOuvernernent libanais, pour la
simple raison que cc dernier n'a jamais pnitendu qu'i!
y avait des infiltrations massives au Liban. Aucun
representant du Liban, aueun responsable du GOIlvemement libanais, n'a employe le terme I< infIltration
massive 11. L'expl'ession clont nous nous sommes scrvis
est «intervention massive dans les affaires interienres
dll Liban ». Et cetle intervention massive, nollS maintenons qll'elle existe, sous les six formes que j'ai
exposees a la preeedente seance et qni eontribuent a
ereer co que nous appelons 11 inLervention massive~.
Il s'agit de ]'envoi d'armes, de l'cntrainemenl de
personnel, de la propagande radiophonique, de la
propagal1de par la presse, etc... L'innltration d'homrnes
armcs n'est que l'une des [onm's de l'intervention
massive.

55. We have merely said that there was continuous
infJItration, but we have never spoken of massive
infJItration because, in our opinion, such an expression
would be contradictory. Inflltration is the act of a
small group of men who secretly enter a counlry
singly or in groups. Mass inliltration, if it were to occur,
would amount to an invasion and we have never said
that Lebanon has been invaded.

55. Nous avons simplement dit qu'iJ y avait infiltration continue, mais llOUS n'avoIls jamais paric
d'infiltration massive, parce que l'expression est, a
notre avis, contradictoire. L'illJJltration est l'action
d'un petit groupe d'hommes, qui passent clandesti~
nement, isoJes 0'.1 ensemble, dans un pays. S'i1 se produisait une inflltration de masse, ce serait lIllC invasion.
Or, nous n'avons jamais dit qu'il y avait invasion an
Liban.

56. All this shows, therefore, that Mr. Galo Pla7,a is
in complete agreement with the Lebanese view that
there is infiltration but not an invasion. By stating
that there is no massive infiltration, he admits the
existence of infiltration pure and simple, That is
predsely what we have always claimed. I am there~
fore grateful to the Soviet Union represcntative for
having given me an opportunity of clarifying the situution.

56, Cela prouve done que M. Galo Plaza est en complet
accord avec la theorie libanaise selon laquelle il n'y a
pas invasion, mais hien infJItn.:.tioll. S'il nie l'existem:e
d'une infiltration massive, c'est qu'il admet I'cxistence
de I'infiltration tont court. C'est ce qne nous avons
touJours soutenu. C'est pourquoi je remercie le representant de l'Union sovietique de m'avoir fourni
l'occasion de tirer la situation au clair.

Mr. LOUTFI (United Arab Republic) (translated

57. M, LOUTFI (Republique arabe unie) : Je ne
vellX pas m'eng<Jgcr dans une discussion d'interpretation
avec le representant du Liban. Je desire simplement
prendre <lete qu'il est d'accord sur la declaration qui a
ete faite par le president du Groupe d'observation,
M. Galo Plaza.

on interpretation with the representative of Lebanon.
I merely wish to note that he agrees with the statement
made by the Chairman of the Observation Group,
Mr. Galo Plaza,
a The speaker read the quotation in English.

J

10
'tt

(( On a demande a M. Plaza si le Gouvernement
libanais avait fourni des renseignements snr lesqueJg
le Groupe n'avait pu encore enqueter mais qui, s'ils
etaicllt confirmes, prouveraient le bien-fonde de SM
accusations, Il a I'epondu : !! Nous n'avons rien re~'~
du Gouvernement libanais qui nous permette de
conclure qu'il y a infiltration massive 8. 11
Tel est exactement le texte que j'ai cite. Jc n'ai rien
ajoute.
53. M. AZKOUL (LilJan) : Je remercie sincerement
le representant de I'Union sovittique d'avoir produit
un texte qui rennet d'eclairer la situation. Lorsquc
j'ai pris la parole il ya quelques instants, j'ai dit que
mon but etait de rendre la situation plus claire,

trom Frem:h): I do not wish to embark on a discussion

i.

Il y est dit notammeJ.lt :

53. Mr. AZKOUL (Lebanon) (translated trom Frencfz):
I sincerely thank the Soviet Union representative for
having produced a text which makes it possible to
clarify the situation. When I spoke a few moments
ago, J said that my pllrpose was to clarify the situation.

57.

,

52,

Texte citt\ en anl-llals par l'oratcur.

.'

"

(
I
r'

,,

r

I

»

"

•

•

'.

58. Mr. SOBOLEV (Union of Soviet SociaEst Hepublies) (lranslalfd from Ru.<sian): In the first report
of tile Observation Group dated 3 July [Sj4040 and
Carr.l], there were several very important s~bstantive
conclusions on their observations, \vitll which Mr. AzkolIt
did rtat agree as easily as he did j1.st now witll Mr. Gala
Plaza's statement.

58, M. SOBOLEV (UniDIl dc~ Republiqucs soda/isLes
sovietiquc'i) [lrrlduit du russc] : Dans le Dremicr ravport
du Gronpe ft'observation [8/4040 et Om. 11. en date
du 3 juillet, Iigurcnt plll~kllrs eOllclllsiollS de ilmd trc.~
importuntl'.s que M. Azkoul ll'a, pas ncceptc\:s anss[
Iacilement que la declaralion de.- M, Galo Plazll.

59. I should like to quote from U ([ocu:ncnt submitted by Mr. Azkoul. This doc'1meut is dated 8 July
and bears the symbol 5/4013. Mr. Azlwul refers here
Lu three conclusions reached by tile Observation Group
in section I of the dowment and he himself calls them
" fUJ.damental conclusions ". I shall now read them,
again in English.

Je cit(\ le document prescntc par M, Azkoul. U
s'agit du document S/4043, Cll date du 8 juillcl.
M, Azkolll y produit, dUllS la section I du document,
trois conclusions du Gl'Oupe rl'obscrvation. 11 le~
qualifie lui-memc l1e it prilleipale.'l". .le vnis en Ilonner
lecture en anglais ;

.. 1.

,-

It has not been possible te esta3lish from

where the~e arms [nam,'!y, tlR nrms sem bv the
Observation Groupl wer~, acquired, , , ,
., 2, Nor was it possible to establish if any of
tIle armed n,en observed had inmtraLed from outside. "
., Any" ." not mnssive ", but" any". I unllcl",land
j t mu)' be evcn single, "il any". And, la5tJy, which
is much more imponant to me and 1 think for everybody:
'. 3. There is Jiltle doubt, however," concluded
the Ob~ervation Group, "that the vast majority was
in any case composed of Lebanese."
h

•

•

•

uQ.

59.

~ 1.
11 n'a pas 6tc possible d'ctahlir la proVCIHlIlC(~
de ces ::mnes [c'est-a-dirc de:> armes qu'a vucs 1('
Groupe d'observation] I:;
[2. Illl'a pas non plus et~ possible de detcnniner
si certains des homme~ armes s'etaient illfiltres dt'
l'cxterieur );
On dit «ccrl'.llins" dcs homrne£; il ll'~t pas qHe.'ltiOll
d'illfHtration ~ mas~ive ~ ~ il pcut mcrl1e s'agir d'ull
seul hommc. Dernicl'e conclusion, hcaucotlp vIm
importante pO'Jr moi, et, je pell5c, pOllf tout le mUildc:
«3. Toutefoi:o;, il o'csL gllcre douteux que, pour
la grande majorit(\, i1 s'ugbsait tIe Lihanais. "

With tllose three conclusions the representa tive of
Lebanon was not in agreement, and in the document
whic!l I mentoned now he touk great [Jdins lo argue
with these conclusions, To my mind, these arguments
were unsuccess:uL

60. Le representant du Liban n'a pas acccpte ccs
tro:s conclusions, et il a rait tOllS !>es eflcrl" pOllr ks
contester dnm le docllnJBnt qlli'. j'ai mentiortno. A
mon nvis, it n'y est pas arrive.

ti1. M.. AZKOUL (Lebanon) (trans/cried Irnm Fren~!l):
I am sorry to llUve to speak again but certai:l questions
have been a!>ked and I mllst amwer them,

61.

62. The Soviet Union reprcsentative has given me a
further opportunity of proving our thesis. We criticized thc nr~t and ::Iecond conclu13ions - which we
call",d th~ positive conclusions - of the Observation
Grollp in its first report [,\'14fJJO ami Corl'.1J. We
criticimd tllO~C conclusions as inconclusive or, at least,

62. LCl representant de I'Union sovietique me uonllc

pre:nat.Jlrr..

What does the liest conclusion say? "It has not
been possible to establish from where tbese arms
Ina:nely, the <trms seen by the Observation Group)
were a.cquired."
III the document quoted by the
Soviet Union representative (8/4043), we have shown
tha.t no positiv'..l conclusion as to the origin of the arms
can be drawn irom a distant view of the arms carried
by the rebels, withont any investigation ~nd without
handling the t'iflcs, sf'.dug their nakc, etc, It is therefore possible, i:l a sense, to accept the statement that,
for the observers, with their limited facilities and lnck
of access to rebel-heLd territory, it was not possible
to establish from where these arms were acquired,

53.

G4. This remark applies also to the second conclusion,
which states: "Nor was it possible to establish if any
of the armed men observed had infJItrnted from ou.t",ide." You have only to fead the document submitted

M, AZKOUL (Liban) : Je m'excuse de devoif
rcprendre la parole. Mais. etant donne fJue certaines
questions ant ete p':Jsecs, jc suis dans l'obligatirm d'y
repondrc,

une nouvelle occasion de prollver notre these. Nons
avons critique la pn~micrc et la dcu::dcrno cou~lusion
- que oous ayons appetecs des conclusions ro~itives que le Groupe d'observation a tirces clans son premier
rapport [S/4040 el Corr. I]. Nous les avons critiquces
en tant que jllgement!> non COncllLfl.nts, OU, du mains,
pr6matures.
63, Que dit la premiere conclusion? « 11 n'a pus eM
possihle d'etablir la. provenance de ces armes [~·cst~a·
dire des armcs qu'a vues le Groupe d'observlltion].))
D:m~ 11'- docmnent qu'a dl~ le representant de I'Unioll
sovietique IS/4M3]. nOllS avon.~ demontrc que cctic
vision de loin d'arrnes portecs pa.r des rebelles, sans
in\'"Cstigation, sans prendre. le iusil en main et en etudier
la marque, etc... , ne pr-ut pas permdtre tl'affinner
ou de ne pal; ilffirm~r !'origine de ecs armcs, Pal' consequent, dalls Ull S2ns, on peut accepter cettc phrase
selon laquelle, pour les (}hservR~etlr.'j, avc.c leurs moyens
limites et l'impossibilire pour eu,,- d'entrer en territoirc.
rchclle, il n'a pas th~ possible d'etahlir la provenance
de ces armes.
64, Cala s'appliql1c egalement a la deuxieme coneIu·
sion, selon laquelle u it n'll pas nOn pillS ete possible
de dcteITIlinN si certaim des hommes urmes s'etaient
infiltrea de l'exterieur~. 11 sufi'tt de lire le document

_______________
1.1

J,

~J

~

,

;1

I

I

~I
I

I

.~

,

!

I

I
I

I

!.

,;

I

.J

by us to see that it was really impossible to draw any
couclusion since the observers only saw rebels in the
distance in grouJls of hllndreds of men Of those rebels
who accompanied them to see rebel leaders. In the
latter case, the persons accompanying them were
probably not infiltrators but chiefly Lebanese. It is
elear Ulerefore that it might be dangerous to draw
conclusions of this ldnd because they could be interpreted as final, although I du nol think that the observelS consid~red them final.

que oous a"Vons presentc pour se rendre compte Gu'il
6tait vraiment impossible de porter un jugement, alors
que les observateurs n'ont vules rebelles - Of'S groupes,
d~ ccntaines d'hommes'~ que de loin at! les oot
accompagnes cbez les chefs. Dam ce cas, probablemmt
ee ne sont pas des infIltrateurs qui les auraient aceom~
pagnes, mais surtout des Libanais. Par consequent,
porter de~ jugements semhlables pourrait avoir des
consequences nefastes en ce .'lens qu'i!s pourraient Hrc
ioterpretes commc des jugernents dfrf1oitifs, enCore qu'i1
me semble que, dan3 I'esprit des observateurs, ils
n'aicot pas cette implication.

65. I accept, on tlle other hand, the third conclusion,
lo which the Soviet Union representative attached the
greatest importance; it confirms what we have always
claimed. According to that conclusion: .. There is
little doubt, however, that the bast majority was in
any case cor.lposed of Lebanese." The" vast majority" refers to those rebels seen by the observers,
b<lcausc this sentence is the closing s<lntence in the
paragraph in which the observers speak of the men
We accept this bt.crpretation
actually observed.
because it establishes, in the first place that, while
the vasL majority were Lebanese, there was a minority
which was not Lebanese. This is. therefore, a definite
conclu'sion on the part of the Observation Gronp.
Secondly, we must note that the rebels seen by the
observers were, as I have already said, those rebels
whom they saw because they accompanied the observers
to a particular area, chiefly in order to ree the rebel
leaders. Those rebels were no doubt especially chosen
i.n order to give the observers tile impression that the
rebel forces were Lebanese. Any Syrians, Egyptians
or Palestinians would certainly not have shown them~
.'leh'es to the observers, since the observers' task was
precisely to note the presence of foreign elements.

65. M::lis la troisieme conclusion, a laquelle le r~Fe­
sentant de I'Union sovielique a attache la plus grande
importance, je l'acceJlte; eUe confLrme ('-c que no LIS
avans toujollrs pretendu. Ene declare: «Toutefois, il
n'est guere douteux que, pour la grande majorite u
- la grande majorite d~s rehe.l1es ViiS par lea obs~r­
vateurs. pl'lrce que cette pame e:'lt la fill d 'un paragrat:hc
dans Icquel on pade des hommes qu'on a vus - (il
s'agissait de Libanais. ~ Nous acceptons cctte interpretaU,m parce qu'elle prouve, en premier lieu, que, SI
la grande mf!jorite ~Hait des Libanais. il y Iwait une
minorite qui n'etuit pas des Libanais. VoiLa done Une
constatation definitive de la part du Groupe d'obser~
vatbn. En second Lieu, il faut noter que les rebelles Vll~
parIes observateurs etaient, je le repete, les rebellrs
qu'ils ont pu voir parce qu'ils les ont accompagnr.s
dans une region determinee, smtout pour aBer voir
leurs chefs. Ccs rebelles devaient etre choisis spcch.
lement pour n'indiquer aux obser.ateurs que la qualite
libanaise de ees rebelles. Des Syricns, ou des Egyptiens,
ou des Pales~iniens, n'auraient sans doute pas pam
uevRnt les observateurs pOll}' que ceux~ci les voient,
puisque la Hche des observatl'urs est de constater
I'existence rIe ces eJCments etrallgers.

66. Accordingly, this third conclusion confirms ratller
than contradicts the Lebanese thesis that the mass
of tl;e rebelS includes a very large number of foreigners.
We have nenr said that the majority of tile rebels
were foreigners, We have even suggested that the
percentage of foreigners was 20 to 30 per cent and we
added that the majority were Lebanese. Here again,
therefore, the conclusion is exactly in line with what
we have said.

86. Par consequent, cette Lroi~i~me conclusion confirme. plutl'lt qu'elle ne ar:mr:nt, la these lib:m::lise sclon
laquelle, panni la masse des rebelles, il y a un tres
grand nombl'e d'etrangers. Nous n'avons jamais dit
que :a lllujorhe des rebelles ctait des etrangers. No~s
avom meme ir.dique une proportion de 25 30 pour 100
d'etnngers et dil que la majorite e.tait oe~ Lihanaii.
Par conseqnent, c'est exactement ce que nous disons
aussi.

67. The S£CRETARY-GENERAL: I have now been
able to check the quotations to which reference has
been made in the course of the debate. and r think that
a good way to end this Gebate may he to prt on record
what was said by Presidcllt Plaza.

87.

a

Le SECRETAIRE GENERAl.. (lraduii de l'ar:-

glafs) : Je suis maintenant en n:esure de verifier lcs
textes qlli ont 6t6 cites au cour/; tIn ddml, et je pense

que le meilleur moyen de clare eette discussion serait
de faire figurer dans le compte rendu stenographique
Ies paroles memcs du president Plaza.

68. I wish, in the first ins lance, to refer to note to
correspondents No. 1831 of 20 Jllfle 1958. I read the
following sentence:
"The Ch~irmao of the Group recalled that its
task ,was only to determine whelher there was any
inflltration; if this eould be done it would be easier
for the Lebanese themsdvl;:s to solve their internal
trouble. "

68. Je rappellerui tout d'abord la note No 1831, dll
26 juin 1958 (" Note to correspondents D). J'y li,
la phrase suivanLe :
11 Le President du Groupe a rappeU: que la tflche
du Groupe consistait uoiquement
determiner s'il
y avait infiltration; s'il y parvenait. cela permettrait
aux Libanuis eux-memes de reso:Hlre plus facnernell~
lems difficulte~ interieures. »

The other quotation is from Press Release LEB/15 of
7 July 1958:
.. Mr. Plaza waS asked whether thc Lebanese
Government had provided iliformation whi.ch the

69. L'autre citation est tiree du communique de
presse du 7 juillet 1958 (Press Release LEB/15) :
"On (l, dem.mdc a ]1.'1. Plaza ~i le Gouvernemcn1
libanais avait fourni des renseigr,ements sur lesquel~

12

a

I,
f

"•

r

('
(
(

t.
L
L

l-

t-

,-r
r'

•

r

r••

Group had not yet been able to investigate but
which, if substantiated, would justify its charges.
He answ~red: • We have not had anything from the
Lebanese Government which would lead us to say
there is massiv~ infiltration.' "

le Groupe n'~vait flll encore cnquHer mais qui, .,'ils
etaient conJlrmc~, prouveraient le bien-fonde de ~c.'l
accusations. 1I a repondu : « NOlls n'avon~ rien
rer;u du Gouvefllement libanais qui nons pCl'l11cltl' dl~
condufe qu'H y u iumtration massive. )l

70. It seems to me obvious that thL, last mentioned
statement is not a statement on the question of subsbnce hut just a registration of the fact that there
was not sufficient evidence for a positive judgement.

70. II mc semble eviilent que celle dcruierc declnration ne porte pas sur la question de fond; M. Plaza
se contenle de eonslater qu'il n'y a pas eu de preuve,.,
suffisantes pour ~met1:rt'. un jugement positif.

71. The PRESIDENT (translated /rJm Spanish): At
the beginning of this afternoon's meetiltg, the President
drew the attention of the members of the Council to
the fact that they hud before them the draft reso!tttlOl1
suhmitted by the Soviet Union [3/4047]. In accordance with the rules of procedure, if !lO other member
of th~ COllncil wishes 10 ~pe<lk or to submit another
draft resolution, the Soviet Union draft resolution should
now be put to the vole. However, in view of thf cumplexi.ty and exbeme gravity (Jf the problem before the
Security Counci:, I would suggest that thi3 discussion
should be continued tomorrow morning.

71. Le PRESIDENT (traduil de Cespagnol) : All
debut de' la seance, j'ai signale a I'attention de.'! rncmbres
du Conseil qu'ils etaienl saisis d'un projcl de resoJu~ioll
prcst'.nte par If] delegation de l'Ullion sovietique
[5/4047]. Confol'luemcnt au r~glement interieur, je
devrais·- ~i pef!;aJlJle d'autre ne prend la parole ou nC'.
depose de p~ojcL de resolution - mctlrc aux voix le
projet de resolution de l'URSS, Cependant, etant donne
la complexite du problCmc donl le Conseil est saisi
et son extr~me gravite, jc propose que le vote soil remis
:l dernain matin.

72. If there is no objection, I shall consider that my
suggestion is adopted.
If WQS SI) decided.

72. S'il n'y a pClS d'objection, je cOllsidercrai Cl'.tJp
proposition comme ailoptee.
It en est ainsi dcicide.

73, Mr. LODGE (United States of America): I simply
wish to say, Mr. President, that 1 am glad to accept
your suggestion that we recess until tomorrow, particularly because. as I said in my staterr.ent this morning
L827fJ! meeting). the United States intends to introduce
a draft resolution of ih own on this subject for consideration at that time.

73. M. LODGE (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) [iraduit de
taflytuisJ . Je Liens sirnplement n dire, monsieur le
President, que j'aecueille avec plaisir wtre suggestion
tend ant a cc que nous ajournions nos travaux jusqu'a
demain matin, et cc d' autant pins que, ainsi que je
l'ai dit ce matin (827 e .~eance], les Etats-Unis entendent
deposer un projet lie resolution sur cette question pour
qu'il soit examine a la seance de demain.

'1'1u meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.

La stance tst levee a 16 h. 55.

13

SALES AGENTS FOR UNITED NATIONS PUllllCATIONS
OEPOSITAIR£S IJ£S PUBLICATIONS DES NAnONS UN1ES

Ago

GHANA
U"I•• "lry Coll.\II lG.k,hop, P.O.
'. A,nl",oM, Aw"
GIUct-OllCl
XooH",o•• I •• ',h.p, 28 S1Odl." Sh •• I.
A,h'.·'.
GU... lEMA,LA,
5",'.d"d l,"."•.;,._"n~",'.<a. d. Av
14-33, Go.lo,.olo CIIY.
HAlll
L1b,al,l. "A I. C.....II.... 1.11. po~ol.
lll.~. pg"·D"·P,I.".

~

I(O~DUU.i

ARG!~INA,·ARGEN11""

,n<

Edl'.r/ol 500","",1,0,0, 5,...., ",1.1,0.500,

h ..... "1,n
Al,ISll.. L1A·AUrt... lI&

M.lho",", U" .."lIy 'ro", ]69/rl Lo'"
001.5" .." "'.100"". C.1.
.lo.l,IllllA-"UWCHE
o... I~" c •.. G"h. 11, WI ••• I.
B. W(lII.",o,ff, MO"'" 5I!1I~""I,.". 1o.
5.1.,,,,;.
"l.QI\l",,"!E~~IOUE

0' M....g.,r" d. I. P,."o.
14-22, n• .I" P.,,1I, a,••• ~••.
W. H. S",lj~ &. Son, 11-7S, b"I ....,d
Ad.I~"•. M'" 8,",.11••,

L1b..,I" Po.a"'""<O"o. l.Godoolpa.

HoNG KONG.HCtlG-I(O~<l
Ih. S"lndon 10.' Co" ~s Na'ha" 1,0&,
Kawloo,.
ICElAND-15LA,folCt
k~a ....I"" 51,1,,", Ey,..~d,..,~~, H.
f .. """on,, •• 11 11, I.)'lo.·, • .;~.
INCI ... ·INC~
0,1,,' Lo";m.'" , .. ,,,liD. 10~oy,1II0'
"",, N." O.IM " H,.d... bod.
C.'v"j "0" ... S,.,'o••'Y C•.• ,,,..
1).1h! " Colwrl.,
P. Varodoch.. ,,." Co .. Mod,...
I~OOHl'SI.... ' folElONESII
r... bo,g"".n. ",,_. v"""" S~\'o,l U.
Dj.k.,la.
IRAN
"Cl ,,... lB2 ~",d.",l",""JO, To~"'"'

IOLl~IA.IOLIVIE

Llb,.rr. 5.1.«", •• ,. (;0,111. 91'2, l' P".
UAtlL.IRESIL
LI.. orl. Agl" R". M• .J,o ,..~, C.l.o
Po,lol )291. R.. o. " ••1.. ,
IUUIA,.BIRMANIE
C".... ,. 00,1.
Dopol, 1"000'.
CEYLON,CEYU,H
Lo~. Ho.'o I.al"hop. A"of.
01 c.yl••, P.O. Box 2l4. Cola~bo.
CHILl·CHILI
Edlt"lol .1.1 '0<1fi,., ... ~" ... d. 51,
S.n'l.go.
llb,.rio I•••" ::.. 1110 ~OS. Sa.llog.·

B"",

tool.","o....

CUlN... ·CHI"'!
Th. World !o,,~ Co.,

.,.1 .• 99 Ch",g
~I.g lood. hi 5.<11.". ".lp.h, T.lw••.
rh. C......"'I.. P,.". L'd. 211 Ho•••
Ild., 50aogha1.

II Q·IUto:
Mo<k.nzl.'. ~.oh'op, hOkd.d_
IRQ ... NO_IRLA,NOI
S"'lia•• ry 0111«, ',b'I•.

COIOMIIA.CQl.OMBIE
li"'''';o BII<~h.I•• Ba~OI~.
lib .. ,io ..... ',1..., Mod.Wo.
Ub,.,1a Nod.nol, Ltdo., ~o" •• ~"~la,
COU'" RiCA. con...·!'u,

IIRAU

"",,,,,.In·, Ig.k,'.,.. , Ud., 35 Allorby

I.. ~,.".. 1 11'0..,1. 1"\0', 4p<lrl"0,
'31~. S<,A J~ ...

a'''

CUBA,
Lo C.... 1.lgo. O'R.illy _IS, l« I!ol>o.~.
CUCHOSl.OV"'lI4.1CI\I'~lOV-.QUIE

~"'."••• m~Y lplto,... I.I, l'l~,.d,IT1lda
9. P,ah. 1DEI'lM"'R~·gAHF.MAR~

~]n~' lI\un"g~"d, lId., t<.'''0\l'0~' ~.

K_b'A'"'''' K.

DOMINiCAN UPUBLlC·

REoUILIQlJl OOMINIC ,"'I

«.do. ~9. Cl,,·

llbro,'o Do..l"',o ••,

,.ad, T.I ....1>.
114lY·ITALIE.
IIb..,lo Co", .. I..I,"orl~ 5.n<onl. "10
Coppo.1 26,11"0"'& .ungo,",,'"
.."aid, do a,.. do IS, R",.o,
J....... N-J .... ON
.'I.,"'on Compony, L'd_. 6 1.t1·NI,~."' •.
Who,,~",ol. To',o,
JOID"'I'l·JOROANle
ta"P~ I. 1,,00., 5 C•. , O"·vl.~",,b,
e.. 66, ....mm••.
KOU....COREE
!oH•• ~ ... bj;.],lo. C... I'd" ~, ~."".

Chn,....., 5.,,"1.

d~d r"llIla,

111...NON.lIMN

ECUACOR·EOl/AnIJR
L1b,.,I. Cl••UIl,,,, Gu.,.~vll &. Q.I",_
11 JAIV",DOI44WACGI
Mn.".1 N~•• , y <:1"., 1"• ..... nld• ...,
Jl, Son Sal,ado<.
ETH'OPI ... ·ETIIICP1E
1""00110"01 1'to>o Atl.""I'. 0.0. ~.
120, AJdl. "'bo' ••
FINl.... NO·fINLANDI
........ ~I •• n XI.j,kauppa. 2 K"k.,k.ID.

~h"Y"', C~II'g. &o.k C.op"o,I.. , J2.

I\.~w.k;,

",,.ou

~ •. '0. 811".

B.I,""

~llfll.l.

~tI."o

1o.u•. S<hQ••k.,,,,.

.•.

M,.no,
po_rUG... l

Li".,I. Ro",I~"", Tld J"a """a, ~h.
$11jGA.~~ "SlNGJ.'QUR

Ih. Clly ! •• k 5,.,., ~,d.• Call)lO' Q."y.
IP"'I~H5.AOHE

mwlo M"odl,P,.",", <':o,l.lla ]f. ""a.
di,a_

L1'ro,l. 80 ..],. 11 I.n•• Unl.."ldGd.

8.....1.,..
SWIDiN.sUIO!
C.!. f,I' ••', K~l.

1la.""••••d.1 A·B.

r"J,""'OO 1. ~,,,,l<h,rm,

SWITZERLAHll.SUISSE
L1b,.I,I. Po"",. S...... I.u,o. .o, G•• h.,
~ ... ,Io"n}".d', KI1<~~'" 17, l:UrI,h 1.
'fi"rL"'ND·lIi""L"'Nlll'
p,o"uo" loll', Lr ••• SS C".j"~,,o' ~ood,
Wo, To,. D,"gkol.
TUIJ(ty.lU~::lllIE

Lihtol'l. II"~'II" ~61 ilOIU,,1 Ca;d.,1,
~.,... Iu, ",,,b,,l.
LIMON Of IOllrH AFRICA.
VN10M WO·MRICAINI
v.' S,holb ~""l<,'a" IPI,.), Lld., Ju
7", P,",odo_
u",'oN O~ IOI'IET SOCI",LISf
RUllII.lCS.UHIO!'L IIU tErOIUQUit
IllCtl\LIlTU SOVI!nOUU

Mo,hd""o
Plo,~,~.d, M

oy~ ~.yI,a. 5m.I••• ~.ya

.

UN,no "IU InUIUC·
U,IJ,L1QU[ "'R"'U Utll~
L1b'old. "La R."~I"ao'. d'EaY~,"", 11
Sf! .... dly '0"0, Col,•.

EO;'o,lol H.....,. ~ ....,
M'.I",. D.P.

I,."""

M~,IK,I

Iona. C,P.Q. 1£1',1, '0'1.111",,'0"

S.dl.. , Uollo<l t;g,tO", t;.", re,l, U.S.A.I " S~I" S.d;on,

rI., N.'''", G.'''', S",I!z.rl"Go.

(
f

•

'.0.

NllROCCQ."''''ROC

,~, ~.t b... ~ppolo,.d "oy b.... , '" Sol., onO CI"ol.I;."

f'

Lo.d••, S.[.1.
LINing STAlE! O! AMERiCA·

URUa~4V

~"

l
t'

1JN\lI~ ~I/ojaaO"'.ROY"'UIoIE-~OjI
~ ",.S'olion.ry 0'11".
hx 569,

"IX\(O,~EX\QUE

0,0." ••0 ;nq""I., "0"' <0".,,1., wh.,. ,.1" ag'nl, loo,.

U.;'.'/ Nol1oo' om.., Pola~

LI, .. ,;' 1""""".nol ~.l ,,,~. $.A.
L1mo.
PHILlPPINU
AI.",o'" Boo~ SI.,e. 7~9 RI,._ A••• ~.,

bia U.i.. "I', P,.". 1960 8'ood"oy.
" .... yo,k 'JP, N. V.

NORWAY·NORVEOE
J,hon G'vnd' ra,,", FarTo;. K, .... ,;"I,gl. rA, O,la.

R. 1"""h",ld', S,h""."'or..

59, f,.. k'u'I!M,lo.
II".,! , M.u,"" 1I""f'hl,.". lOT

'ERU.~EROU

........\l/oj'l D'A,MiRIO\l1
1".'.,lIo".T Oo<om.~~ S.",I.o, Colom-

'

GUM.....y· ..\U"' ..<>NI

PUAGUAY
"';0,010 d. Llb' • .r•• d. 5.1... ",. Nlu o ,
C.II. P'., f,o.<o N •. JI'-~], .... uo,lon.

LIIXEMIOURG
IIb..I';. J. ~,humm". \".m"'o,;.

AI....ndor ..., •• Spl,g.IIF"'" 9, Wl,,·
bo'o"
W. E. Saa'bo<h. Oo,,,.,o,n<l'a'" Jg.
UI. (I).

Edlll••, A. P,,""o. 13. "'. $ou'rt.l,
r.,I, I~.).

'v' 'I.';. 'a"~~~_

J, Mo"'ol" KaMO'o, M.".lia.

d'OI"d•••, <I. pa"l,ip~llb"
le.• "",I.II"" 8, "" MI,"oIX·lollol".
R.b.l.
NfTI([RI~ NOl .....VI_lA'
".\'_ 1oI.o<~,., W1il..>r, lo~~. y... h.. \
9, ·'·G'OY.o~ag •.
i'llI'< 2EAUNo.N(]IJVmE.IEUlOOI
1I,j"d No'ln", A"adoll" 01 N.", 2.,.

FU."'cE

P"Kllt"N
l,. p.kl.,,,,, C~.op.'o'l.. &~,~ 5a,F.'y.
0","', E.,' ""kl"a,.
.,~Iho", Un".d, lid.• Lokb".
TO,... , lI, 1'0"'0'. ~.~,..."l, 3
P.. NAMA
Jotl M••".d." Aport"d. 2Q~l, A•• e....

P,.'.

i

•• ~ro, ••'",r., d. ldl'.,'.I.',
w.
o·EI'a. PI.,.. C.g,,",". lJ~2. I" pho,
M.n1.,ld...
VI/olE!IlELO
Llb"". d.1 bt., "'V. IoII'o,da. H•. l1,
td!. ~llp<I', C.ro,.. ,
VllfI·NAM
lib,.I,I•. ~09.'"I. ~ud, Th., Il~. tu.
1••0', 8,P, 2!J, SolVbn_
YLI(lOlL...V1A_VOI,IGOSLAVIE
Canlo,j."" Zol.;'ba.qobll.na, 51
10_
",:_".
~"d••• <.,
J.Db,I
n.l.
Knllga, T"..I:. 27/11. a.o~, ..d.
~ .. "i.I•• 5, r'D I""". , jodln,l.o,

lOIl"h,

}.

..

•

(""121

I., ,goon •• d.' .. d.... "~., J. ' •••• 'Dn ... .,," .",~"," d.
pay. o~ 11 0'..1... P" _.",. O. ~'p.,II"i, .. p,,,...! .,..
nd,."h.l C I. ~ .." •• lot "".,. . ., ,/. I• .1;01';'""0",
O'g.n',,,Il,, do, N.,io" ~"i". N.~·Vo,k la.I,U"!••'......,';Qo,), <0 ~ ;a 5..fib" d., V"",, <:l'DG""o~," do< I'o,;an'
(1nl.., P./ol. dOl No';a"" G..... (>,I".).

i~

,~

!
Printed in Fro.nee

Price: $V.S. 0.16; 1/- stg.; Sw. fr. 0.50
(or cqUivulcnt in other <.;urr~lIclcs)

1200l)-.~OcLobl'r 19S9-1,67[)

t
