S/PRST/2012/11

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 April 2012
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6748th meeting of the Security Council, held on 11 April 2012, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Sierra Leone”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
1.
The Security Council welcomes the latest report of the Secretary-General
dated 14 March 2012 (S/2012/160) on the situation in Sierra Leone and the
activities of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIPSIL). The Council welcomes the briefing provided by the Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General (ERSG) in Sierra Leone, Mr. Michael von
der Schulenburg on 22 March 2012. The Council reaffirms its support for continuing
efforts to consolidate peace in that country.
2.
The Security Council emphasises that the Government of Sierra Leone bears
primary responsibility for peacebuilding, security and long-term development in the
country. The Council notes the steady progress achieved so far by the national
authorities and people of Sierra Leone in a number of areas including national
reconciliation, the promotion of gender equality and the preparation for national and
local elections on 17 November 2012. The Council emphasises the importance of
these elections for consolidation of peace and security in Sierra Leone.
3.
The Security Council calls upon all political parties to engage constructively in
an honest and open dialogue aimed at furthering national cohesion. The Council
calls on the Government of Sierra Leone, all political parties as well as other
stakeholders to intensify their efforts to foster an environment that is conducive to
the holding of peaceful, transparent, free and fair elections. The Council calls on the
leadership of the political parties to undertake cross-party confidence building
measures, promote political participation and non-violence among their membership
and ensure the full adherence to due process of law and to the recommendations of
the 2 April 2009 Joint Communiqué, which inter alia calls for the establishment of
the Independent Police Complaints Committee to reinforce the neutrality and
professionalism of the Police, and the Political Parties Code of Conduct. The
Council believes that these steps are essential to ensure public and international
confidence in Sierra Leone’s democratic process.
4.
The Security Council acknowledges the statement of the Government of Sierra
Leone on 3 April 2012 clarifying its position regarding the arms delivered to the
Sierra Leone Police. The Council underscores the importance for Sierra Leone’s
national authorities to respond proportionately to threats to the security of all
12-29011 (E) 110412

*1229011*

S/PRST/2012/11

citizens in Sierra Leone. The Council calls upon the Government to ensure that its
security forces remain committed to upholding human rights and applicable
international law.
5.
The Security Council calls on the Independent Media Commission to
proactively monitor the media and ensure compliance with the code of conduct for
the media and calls on the national authorities to address the administrative and
financial challenges facing the Sierra Leone Broadcasting Corporation.
6.
The Security Council commends the contribution of UNIPSIL and the UN
Country Team to the peacebuilding and development priorities of Sierra Leone, and
in particular through the integrated UN Joint Vision. The Council commends the
achievements of ERSG von der Schulenburg in Sierra Leone and urges the Secretary
General to promptly appoint a successor.
7.
The Security Council continues to emphasize the important role of the regional
organisations such as the African Union, the Economic Community of West African
States and the Mano River Union in supporting Sierra Leone to achieve its
peacebuilding, security and long-term development goals. The Council
acknowledges the work of the Transnational Organised Crime Unit and calls on
Sierra Leone’s authorities to work with its neighbours and regional partners in order
to intensify their joint efforts to consolidate regional peace and security, including
through tackling the challenges posed by drug trafficking and organised crime.
8.
The Security Council acknowledges the role of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) in supporting peacebuilding efforts in Sierra Leone, including in addressing
the priority area of youth employment. The Council urges the PBC to continue
working in support of UNIPSIL and the UN Country Team.
9.

2

The Security Council remains actively seized of this matter.

12-29011
