UNITED NATIONS

.

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

1898”

MEETING:

25 MARCH

1976

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (SIAgendall898)

.. ... .. .. .. ... .. .. ... . ... .. ... .. .. .. .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Request by the Libyan Arab Republic and Pakistan for consideration of the
serious situation arising from recent developments in the occupied Arab
territories:
Letter dated 19 March 1976 from the Permanent Representatives of the
Libyan Arab Republic and Pakistan to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/12017) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

.

SIPV. 1898

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
i i f;’ , L,j ; dNations
I- .sLA.. document.
I ’
t ?‘,.. Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
” ‘-“?P 2”
“of the’*document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted ‘in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

.
8

.

1898th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 25 March 1976, at 10.30 a.m.
President:

Mr. Thomas

S. BOYA

(Benin).

places at the Security Council table bnd Mr. Kaiser
(Bangladesh), Mr. Abdel Meguid (Egypt), Mr. Jaipal
(India), Mr. Zahawie (Iraq), Mr. Sharaf (Jordan)
Mr. El Hassen (Mauritania),
Mr. Baroody (Saudi
Arabia), Mr. Allaf (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. Driss
(Tunisia) and Mr. Petri6 (Yugoslavia) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

2. Mr. JACKSON
(Guyana): Mr. President, before
turning to the issue curr&tly engaging the attention of
the Council, I should like, on my own behalf and on
behalf of the Guyana delegation, to be associated with
your remarks and those of my other colleagues in
extending a warm welcome to the new Permanent
Representative
of the United States, Mr. Scranton.
We are we!1 aware of the distinguished
service
Mr. Scranton has rendered to his country and of the
wide respect his Counsels attract. We look forward
to the applicatioh
qf his considerable talents to the
serious and genuipe efforts of the international
community for the achievement of a world society in which
justice and equity will prevail unchallenged.
I wish
Ambassador Scranton a successful and rewarding term
of office.

agenda (S/Agenda/l898)

of the agenda

Request by the Libyan Arab Republic and Pakistan
for consideration
of the serious situation arising
from recent developments
in the occupied Arab
territories:
Letter dated 19 March 1976 from the Permanent
Representatives
of the Libyan Arab Republic
and Pakistan to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/12017)
The meeting

was called to order at 12.15 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda
3. Only two months ago there: was, a full debate in
the Council on the Middle East’situa”fion iiic!l&@$ the
Palestinian
question. During that debate Guyana’s
position was fully expounded [!$?2nd.!peting].
It is
therefore well known and doesnot riled to be iepeated
at this stage. My delegation will thus on this occasion
focus on the particular
manifestation
of that more
general problem which brings us together today.

The agenda was adopted.
Request by the Libyan Arab Republic and Pakistan
fir consideration of the serious situation arising from
recent developments in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 19 March 1976 from the Permanent
Representatives of the Libyan Arab Republic and
Pakistan to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/12017)

4. There is no doubt that the situation in and regarding
the Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967 is
of serious concern. Occupation
itself and its determined prolongation by force, the erosion over time of
the multireligious
character of Jerusalem and its systematic domestication
to the dictates of the authorities
of the Israeli State are the more immediate origin of
the recent flow of events. That the authorities
in
Israel sanction these processes both by positive action
and by default, in defiance of world public opinion,
is to be regretted. That they do so in clear contravention of so many General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions is to be deplored. But that’ the
Israelis have so recently embarked on a programme as
brutal in its repressiveness as it is contemptuous
of
legitimate Arab aspirations is a situation which should
be roundly condemned.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
In accordance with the decisions taken earlier [1893-d,
1894th, 1896th and 1897th meetings], I shall now invite
the representatives of Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization
to take places at the Council table
and the representatives of Bangladesh, Egypt, India,
Iraq, Jordan, Mauritania,
Saudi Arabia, the Syrian
Arab .Republic, Tunisia and Yugoslavia to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber, on the usual understanding that they will be
invited to take places at the Council table when it is
their turn to speak.
At the invitation of the President,
and Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation

Mr. Herzog (Israel)
Organization) took
1

5. The present developments in Jerusalem and the
other territories occupied by Israel have served to highlight the linking of issues which have rendered more
difficult a rational search for a solution to the critical
situation in the Middle East. So far, in the search for
that solution, that which is just, deriving authenticity
from acknowledged legal precepts, and that which is
equitable, proceeding-perhaps
falsely-from
an
assumption of a common human perception, have
suffered. Nevertheless, it is now widely agreed that
respect for the legitimate national rights of the
Palestinian people is a sine qua non for the initiation
of a regime of peace and security in the Middle East.
It is time for this recognition to be translated into
reality and for the necessary steps to be taken,
including the withdrawal by Israel from all territories
occupied since 1%7.

11, Recent developments in the territories occupied
by Israel have resulted in human suffering and
casualties. Those events illustrate the always present
dangers inherent in a situation which is characterized
by occupation and by a series of unresolved political
and territorial problems.
12. Any military occupation, however humane and
well-meaning the intentions of the occupier, implies by
necessity that the inhabitants cannot exercise fully their
political and democratic rights. Such a situation leads
in turn, as we have seen in the Middle East, to a
spiral of violence. The only way out is a political
solution.
13. In the meantime, while the search for such a
political solution is going on, Israel, the occupying
Power, must carefully adhere to the provisions of
the fourth Geneva Convention’ and international law
concerning military occupation of the areas occupied
in 1967. It goes without saying that the sanctity of
Moslem and Christian Holy Places must be scrupulously observed. We are certainly gratified to note
that Israel’s Supreme Court has upheld that principle.
In this context, I should like to stress that Sweden
has full respect for the efforts made by the Israeli
authorities in following their policy of access for
persons of all religions to the Holy Places.

6. The creation of facts by Israel is a matter that has
engaged the attention of the Council for a long time.
The events of the last few weeks represent only some
of the outward and visible manifestations of, and are a
response to, these acts. To expect a people subjected
to the rigours of alien rule to endure such domination
for a prolonged period is something that the experience
of recent years has shown to be wrong, counterproductive and self-defeating. In the present case, the
remedy lies in the recognition-so urgently needed-by
the occupying Power, which is Israel, of the logic of
history and, in that context, of the requirements of
the present situation. Israel must face facts objectively
and not be deluded by those it seeks to create.
7. My delegation calls upon Israel to act now and to
display that flexibility of attitude and that breadth of
vision which have so far not been in evidence.

14. Sweden’s position since 1967 has consistently
been that no action should be taken which would alter
the status of Jerusalem. Thus, Sweden voted in favour
of General Assembly resolutions 2253 (ES-V) and
2254 (ES-V). This principle has been underscored by
the Security Council in resolutions 252 (1%8) and
267 (1969).

8. It seems to. my delegation that in the present
circumstances, action by the Council at this stage
can emphasize the need for the manifestation of such
an attitude by Israel and can, at the same time, aid in
a general way the processes for peace which so often
run into dangerous stalemates. I believe that the
possibility exists for a decision by the Council, a decision with the potential for achieving these twin purposes. My delegation, therefore, hopes the Council
can seize the opportunity of the moment.

15. It is today as important as ever that the status
of Jerusalem should be respected. It is first of all a
consequence of international law and in accordance
with the Geneva Convention that no changes should
be effected. Any change in the status of Jerusalem
would further complicate the search for peace. In addition, the psychological climate, characterized by the
bitterness and hatred already now so predominant in
the area, may further deteriorate through such acts.

9. Mr. SUNDBERG (Sweden): First of all I should
like to extend, on behalf of my delegation, a warm
welcome to Mr. William Scranton, the new Permanent
Representative of the United States. We wish him
every success and we look forward to the fruitful cooperation with him and his delegation which he so
generously proposed here the other day.

16. Another problem which is giving cause for
increasing concern is the settlement policy pursued by
Israel. Sweden strongly opposes that policy. We add
our support to those who urge Israel seriously to
reconsider its policy in this regard. Any new settlement
adds to the difficulties. The policy concerning settlements in the occupied territories must be considered
unlawful.

10. Let me also express the satisfaction of the
Swedish delegation at the presence of the Israeli delegation in the Council. We see the fact that Israel has
chosen to participate in the debate as a welcome step
forward which can give but increased significance to
the Council deliberations, although the differences still
remain deep between the parties concerned.

17. Sweden has consistently supported the principle
of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory
by war. This generally recognized principle has been
confirmed in Security Council resolution 242 (1967).
An occupying Power must not by interim actions
such as the establishment of settlements create a situa2

tion in) which withdrawal fro-m occupied territories
would be practically and politically difficult to achieve.
Such actions can jeopardize the application of the
principle.

who specifically called for these meetings-the Libyan
Arab Republic and Pakistan-or the rest of the Council
membership to have a full debate on the Middle East
question.

18. Whatever aspect of the complex of problems in
the Middle East we debate in the Council, and from
whatever angle we approach these problems, we are
always faced with the same common denominator
-the necessity of a political solution leading to a
just and durable peace. The basic groundwork for
such a solution has already been laid. Resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973) provide the basic guidelines for
such a solution; The principles embodied in these
documents are still fully valid. We must, however,
also be aware of the fact that these resolutions are
lacking in certain basic elements which are essential
for a just and lasting peace in the Middle East.

24. Clearly, that objective of avoiding such a comprehensive debate has by and large been observed. All
those of my colleagues preceding me in the debate
have sought to emphasize the disturbing developments
in the occupied Arab territories rather than to engage
in a comprehensive consideration of the Middle East
problem and the ‘question of the inalienable rights
of the Palestinian people to self-determination’ and
independence. Yet, despite this deliberate restraint
on the part of all of us and, indeed, despite the
restraint demonstrated by those of our colleagues who
are not members of the Council and who have addressed us here, we cannot escape one basic fact:
it is impossible to discuss the recent and current
developments pertaining to the clear resistance demonstrated by the victims of occupation whether in
Jerusalem or the West Bank, or indeed the other
occupied ’ Arab territories, in abstraction or in a
vacuum. We must recognize-as many of the speakers
before me have-that these events are only a symptom
or manifestation of the real problem. The main source
of the problem before us is the continued occupation
by Israel of Arab lands, and only the speedy termination of Israel’s illegal occupation of all the Arab territories that it conquered in June 1967 will put an end
to the continuous grave and dangerous situation that
prevails in those territories.

19. It is now hardly disputed by anyone that during
the previous attempts to attain a lasting solution, the
interests and rights of the Palestinian Arabs have not
sufftciently been taken into account. It is now evident
to all that the Palestinian Arabs have legitimate national
interests and rights and that these must be fully taken
into account in the search for such a solution.
20. At the same time, it must be strongly emphasized
that the legitimate interests and rights of other peoples
must not be sacrificed. The Swedish delegation considers it to be of decisive importance that the existence
and independence of Israel as well as of every other
State in the area be safeguarded within secure and
recognized borders.

25. Bearing this overriding consideration in mind,
we find that it is all the more regrettable that the
unique opportunity which the Council had last January,
during the substantive consideration of the question
of the Middle East and the question of Palestine,
was not made full use of to effect a sound and just
framework for a just and lasting peace in the area.
What has been happening in the occupied Arab territories should certainly spur Council members to a
more determined effort in the search for peace and
justice in the Middle East. I need hardly emphasize
that in such a course of action two conditions are
indispensable. The first is scrupulous respect for the
Charter and for international law, which clearly
consider absolutely repugnant any notion of the
acquisition of territory by military conquest and thus
postulate the emphatic and urgent need for Israeli withdrawal from all occupied Arab territories. The second
condition is the’ enjoyment by the Palestinians of their
national inalienable rights.

21. The developments which have given rise to the
present Council debate remind us once again of how
urgent it is to keep up the momentum in the search
for a solution to the problems of the Middle East
which will enable all the States in the area to live
peacefully and securely side by side.
22. Mr. SALIM (United .Republic of Tanzania): On
a previous occasion, and in his absence, I had already
welcomed the new representative of the United States.
Now that Ambassador Scranton is present, I should
like to reiterate that welcome and state that we look
forward to working with him in an atmosphere of
harmony, friendship and co-operation. As already
pointed out by many of my colleagues, Mr. Scranton’s
reputation and prestige have preceded him in the
United Nations, and I can only say that the Organization is all the richer by having in its midst a personality
of such calibre and eminence.

26. Having made these observations, let me comment
on the recent developments in Arab Jerusalem and the
West Bank towns and cities. The representative of the
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), as well as
the representatives of the Libyan Arab Republic and
Pakistan, among others, have already given an
elaborate expose on the nature of these events. I shall
therefore refrain from going over the same details.

23. It was intended to confine the current debate in
the Council to the recent serious developments in the
occupied Arab territories with special emphasis on the
repressive measures adopted by the Israeli authorities
against the Arab inhabitants of Jerusalem and the West
Bank cities and towns. Quite clearly, .it has not been
the intention of either those members of the Council
3

Rather, I wish..to underscore the meaning of‘these
developments
and the conclusions we should ,draw
from them.

violation of its obligations as an occupyingPower.
The policy of creeping annexation has been meticulously followed. The creation of so-called new facts
through the establishment
of Israeli settlements,
changes in the demographic
structure of occupied
territories and violations of the status of the occupied
territories, including the Holy City of Jerusalem, have
been part of Israel’s arsenal for continued occupation.
All these measures, including the expropriation
of
Arab lands and the unilateral adoption of legal and
administrative
measures that tamper with the status of
the occupied areas, have been taken in violation of
international
law and in clear defiance of the resolutions and decisions of the Organization. At this juncture
I should like once again to categorically
affirm my
Government’s
total opposition to such measures and
its firm position that it considers all such measures
null and void.

27. First, it must now be clear to all of us-assuming
that anyone entertained any doubts-that
occupation
invites resistance and that no amount of force, intimidation or tactics involving sugar-coated bullets can make
the victims of occupation acquiesce to their humiliation and degradation. Thus, the resistance’, in the form
of demonstrations,
strikes and other forms of massive
protest, displayed by the people of the occupied t,erritories, notwithstanding
the risks involved to their own
lives and security, is but a logical manifestation
on
the part of a proud people fighting against foreign
occupation in order to regain their rights, their dignity
and their self-respect.
28. Secondly, as resistance against the occupation
forces mounts there is a corresponding
increase in
repressive measures adopted by the occupying authorities in an attempt to curb that patriotic resistance.
The evidence is abundantly there. Only today, The
New York Times provided us with additional relevant
material. Mr. Terence Smith, reporting from Jerusalem, asserts:

30. We must take this opportunity
to emphasize
what we have repeatedly said before, both in the
Security Council and in other forums of the Organization, namely, that these policies adopted by the Israeli
authorities can only lead to confrontations.
They are
self-defeating and can only prolong the agony of the
conflict and increase its tragic repercussions, besides
reinforcing Israel’s isolation from the international
community.
Israel would be well advised to begin a
new chapter. It must recognize that continued occupation can only invite more vigorous and determined
resistance. It must take heed of the preponderant
position expressed in the Security Council’s
discussions last January that the key to Israel’s own
security lies in respect for the security of others and
recognition
of the inalienable
national rights of the
dispossessed Palestinian
people. And the Council,
as it is about to conclude its consideration
of the
present debate, must be vigilant to the real needs of
the hour-its
support for a resolution conducive to a
just and leasting peace in the Middle East.

“ . . . the Israelis today hesitate less in using force
to maintain public order. In putting down the most
recent riots, Israeli soldiers, many of them teenagers , have used tactics they would themselves
denounce in any other situation.”
The New York Times article
further revealing observation:

makes

the following

“The complaint about harsh personal treatment
comes up time and again in conversations
with
West Bankers. In the name of security, they are
continually
subjected to sudden searches of their
homes and person. Midnight
arrests of suspected
trouble-makers
are frequent and it is often weeks
before charges are lodged. Such measures have been
in use by the Israeli authorities since 1967, but the
intensity has been stepped up in recent months.”

31. Mr. RICHARD
(United Kingdom):
This is the
first formal opportunity which my delegation has had in
the Security
Council
of welcoming
Ambassador
Scranton to this table. My delegation looks forward
with pleasure to working with the distinguished representative of the United States in the pursuit in this
Council-to
quote the words used by a distinguished
Welshman, Thomas Jefferson, whose other claim is
that he happened to write the Declaration
of Independence-of
honour, happiness and hope.

As I said, that was not a quotation from any Arab
source. It was not a statement by the PLO. It is a
quotation from an article reported in today’s New
York Times.
29. Clearly, all this demonstrates
the policies of
desperation adopted by the Isareli authorities in a vain
attempt to curb the legitimate resistance of the people
in the occupied Arab territories. But these are not the
only measures adopted by the Israeli authorities in
violation of the rights of the inhabitants
currently
under Israeli occupation
and in contravention
of
existing international
legal instruments, including the
fourth Geneva Convention and resolutions of both the
General Assembly and the Security Council. Since
1967, Israel has, in fact, embarked on a systematic

32. May I also refer at the outset of the remarks
I wish to make to the speech made yesterday by the
representative
of Saudi Arabia [1897th meeting]. He
will know the respect that I feel for him and I am sure
that he will understand if I therefore merely say that
it seemed to me that some of his remarks were
unnecessary, were irrelevant and indeed were positively unhelpful to the course of this debate. -It does
not seem to me, at any rate, to do very much good
to attempt to falsify, even unintentionally,
history
4

.

which is known,
Europe.

,,

at least to all of us who live, in

1
33. Let me at the start refer to my delegation’s
abstention in the procedural vote taken at the beginning
of this debate on the question of the participation
in
it by the Palestine Liberation
Organization.
I should
like to make it clear that we did not abstain because
we believed that it was inappropriate
for the PLO to
participate in the work of the Council; on the contrary,
we believe that the representative of the PLO is an
indispensable participant in any debate on this subject,
and we believe that his voice should be heard. But
like others who have spoken before us, we too had
reservations about the procedures under which the
PLO representative was invited to take part. Rules 37
and 39 of the provisional rules of procedure are clear
on the question of participation
in Council debates.
We believe that the formula used to invite the PLO
to participate does not conform with those provisions.
As the representative of the United States has already
remarked [1896th meeting], we may live to regret the
precedent thereby set.
34. When this debate started, I was far from certain
that it could contribute to a solution of the problems
to which the representatives
of Libya and Pakistan
had drawn attention in their letter of 19 March. That
letter referred in particular to the situation arising as
a result of the ruling by an Israeli magistrate in
Jerusalem on 28 January on the question of prayer in
the Al-Aqsa Mosque. Yet as the representative
of
Israel said in his statement on 22 March [189&h
meeting], the Israeli High Court, in an order made on
21 March, rejected an ‘attempt by an Israeli individual
to have the Minister of Police ordered to allow him to
visit the Temple Mount in Jerusalem. The High Court
upheld its decision of 1970 by which it had rejected
an application
for an order nisi against the Police
Minister,
saying-and
I think this is of some importance in our debate-that
the situation of the
Temple Mount was a special one in which political and
security considerations had to be included.
35. At the same time, my delegation was aware of
informal working papers being circulated which, we
felt, contained tendentious and exaggerated language
and which, so far from contributing to an amelioration
of the situation in the West Bank and in Jerusalem,
would have, by their lack of balance and their neglect,
as we saw it, of the actual facts of the situation,
only inflamed feelings which were already running
high.
36. In view of those earlier forebodings, I am therefore pleased to be taking the floor late in this debate
because it seems to me now that some of our fears
have been allayed and that a measure of progress has
been made.
37. To name the most’ obvious, there is the basic’
fact that we have both the representative of the PLO

./

.,’

and the representative
of Israel participating
in this
debate. I would be a foolish man looking at the world
through the rosiest of pink spectacles who would
conclude that the exchanges between the two had
revealed a great deal of common ground. But I do
draw some comfort from the very fact that they are
here together and participating
in this debate.
38. Further, my delegation has been encouraged by
the way that those who have been concerned with the
drafting of the working papers that have been circulating informally have listened carefully to the views
of those who had very real difficulties with earlier
versions, and the way in which they have incorporated
some important amendments in what is, I hope and
believe, the final version. In the view of my delegation, these amendments
have greatly improved the
document.
39. There is a great deal in the paper with which
the United Kingdom
agrees. The United Kingdom
has voted repeatedly in favour of resolutions calling
upon Israel not to alter the status of the city of
Jerusalem, and that remains our firm view. We have
watched with anxiety dangerous and potentially tragic
events and developments in the West Bank. We have
made plain our view that Israel should acknowledge
the applicability
of the fourth Geneva Convention
to the West Bank, East Jerusalem and the other territories which it occupies.
40. Since, owing to a long-standing engagement later
today which unfortunately
it is not possible for me to
avoid, it seems unlikely that I shall be able to be here
to explain my delegation’s vote when the draft resolution [s/n0221 is put to the vote, I should like to take
this opportunity
of clarifying the United Kingdom’s
attitude to two aspects of that document.
41. In the first place, the United Kingdom interprets
the reference to resolutions of the General Assembly
in the fifth preambular
paragraph to mean resolutions 2253 (ES-V) and 2254 (ES-V). Secondly, my
delegation believes that there are certain measures
which an occupying Power can justifiably
take in
respect of the inhabitants of the territories which it
occupies. With regard to operative paragraph 2, therefore, I must make it plain that in our view the words
“all measures*’ should be taken to mean all unwarranted measures.
42. In conclusion, I would reiterate the United Kingdom’s concern at the course of events in the West
Bank, and in particular at reports of the means used
by the Israeli authorites in restoring order there. We
accept that because of these doubts and because of this
concern, a debate ranging somewhat beyond the
immediate problems raised in the letter of the representatives of Libya and Pakistan has been inevitable.
It is, however, of the greatest importance now that
the Council try to avoid excessive recriminations,
which in our view ‘can lead only to a vicious circle of

violence and to the dead end of more suffering.
Instead, by providing,
as I hope, a framework for
peace rather than merely the rhetoric of antagonism,
our task should be to try to promote a greater cooperative effort on the part of those immediately
concerned to restore peace. I hope that at the conclusion

of the debate the Council will be seen to have fulfilled
that responsibility.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.
Note
’ United

Nations,

Treaty

Series,

vol.

75,

p. 287.

6
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

00150

83-60801-August

1984-2.200
