S/PV.9129

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9129th meeting

Tuesday, 13 September 2022, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Kamboj
Mr. Gallagher
Mr. Kimani
Mr. Ochoa Martínez
Ms. Juul
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Mills

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the Sudan and the activities
of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(S/2022/667)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-58839 (E)
*2258839*

S/PV.9129

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in the Sudan and the activities of
the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan (S/2022/667)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s rules of procedure, I
invite the representative of the Sudan to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Volker
Perthes, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Sudan and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan;
and Mr. Ibrahim Mudawi, President of the Sudan Social
Development Organization.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/667, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in the Sudan and the
activities of the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan.

13/09/2022

Next month, on 25 October, the military coup in
the Sudan will be one year old. The past 10 months
have been marked by recurrent protests against the
coup. There have been 117 people killed and thousands
more injured in the context of those protests. At the
same time, efforts to realize the goals of the revolution
of 2018 have continued, particularly among youth,
women, trade unions and professional associations. A
recent noteworthy event was the formation of a new
independent journalists’ syndicate, whose members not
only asserted their right to form an association but also
elected their council and president through competitive
voting for the first time in 33 years. At the same time,
elements of the former regime that were displaced by
the revolution are gradually returning to the political
scene, to the Administration and to public space.
With regard to the political process, some important
decisions have been taken by the military and some
promising developments have happened among
civilians. On 4 July, the President of the Sovereign
Council, General Abdelfattah Burhan, announced the
military’s intention to withdraw from politics. While
large parts of the public doubted that the military
leadership meant what it said, the announcement did
generate momentum among civilian forces, and several
major initiatives aimed at reaching a common civilian
vision have emerged in response.

Mr. Perthes: Since my previous briefing in May
(see S/PV.9041), the Sudan has seen new political
developments, but also a continued deterioration
of the socioeconomic situation. Security incidents
affecting civilians have increased across the country.
Humanitarian needs are growing exponentially.

Last Saturday, the initiative of the Bar Association
presented to the trilateral mechanism the outcome of
its work on a draft constitutional framework. The draft
was explicitly endorsed by the parties behind two other
major initiatives, which means that the Bar Association
initiative now gathers a broad spectrum of civilian
forces around one vision, including the parties of the
Forces for Freedom and Change; the Central Committee,
on which the Government of former Prime Minister
Hamdok had relied; relevant parties not included in
that Government, like the Democratic Unionist Party;
and Juba Peace Agreement signatories still present in
today’s Sovereign Council.

The overall situation will continue to worsen
unless a political solution is found to restore a credible,
fully functioning civilian-led Government, one that can
re-establish the authority of the State across the country
and create conditions for the resumption of international
cooperation, including debt relief. Such a solution is by
no means guaranteed, but there is a chance to reach
a political agreement that would inaugurate a new
transitional period towards democratic governance.

The trilateral mechanism, consisting of the United
Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in
the Sudan (UNITAMS), the African Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, has
engaged with all initiatives. We have facilitated a
meaningful participation of women; we have provided
constitutional expertise to those who have requested
such assistance; and we are currently in the process of
comparing the constitutional and political visions that

I now give the floor to Mr. Perthes.

2/18

22-58839

13/09/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

have been issued. Almost all stakeholders — including,
notably, the military — have expressed that they
want the trilateral mechanism to play a role either in
bringing the different initiatives together, coming up
with bridging proposals or eventually mediating an
agreement with the military.
I am actually encouraged by the degree of
commonality in the current debate in the Sudan.
There are no doubt important differences about the
institutional division of powers, particularly the role of
the military. But the gaps have narrowed, and there is
now a wide-ranging consensus on, among other things,
the need for a civilian Head of State, an independent
Prime Minister and a Cabinet composed of experts and
technocrats, not party leaders. There is also consensus
that the issue of transitional justice should be high on
the list of priorities. There is therefore an opportunity
to end the crisis, and both the military and civilian
forces must grasp it. While any political agreement
must be Sudanese-owned, the trilateral mechanism
stands ready to convene the parties around one text so
as to bridge the remaining differences.
As the political stalemate continues, the human
rights situation has not improved either. Since my last
briefing (see S/PV.9041), 20 protesters have been killed
and at least 1,700 injured. I have more than once felt
it necessary to publicly condemn the excessive use of
force by security forces as well as their targeting of
health facilities and medical staff.
The political crisis in Khartoum is also contributing
to instability in the rest of the country. The peace
talks between the Government and the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement-North that were paused in the
summer of 2021 have not resumed. The surge of violence
in Darfur and Blue Nile is particularly worrying. From
24 May to 28 August, UNITAMS documented 40
incidents of intercommunal violence resulting in the
deaths of more than 300 civilians. National and local
authorities, including the Commander of the Rapid
Support Forces, leaders of the signatories to the Juba
Peace Agreement, regional and state governors, native
administrations and civil-society leaders have all made
attempts to broker reconciliation and agreements in
Darfur and Blue Nile, but the sustainability of those
agreements remains uncertain in the absence of
effective State authority. I urge all communities to
refrain from hate speech, which is increasingly fuelling
communal tensions. I urge the authorities to urgently
address protection gaps. There should be no doubt that

S/PV.9129

the responsibility for the protection of civilians rests on
their shoulders.
The lack of implementation of the Juba Peace
Agreement continues to contribute to instability.
Protocols addressing the drivers of the conflict in
Darfur, including wealth-sharing, justice, the resolution
of land issues and ensuring the return of internally
displaced persons, remain unfulfilled. In the absence
of a political agreement, it will be difficult to advance
them. One positive step, as mentioned by the Permanent
Representative of the Sudan during our previous
meeting, was the graduation on 3 July of the first batch
of 2,000 fighters for the joint security-keeping force in
Darfur, as provided for in the Juba Peace Agreement.
The United Nations has contributed to training them in
human rights and international humanitarian law. But
the graduation was only a first step. The joint securitykeeping force has not actually been fully established to
match the number of soldiers from regular forces and
has yet to be deployed. I urge the authorities to begin
deploying them and thereby improve the protection of
the population.
Humanitarian needs are now at record levels
owing to a combination of ongoing political instability,
economic crises, a rise in intercommunal violence, poor
harvests and now floods. Some 11.7 million people are
facing acute hunger, and the number is growing. While
United Nations and partner organizations have managed
to reach 7.1 million people in need since January, the
2022 Humanitarian Response Plan is funded only
at 32 per cent — less than a third of what is needed.
In that challenging context, the United Nations has
been working with partners to strengthen community
stabilization efforts and resilience-building. Integrated
approaches supported by the Peacebuilding Fund have
been put in place to address the risks created by climate
change and food insecurity in Darfur.
UNITAMS and the United Nations family continue
to offer support to national and state authorities in the
implementation of the National Plan on the Protection
of Civilians. UNITAMS also continues to advise and
train the Sudanese Police Force in community policing,
addressing sexual and gender-based violence and the
protection of civilians. The workshops and trainings
over the past few months have involved more than
400 police personnel and 1,100 community members,
usually in cooperation with the Sudanese Police Force,
other United Nations agencies, civil society and the
respective state prosecutors’ offices. The Permanent

22-588393/18

S/PV.9129

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Ceasefire Committee, chaired by UNITAMS, has
continued to engage in order to de-escalate tensions,
resolve disputes between signatory parties to the Juba
Peace Agreement and undertake capacity-building
activities with local authorities. It has conducted
investigations following formal requests from the
parties, including after the conflict in Kerenik and El
Geneina in April.
To sum up, nearly a year after the military takeover
of 25 October, the Sudan still lacks a fully functional
and legitimate Government. The decision of the military
to withdraw from politics and the recent initiatives
by civilian forces offer a window of opportunity
for both the military and political forces to reach an
agreement on the way forward. However, time is of
the essence. The longer the political paralysis lasts,
the more difficult it will be to return to the transition
that UNITAMS is mandated to assist. I urge all actors
to seize this opportunity and reach agreement on a
solution that enjoys legitimacy in the eyes of Sudanese
women and men. We in the United Nations and our
partners in the trilateral mechanism remain steadfast
in our efforts in that direction. I count on the Security
Council and the broader international community to
back our efforts and offer coordinated support to the
Sudan at this critical time.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Perthes for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mudawi.
Mr. Mudawi: Thank you, Madam President, for
giving me this opportunity to brief the Security Council
on the Sudan. It is a complicated question, and I will be
addressing some specific points. Mr. Perthes has given
us an overview of what is happening.
As we know, the overthrow of the Islamic regime
in 2019 provided an opportunity for the Sudanese
to transition from dictatorship to democracy.
Unfortunately, while we were undergoing the
transition, there was a military coup on 25 October.
Since then, everything has been deteriorating. There is
a lot of fighting in different areas of the Sudan. There
is growing insecurity for the population, especially in
Darfur. The protection of civilians is a big problem
for all of us. There are problems with food. There are
problems with administration. Nothing is moving at
this time.
We have spent all this time trying to bring civilians
together so that we can agree on a civilian transition,
4/18

13/09/2022

because the demand and the hope of all the Sudanese
people is for a civilian-led Government, and that
civilian-led Government has to be formed by civilians.
It is not the military who form the civilian Government.
Since immediately after the coup, the military has
been trying with different civilians to assume the role
of Prime Minister and to form a Government, but no
civilians have accepted it because no one wants to be
under military rule.
The military has now said that it wants to give up
power to civilians, and we have been working with
different civilians, political parties and civil society to
try to bring people to agree on a way forward. There
has not been just one effort, but rather there have been
several efforts undertaken by several people trying to
bring people together.
Recently we managed, as civil society, under the
Sudanese Bar Association initiative, to bring in the
Forces for Freedom and Change party, which had
been part of the previous Government; one of the
biggest parties, which was not part of the previous
Government, the Original Democratic Unionist Party;
Ansar Al-Sunna; and the Popular Congress Party. That
initiative has managed to gather many civil society
organizations, professional organizations and youth. It
is the only credible initiative now that we can build on
and reach an agreement on a civilian Government and
sending the military to the barracks.
Sending the military to the barracks is easier said
than done. There are the Sudanese Armed Forces. There
are the Rapid Support Forces. There are the factions that
have signed the Juba Peace Agreement. They all have
military components, and they need to be unified in one
professional army. They need to be taken into barracks
so that they are not roaming among civilians, which is
the case now, especially in areas such as Darfur, Blue
Nile and South Kordofan. As long as they continue
roaming around, the army’s return to the barracks and
its withdrawal from politics will remain only a dream.
Those people have to go back to the barracks and stay
in the barracks. A process of unifying and classifying
the different armies and groups that have been formed
must be started. The armies and groups must be
brought to the barracks, and they must do training and
be demobilized so that we can have a unified army. If
we do not have a unified army, there will always be a
risk that there will be fighting among those factions,
and that might lead to a civil war.
22-58839

13/09/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The big problem now is that those different factions
and militaries are staying in the towns, posing a risk
and are causing many problems for the people. In rural
areas, especially in Darfur, civilians are under threat
all the time. They are not able to farm because of the
threat of attack by different groups. It is not possible
to know who is who because everyone is wearing a
military uniform and taking up arms.
In a way, the State authority does not exist. All
those groups are behaving however they want. We will
not have a civilian Government unless we have a unified
army. We cannot have a civilian Government without
authority. We need to have a civilian Government that
is in control. That means that all the armies — not only
the Sudanese Armed Forces, but all the armies — have
to go back to the barracks.
There are needs now. There are states of
emergencies everywhere. During the rainy season,
there were many floods, and many houses and many
villages were destroyed. The response, if any, from the
Government has been very weak. The needs are great,
and no one is providing assistance. Only very limited
assistance is being given by the United Nations and
some international organizations, and yet there are
many needs.
The problem is that the economic situation of
almost all members of society is deteriorating. We are
now seeing many strikes among professionals who are
asking for wage increases because of inflation and
because they cannot survive. The Minister of Finance
himself said that what we give to a civil servant does
not meet his needs for more than 12 days. That means
that there are 18 days during which the civilian civil
servant cannot eat, and he has to find other means to get
food. That situation cannot continue forever. We must
stabilize the situation by establishing a civilian-led
Government that has credibility with society. It cannot
be just any civilian Government in which we group
civilians together and say, “this is a Government”.
Rather, it has to be a civilian Government that is
accepted by the population, especially the youth,
who are on the streets every day. We need a civilian
Government made up of credible persons who are not
partisan so that we can lead the transition.
There are many things in the transition that have
to be done. We in this country all have different views,
and it is has been widely accepted that we will enter
into a societal dialogue by which the Sudanese people
can reach agreement on how the country can be ruled

S/PV.9129

and a new Sudan’s needs can be met. We said that the
societal dialogue has to be a constitutional dialogue,
culminating in a constitutional conference at which all
the Sudanese people are represented. The best thing
that the transition can do is stabilize the economy,
begin to reform the civil service and start the process
for a constitutional conference so that at the end of the
transition period, the Sudanese people can arrive at an
acceptable model of governance that all agree on, along
with a date when elections can be held.
The other issue that has to be resolved is transitional
justice. As we know, many atrocities have been
committed over the past 30 years and in the wake of the
uprising and the downfall of the regime in April 2019.
There has been much killing. More than 100 young
people have been killed since October, and many,
some of whom have yet to be identified, were killed
on 3 June. All such issues involving atrocities must be
addressed. What all of us Sudanese agree on is that we
need a transitional justice model that will address the
violations committed under the 30-year Islamic regime
and following the downfall of Al-Bashir.
Those are therefore the main issues we should be
looking at. I believe that one of the most important
things we need now is a civilian Government that can
address the economic situation, which is an emergency.
Other services, such as education and health care, have
all deteriorated. We have a school dropout rate of more
than 60 per cent at the basic education level that must
be addressed. Many people are now homeless, and an
estimated 1 million of them are young people. Our
hospitals, clinics and all other such facilities have also
deteriorated. Going to hospital is now risky, because
hospitals’ hygiene and overall operating conditions
are compromised. In addition, medical doctors and
personnel’s pay is so inadequate that they actually
cannot live on it.
We therefore need a civilian Government. And we
need the army to return to barracks. The entire military
has to be offered incentives to return to barracks and
undergo training on how to deal with people. We need
civil-service reform. We have a very large civil-service
corps that we inherited from the previous regime,
with non-professionals and unqualified people in
various positions.
With regard to the situation of women and children,
many women in rural areas have become heads of
households, trying to work and put food on the table for
their families. In conflict areas such as Darfur, where

22-588395/18

S/PV.9129

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

people were killed during the war, many women are now
the heads of their households. And although we agreed
that we needed a meaningful representation of women
during the transition period, that has unfortunately not
happened. We agreed that women should occupy 40 per
cent of Government positions. That has not happened.
At the initiative of the Sudanese Bar Association, we
have now agreed that 50 per cent of the Cabinet, 50 per
cent of the Sovereign Council and more than 40 per
cent of the Transitional Legislative Council have to be
represented by women.
I believe we need to increase pressure on the
military to make greater concessions and return to
barracks. We need to train them so that we can have
a modern, united Sudanese army. The priority for the
next Government has to be addressing the economy,
which has to be stabilized. The Government must find
the means to provide food for the people to survive and
begin farming again.
It must also address the security issues in Darfur,
which is crucial. The reality, and the problem, is that
the mechanism set out in the Juba Peace Agreement for
the protection of civilians is not working. The forces
are made up of tribes, and when there is a conflict, each
force member will side with his own tribe. We have
seen that in northern Darfur and western Darfur. We
need to find another mechanism for the protection of
civilians, and we have to explore other options. How
can we protect civilians? How can we train soldiers?
Can we send soldiers or police from other areas of the
Sudan to regions other than their own and not allow
people from one region to protect the civilians of that
region? Those are the issues. The issue of bandits also
has to be addressed. There are still people roaming
around. Unfortunately, they wear military uniforms
and are committing a lot of crimes.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Mudawi for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I am grateful
to Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Perthes for his briefing and for his and his team’s tireless
efforts. I also thank Mr. Mudawi for his account, which
we followed closely, and I welcome the presence of the
Permanent Representative of the Sudan at our meeting
today. I would like to make three points in response to
what we have just heard.
6/18

13/09/2022

First, concerning the political situation, we regret
that limited progress has been made since the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General briefed us
in May (see S/PV.9041). We take note of his cautious
optimism today following recent moves towards a
negotiated outcome, and we hope this momentum can
bear fruit.
The United Kingdom condemns the excessive use
of force by security forces, which led to the deaths of
nine protesters on 30 June. As we heard, that takes
the total number of protesters killed since the coup
to 116. The United Kingdom calls on the Sudanese
authorities to stop all violence against protesters and
for perpetrators of human rights violations to be held
to account. We further urge the military component
to engage constructively in the political process and
fulfil its stated commitment to withdraw from the
political scene.
Secondly, the Sudan is facing an urgent economic
and humanitarian crisis. Ordinary citizens continue to
suffer. Bureaucratic and security-related impediments
are limiting the international community’s ability to
deliver humanitarian aid to those most in need. We urge
the authorities to remove those barriers immediately.
Only a civilian-led transitional Government can put
the country on the road to recovery and allow for the
full resumption of international support, including
debt relief.
Thirdly, the United Kingdom is deeply concerned
about the increased violence in West Darfur state and
the Blue Nile region. The recent graduation of members
of the joint security-keeping force is a welcome step.
Further steps are urgently needed in order to implement
the security arrangements of the Juba Peace Agreement,
address the root causes of conflict in Darfur and achieve
sustainable peace.
In conclusion, the United Kingdom fully supports
the efforts of the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan, along with the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, to help facilitate the Sudanese-led
process to resolve the political crisis. We urge all
Sudanese actors to come together in good faith and
in a spirit of compromise in order to deliver on the
population’s demands for freedom, peace and justice.
Mr. Gallagher (Ireland): I would like to thank
Mr. Volker Perthes for his briefing. Ireland strongly
supports the work of the United Nations Integrated
22-58839

13/09/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.9129

Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS),
the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development in the Sudan. I also want to thank
Mr. Perthes and his team for their tireless efforts. And I
thank Mr. Mudawi for his thoughtful intervention.

stakeholders and to bolster the role of UNITAMS
and the trilateral mechanism. For that process to
have any chance of success, women must be fully and
meaningfully involved, and there is more work to be
done in that regard, as we heard from Mr. Mudawi.

The deeply damaging consequences of last year’s
military coup are now clearly manifesting themselves
throughout the country. No aspect of Sudanese society
has been left untouched by the fractured politics in
Khartoum. We see than in the political and security
turmoil, as well as in the deteriorating economic,
social and humanitarian environment. I am particularly
alarmed by the increasing militarization of Sudanese
life and rising armed violence against civilians.

I am deeply concerned about continued reports
of excessive use of force across the country against
peaceful protesters by the military authorities and
associated armed groups. That is unacceptable and
must end. All human rights violations and serious
crimes against civilians, including sexual violence and
violations against children in armed conflict, must be
investigated and those responsible held to account in
a timely manner. Ultimately, we have to get to a point
where the military accepts the democratic aspirations
of the Sudanese people. It must resist the temptation
to cling to illegitimate power and work in partnership
with its Sudanese brothers and sisters in order to realize
a better future.

Moreover, this crisis is occurring in a context of
growing regional instability and a global food crisis,
which is particularly impacting the Horn of Africa. In
the Sudan today, hunger is now a looming reality for
millions — an upsetting reversal in a country that has
traditionally been a global leader in areas of agricultural
production. Food costs are soaring, and access to basic
goods is limited due to the effects of Russia’s illegal
invasion of Ukraine. The situation is being exacerbated
by severe flooding and the impacts of climate change.
Once again, it is the most vulnerable who are suffering
the most. Ireland and the European Union will continue
to provide life-saving humanitarian assistance to those
who need it most.
As we heard from the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, only genuinely inclusive politics can
be the foundation for addressing the acute challenges
that the Sudan is facing. The military’s announcement
that it would withdraw from the political process in
order to allow space for real dialogue is positive — but
only if rhetoric is accompanied by action. We urge the
military to facilitate an environment that is conducive
to genuine progress.
The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral told us that there is an opportunity to end the
crisis. While there may be an opening, all stakeholders
need to put aside their differences and grasp this
opportunity to shape the Sudan’s political future in a
spirit of compromise and consensus.
The window of opportunity to chart a path back
to a civilian-led democratic transition may not be
open for long. We call for redoubled support from
the international community in order to facilitate
consensus-building among the Sudan’s democratic

While the political process develops in Khartoum,
the authorities continue to have a responsibility to
protect their own people throughout the entire country.
Recently in West Darfur and Blue Nile, hundreds
of civilians were massacred. I want to express our
sincere condolences to the families of the victims.
The authorities must do everything they can to protect
civilians, ensure accountability and tackle the root
causes of the violence. That includes making real
progress on the implementation of the Juba Peace
Agreement and the Sudanese National Plan on the
Protection of Civilians.
In conclusion, let me reiterate my call for all
Sudanese stakeholders to come together to find a way
out of this political stalemate. The stakes are too high
for the people of the Sudan, and the risks too great for
the stability of the region, if they do not do so. Now is
the time to restore the Sudan’s democratic transition for
the benefit of all its people.
Ms. Juul (Norway): We thank today’s briefers
for their insights and thank, in particular, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for his
tireless efforts.
Almost 11 months after the military takeover, our
main message remains the same — only a civilianled transitional Government and a clear, but realistic,
timetable for elections can resolve the political crisis
and pave the way for the full resumption of international
partnerships with the Sudan.

22-588397/18

S/PV.9129

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The announcement by the Head of the transitional
Sovereign Council, Lieutenant General Al-Burhan,
that the military forces will withdraw from the
political scene once a civilian Government is in place
is an important signal, and we hold the military and
security forces to that commitment. There can be no
return to authoritarian rule or a normalization of the
current situation.
We therefore also welcome the publication of the
Sudan Bar Association’s draft transitional constitutional
framework, which is the result of in-depth discussions
involving a wide range of actors. Together with other
constructive initiatives, those efforts — led by the
Sudanese people themselves — are evidence that it is
possible to break the current impasse.
We now call on all stakeholders to maintain the
momentum that has been created and ensure that women
and youth are part of the process. Any agreement or
Government resulting from a non-inclusive process
will lack credibility with the Sudanese people and the
international community.
The tripartite initiative of the United Nations, the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development is well placed to facilitate and support the
Sudanese stakeholders in those efforts.
We are deeply concerned about the reports of
increased violence in parts of the Sudan, including
well-documented cases of sexual and gender-based
violence, as well as grave violations against children.
The Government has a fundamental responsibility to
take concrete measures to actively protect all civilians.
It is also its responsibility to allow and facilitate full,
safe and unhindered access for humanitarian assistance.
Bureaucratic impediments can and should be removed
without delay. The signatories to the Juba Peace
Agreement and other armed actors also have the same
responsibility to abide by humanitarian principles.
We would like to highlight that there are some
positive developments, as described in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2022/667). For example, we
welcome the graduation of the first batch of the joint
security-keeping force. As Mr. Perthes said, that is an
important first step towards a genuine united force.
The next step is to ensure that the newly graduated
forces are deployed and equipped to fulfil their tasks.
Other dimensions of security-sector reform should also
follow, as per the security provisions in the Juba Peace
Agreement. Mobilizing resources is first and foremost
8/18

13/09/2022

the responsibility of the authorities, with the United
Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the
Sudan mandated to provide support, including through
the Permanent Ceasefire Committee.
The economic crisis, marked by high inflation
and shortages, is having an alarming impact on food
security and livelihoods. People in marginalized and
war-affected areas are particularly vulnerable. They
have no safety nets. We must scale up humanitarian
action to meet emerging needs and prevent an even
more dire situation next year.
Finally, the current conflict dynamic in the Horn
of Africa should be of vital concern to the Council,
especially the impact of renewed fighting in Tigray,
which will have serious and immediate consequences
for neighbouring countries. We encourage and support
the African Union and the United Nations in using their
good offices to reduce tension and promote dialogue.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I thank Mr. Perthes, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Sudan,
for his comprehensive briefing on recent developments
in the Sudan, including the most recent efforts of the
trilateral mechanism. We also followed the briefing by
Mr. Ibrahim Mudawi and welcome the participation of
Ambassador Al-Harith Mohamed in today’s meeting.
A clear path out of the current political situation
has yet to emerge. However, despite the mounting
challenges facing the Sudan, the United Arab Emirates
believes that tangible progress remains possible
and requires serious support from the international
community. With regard to the updates on the efforts
of the trilateral mechanism, including the ongoing
engagement with Sudanese stakeholders, we note
that the meeting on 8 June stressed the importance of
holding an inclusive dialogue across all segments of
Sudanese society to reach a sustainable agreement. We
also note that the meeting on 9 June aimed at bridging
differences of opinion marked a necessary step towards
promoting national interests and prioritizing reason and
wisdom in overcoming such differences for the benefit
of the brotherly people of the Sudan.
We also hope that the military component’s
announcement regarding its withdrawal from the
negotiations facilitated by the trilateral mechanism
will help the political forces reach consensus on the
formation of a technocratic Government. To that end,
and as we have noted previously, Sudanese ownership
22-58839

13/09/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.9129

of the political process is essential to the ensure of the
transitional process.

political process to restore a civilian-led transition
to democracy.

With regard to the difficult economic situation,
which is compounded by dire humanitarian conditions
that have been exacerbated by flooding and severe food
insecurity, it is important for international donors to
consider revising their recent decisions, which could
prevent the collapse of the Sudanese economy and
assist in its recovery. The international community
should also intensify its support for the Sudan in order
to alleviate the suffering of those affected by the impact
of climate change. In that context, we again express our
sincere condolences to the Sudan, its brotherly people
and the families of the victims of the devastating
floods. We also underscore the ongoing commitment of
the United Arab Emirates to providing relief assistance
through the air bridge that we launched recently in
support of those affected in the Sudan.

Following the public commitment of Lieutenant
General Al-Burhan and Lieutenant General Mohamed
Hamdan Dagalo, also known as Hemedti, to accepting
a civilian agreement on a new Government, we will
welcome an inclusive dialogue among civilian prodemocracy parties on developing new constitutional
arrangements
and
a
civilian-led
transitional
Government. Such arrangements should clearly define
a timeline for free and fair elections, procedures for
selecting a transitional prime minister and other key
officials, the authority and the role of the military, and
dispute resolution mechanisms to help avoid future
political crises.

Turning to the security situation, we believe that
national mechanisms in the Sudan are important to the
de-escalation of tensions, including the facilitation of
several local peace agreements in response to clashes
among tribes in West and South Darfur. In addition,
although the Sudan has received limited support for
the full implementation of the Juba Peace Agreement,
considerable progress has been made in security
arrangements in Darfur, as reflected, for example,
in the efforts of the Permanent Ceasefire Committee
and the recent graduation of the first class of the joint
security-keeping force. In that regard, we recall that the
current stage requires that the international community
intensify its efforts and provide technical and financial
support so the Sudan can achieve more progress to
ensure the restoration of stability throughout Darfur.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates reaffirms
its support for the aspirations of the Sudanese people
and reiterates its commitment to the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and national unity of
the Sudan.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Perthes for his comprehensive briefing. We commend
him and his team for supporting the people of the
Sudan and their aspirations to restore a civilian-led
transition to democracy. The United States continues
to fully support the collaborative efforts of the United
Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the
Sudan, the African Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development to facilitate a Sudanese-led

Full respect for freedom of association, expression
and peaceful assembly is vital. We have consistently
condemned violence against the unjust detention of
peaceful protesters and call for those responsible to be
held accountable. We support the Sudanese people’s
calls for accountability for incidents of violence,
including through transitional justice mechanisms. We
condemn the recent violence in Darfur, Blue Nile and
elsewhere, which only deepens the dire humanitarian
situation on the ground, erodes the gains of the Juba
Peace Agreement and hinders efforts to achieve
sustainable peace. The ongoing violence demonstrates
how urgent it is to see the Juba Peace Agreement
implemented, including the full deployment of the
security-keeping forces in Darfur, inclusive securitysector reform, robust international monitoring and
reporting mechanisms and comprehensive, inclusive
and transparent transitional justice processes, including
accountability for violence against civilians and other
human rights abuses and violations.
Finally, we are also concerned about the heavy
rains and flash flooding that continue to affect tens
of thousands of people across the Sudan, events that
underscore the continuing impact of climate change on
vulnerable communities. The United States supports
the provision of safe drinking-water hygiene kits,
emergency shelter items and more to the worst-affected
communities. Long-standing United States Agency
for International Development disaster-preparedness
programmes in the Sudan are also responding through
the distribution of pre-positioned relief supplies.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Let me
begin by thanking Mr. Volker Perthes, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Sudan,

22-588399/18

S/PV.9129

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

and Mr. Ibrahim Mudawi for their briefings. I also
welcome the delegation of the Sudan to this meeting.
Our delegation will raise three points.
First, we are concerned about the violence both
in Darfur and the Blue Nile region. We extend our
heartfelt sympathies and condolences to the families of
the victims. We are distressed by rising intercommunal
violence and regret that the fighting has significantly
displaced Sudanese women and men and their children.
We call on the Sudan’s authorities to increase efforts
to protect civilians in those areas and enhance
accountability. Conditions conduive for the safe return
of displaced persons are also vital.
Secondly, we regard the implementation of the
Juba Peace Agreement as one of the cornerstones of
addressing the root causes of conflict in Darfur, South
Kordofan and the Blue Nile region. Accordingly, we
commend the Sudanese authorities for the progress in
establishing the joint security-keeping force in Darfur.
However, quicker and bolder implementation of the
Agreement is necessary. Otherwise, the Juba Peace
Agreement will fail to inspire credibility for Sudanese
civilians. After all, frequent outbreaks of violence have
shown that palliative measures alone cannot provide
security to civilians in Darfur and the Two Areas.
Thirdly, we consider the transition to democracy
to be another cornerstone of addressing the root causes
of conflict in the country. We therefore welcome
the Sudanese Bar Association’s draft transitional
constitution. We appreciate the active participation of
several civil society representatives in the Association’s
drafting committee.
Above all, we reiterate our support for the trilateral
mechanism’s crucial work. We regard as particularly
critical the facilitation efforts of the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan,
the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development.
An urgent way out of the stalemate that Sudanese
society has reached is necessary. In order to break that
deadlock, we underscore our support for a political
dialogue that is inclusive and Sudanese-owned and that
paves the way for a legitimate democratic transition in
the Sudan.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Representative Perthes for his briefing
and welcome the Permanent Representative of the
10/18

13/09/2022

Sudan to today’s meeting. I also listened carefully to
Mr. Mudawi’s remarks.
The Sudan is now at a critical stage in its political
transition. While political challenges and uncertainties
remain, the relevant parties have stayed the course of
dialogue and consultations in search of a way to restore
the transitional Government and continue the political
transition. We noted the announcement by the Sudanese
military in July to withdraw from the political dialogue
to allow space for political forces to form a Government.
Political groups have put forward many proposals
for the establishment of a Government. The trilateral
mechanism of the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan, the African Union
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
has also been working to facilitate internal political
dialogue in the Sudan.
The facts have repeatedly proven that the Sudan’s
problems can be resolved only by finding a path that
aligns with its national conditions and the interests
of the country and its people, while the imposition of
external solutions and the single-minded pursuit of
quick results will not be conducive to lasting political
stability. The international community should adhere
to the principle of a Sudanese-led and -owned process
while remaining as patient as necessary with regard
to intra-Sudanese consultations and dialogue, as well
as offering support and encouragement to the political
efforts of all Sudanese parties.
In response to the recent intercommunal clashes
in Darfur, the Sudanese Government promptly took
measures to fulfil its responsibility for the protection
of civilians. Some progress has been made in the
implementation of the Juba Peace Agreement, as the
Permanent Ceasefire Committee continues to play
its role in eliminating violent conflict. Moreover, the
first cohort of 2,000 soldiers in Darfur’s joint securitykeeping force successfully graduated, which would not
have been possible without the sustained political input
of the Sudanese Government and relevant signatories.
It should be noted that financial shortfalls are
hindering the implementation of the Juba Peace
Agreement on the ground. The international community
should doubly cherish that hard-won Agreement and
provide financial and technical support to accelerate
its implementation.
The sanctions imposed by the Council in relation
to Darfur have severely restricted the Sudanese
22-58839

13/09/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Government’s ability to maintain stability and protect
civilians there. Until they are lifted, such measures
should be adjusted in the light of the evolving situation.
China regrets that the Council was not able to set
benchmarks to adjust the sanctions imposed on the
Sudan before 31 August, as required by the relevant
resolutions. We urge the penholder to earnestly fulfil
its responsibilities, resume consultations as soon as
possible and spare no effort to achieve consensus.
We stress that the benchmarks should be clear, welldefined and realistic and should not go beyond the
Darfur issue or existing sanctions measures, and
neither should they become a political tool to delay the
lifting of sanctions against the Sudan. The Government
of the Sudan stated its position on the benchmarks in a
letter dated 31 August addressed to the Council, which
deserves a positive response from the penholder and
other Council members.
At present, the Sudan’s economy and the Sudanese
people’s livelihoods continue to deteriorate as droughts
and floods take turns hitting the country. Food
insecurity and displacement are urgent issues that need
to be solved. The humanitarian situation in the country
also presents grave challenges.
At a time when the Sudanese people are most in
need, the politically motivated suspension of economic
aid and debt relief will aggravate the Sudan’s economic
and humanitarian stress, rather than helping it to free
itself from its current predicament. China calls upon
the relevant countries and international organizations
to adopt responsible policies, to resume international
assistance to the Sudan as soon as possible and to assist
the country through the provision of economic and
humanitarian relief.
China sincerely supports the Sudan’s peace and
development and attaches no political conditions in
doing so. In the wake of the severe floods that have
affected multiple areas in the Sudan, China immediately
sent a message of sympathy, to be followed by disaster
relief assistance. China will continue to strengthen
exchange and cooperation in various fields between the
two countries and provide support and assistance to the
Sudan to the best of its ability.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): Let me begin by thanking
Special Representative Volker Perthes for his detailed
briefing on the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan

S/PV.9129

(UNITAMS). I also thank Mr. Ibrahim Mudawi for
his presentation.
The political transition process that began three
years ago continues to face obstacles on the ground.
While recent months have witnessed some welcome
developments, a stalemate in the process remains. The
latest announcements by the leadership of the Sovereign
Council, the annulment of the nationwide emergency
and the release of political detainees, as well as a
decrease in security incidents, are positive signs.
We reiterate that a Sudanese-led, Sudanese-owned,
inclusive and credible political dialogue remains
critical in efforts to find a lasting solution to the current
impasse. In that context, we note the initiatives taken
by the trilateral mechanism, including its advocacy
for the creation of conducive conditions that could
enable negotiations between the military and civilians.
We encourage the mechanism to continue its efforts
and assist the Sudanese stakeholders in finding a
way forward.
We continue to underscore the importance of
implementing the Juba Peace Agreement. While the
pace of implementation of various provisions of the
Agreement has remained slow, we note the integration
of 2,000 armed movements members into the joint
security-keeping force, as well as the signing of the
native administration legislation. We also note the
progress made with regard to transitional security
arrangements for Darfur through the activities of the
Permanent Ceasefire Committee. That momentum
needs to be sustained in the coming days.
The prevailing intercommunal violence in West
Darfur can be tackled effectively only by prioritizing
reconciliation and addressing the political and securityrelated issues. The signing of local peace agreements
should be supported by the provision of necessary
resources. The Mission’s support to the Sudan will
be critical during the coming months, particularly in
assisting the political transition, the implementation of
the Juba Peace Agreement and peacebuilding efforts.
The Security Council’s ongoing deliberations
on the benchmarks for its sanctions on the Sudan,
which are supervised and implemented by the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591
(2005) concerning the Sudan, must also consider the
complex interplay of local factors at work without
resorting to an overly prescriptive approach. We have
noted the penholders’ decision to keep a decision on

22-5883911/18

S/PV.9129

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

sanctions benchmarks for the Sudan in abeyance. That
is a welcome move that keeps the Council united on a
sensitive issue such as sanctions.
On the economic front, the suspension of a
significant portion of international donor assistance,
together with the pause in engagement by international
financial institutions, has severely affected the flow
of overseas development assistance. The funding
shortfalls are also having an impact on the activities
of humanitarian actors and their ability to meet
growing needs.
India has long-standing relations with the Sudan and
its people. Over the years we have assisted the Sudan
with several projects, including with concessional
lines of credit, capacity-building and humanitarian
assistance. We hope to see it emerge as a prosperous,
peaceful and stable nation and will continue to support
the country and its people. We remain confident that
the people of the Sudan will overcome their current
challenges and press on towards securing a stable and
prosperous future.
Mr. Biang (Gabon): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the three African members
of the Security Council (A3) — Ghana, Kenya and my
own country, Gabon.
I thank Special Representative Volker Perthes for
his briefing. We also took note of the presentation by
Mr. Ibrahim Mudawi, a representative of civil society.
And I would like to thank my brother Ambassador,
Mr. Harold Agyeman, Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005)
concerning the Sudan, for his report on the activities
of the Committee. I welcome the participation of the
Permanent Representative of the Sudan in today’s
meeting. The A3 stands in solidarity with the people of
the Sudan amid its ongoing political, economic, security
and humanitarian challenges. We also recognize that
there are opportunities that must be seized in order to
make progress in the Sudan.
At the political level, the protracted stalemate
among the parties on establishing a viable political
process to restore the country to a democratic transition
process is rolling back the gains that the Sudan made
after the 2019 revolution. We encourage all Sudanese
stakeholders to heed the call by the African Union
and the international community to unconditionally
participate in the Sudanese-owned and -led process
under the facilitation of the trilateral mechanism made
12/18

13/09/2022

up of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), the African Union and the United Nations.
We welcome the publication last week of a new
draft constitutional framework, a key step in the
stabilization process in the Sudan. To that end, we call
on the Sudanese authorities and all stakeholders, both
civilian and military, to commit to the negotiations on
the constitutional framework and embrace an inclusive
and constructive dialogue representing all segments of
society, including women and young people. All the
parties must show flexibility, given the urgency of the
situation on the ground and the weariness expressed by
the population during the various demonstrations.
The A3 welcomed some of the progress made during
the reporting period, including the signing of native
administration legislation by the Governor of Darfur
in accordance with the Juba Peace Agreement, as well
as the completion of the training of the first group of
the joint security-keeping force. We also welcomed the
releases of political detainees, which are an essential
confidence-building measure. We hope those positive
signals will be the basis for a new chapter in the political
process. The A3 further acknowledges the outcome
of the thirty-ninth IGAD Extraordinary Summit held
in Nairobi, including the meeting between Ethiopia’s
Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed and General Al-Burhan
with a view to defusing tensions in the Fashaqah border
area. We sincerely hope that this positive step, which is
important for regional stability, will bear the expected
fruits. It is essential that neighbouring States give
priority to the peaceful settlement of disputes.
(spoke in French)
On the security front, the A3 remains deeply
concerned about the recurring intercommunal clashes
in several regions of the country, particularly West
Darfur and the Blue Nile region. In that regard, we
welcome the steps taken by the Sudanese authorities
to end the violence through the signing of cessation
of hostilities agreements between members of the
communities in conflict. We believe the Government
could take additional steps to address the root causes of
those conflicts, which will require the full participation
of local communities, civil society and displaced
persons in the peace process.
We also take note of the report submitted by the
Sudan on 8 September to the President of the Security
Council on the progress in implementing the National
Plan on the Protection of Civilians. We urge the
22-58839

13/09/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Government of the Sudan, with the support of the United
Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission
in the Sudan (UNITAMS) and the United Nations
country team, to redouble its efforts and accelerate the
implementation of the remaining benchmarks.
The deteriorating humanitarian situation in the
Sudan is worrying. The current economic crisis, the
adverse effects of climate change and the risk of food
shortages continue to worsen the situation. We note with
deep concern the impact of climate change on people’s
lives, livelihoods and security. Cycles of flood and
drought are exacerbating an already fragile situation
in vulnerable regions of the Sudan, causing massive
displacement. In view of the immense humanitarian
needs, the A3 echoes the Secretary-General’s call
to the international community to mobilize funding
for humanitarian operations. In addition, we urge
the Sudanese authorities to facilitate unhindered
humanitarian access, including in the conflict areas.
The A3 commends UNITAMS and the United Nations
country teams for their efforts to continue providing
assistance to the people of the Sudan, despite the
difficult environment. We urge UNITAMS to continue
working closely with the Sudanese authorities in order
to facilitate the rapid implementation of development
plans and programmes.
In conclusion, the A3 reaffirms its solidarity with
the people of the Sudan, as well as its continued support
for their efforts to achieve a lasting peace.
Mr. Ochoa Martínez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
We would first of all like to thank Special Representative
Perthes and Mr. Mudawi for their briefings.
The situation in the Sudan, 11 months after the
coup, demonstrates the urgency of re-establishing a
functioning civilian Government. It remains clear that
the Sudanese people do not accept the usurpation of
power by force and that the democratic transition must
be civilian-led. The announcement of the withdrawal
of the military component of the trilateral mechanism
could be an opportunity to facilitate dialogue among
the various civilian parties in order to find consensus.
We call on all stakeholders to participate constructively
in that process.
It is also essential that the authorities create an
environment conducive to the holding of this dialogue.
That includes refraining from using force or arresting
protesters and ensuring that the right to expression and
peaceful association is respected. Mexico deplores the

S/PV.9129

deaths that occurred during the protests on 30 June. We
are also concerned about the reports of sexual harassment
and intimidation of women and girls in the context of
those protests. We call on the authorities to expedite
the work of the committees previously established to
investigate possible human rights violations in the
context of those protests and to provide them with the
resources they need to do their work effectively. The
results of the investigations should be made public.
Accountability, transitional justice and the
implementation of rule-of-law reforms are key to
stability and national reconciliation in the Sudan.
Progress in the implementation of the Juba Peace
Agreement, apart from a couple of exceptions, has
been limited. Political will is crucial to the country’s
ability to move forward and achieve results, such as
the graduation of 2,000 members of the joint securitykeeping force. We also hope that the Permanent
Ceasefire Committee will continue its important work
to reduce tensions.
We are deeply concerned about the uptick in
violence in the Blue Nile and Darfur regions since
the coup. We urge the authorities to redouble their
efforts to protect civilians, improve early-warning
mechanisms and ensure accountability. As in other
cases, the proliferation of weapons is one of the main
factors fuelling the violence. The return of armed
groups from Libya to Darfur with heavy weapons and
military vehicles, among other things, is a source of
great concern.
The interruption of the transition period has
aggravated the economic and humanitarian situation.
As long as no progress is made in the implementation
of security measures in Darfur, massive civilian
displacement will continue. The most recent analysis
of the Integrated Food Security Phase Classification
shows that the numbers of vulnerable people have
increased by 2 million, and that the current total
of 11.7 million, which the Special Representative
mentioned, will continue to increase as long as the root
causes of violence are not addressed. In that regard,
we would like to express our deep concern about the
obstacles faced by non-governmental organizations
and United Nations agencies, funds and programmes in
their operations. Mexico calls for ensuring unrestricted
access for the United Nations and its partners to provide
humanitarian assistance.
Lastly, many of the achievements of the transitional
Government are at risk of being lost. It is time for

22-5883913/18

S/PV.9129

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

all involved in the political process to work together
constructively and put the national interests first. It is
time to restore a democratic transitional Government
and the hope of the Sudanese people that peace and
stability are possible.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I too thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Perthes
for his update and Mr. Ibrahim Mudawi, the civilsociety briefer, for his insights. We also welcome the
representative of the Sudan to this meeting. Albania
supports the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS). We
commend the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and his team’s continued efforts in supporting
the Sudanese people and their aspirations to form a
credible, civilian-led, democratic Government.
Albania is deeply concerned about the dire
humanitarian situation in the Sudan, which has worsened
after the severe flooding. We offer our condolences to
the victims’ families and urge the Sudanese authorities
to ensure that all possible measures are in place to
prevent the situation from deteriorating further. The
humanitarian needs in the Sudan are at a very high
level, and the Sudanese authorities must provide
unfettered humanitarian access to all who are affected
by conflict. The intercommunal violence, particularly
in the Blue Nile region, must stop. Albania stands with
the Sudanese people and echoes their calls for a life of
safety and dignity. In that regard, Albania supports the
continued efforts of UNITAMS, the African Union and
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development to
create conditions that can enable negotiations between
the military and civilians. We urge the political actors
and prominent military figures who have withdrawn
from those talks to go back to the negotiating table and
engage in the political process. The critical need for all
stakeholders to engage in reaching an agreement and
finding a common and comprehensive solution is more
urgent than ever.
As we heard, no major progress has been made
in the implementation of the Juba Peace Agreement.
The worsening security situation in Darfur and the
significant outbreaks of violence in the capital and
throughout the country concern us deeply. We condemn
in the strongest terms the security forces’ extensive
and widespread use of violence on protesters. Albania
urges the Sudanese authorities to independently and
impartially investigate any allegations of human rights
violations or abuses, as well as sexual and gender-based
14/18

13/09/2022

violence, especially when committed by members of
the security forces.
In conclusion, we applaud the Sudanese Bar
Association’s publication of a draft transitional
constitutional framework document for the Sudan.
That is a significant initiative to build on. Moreover,
Sudanese civil society has clearly expressed its desire
to be the main character in shaping the future of its
country. In that regard, we also encourage the active
engagement of women as a constructive step forward in
their meaningful participation in democratic processes.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Volker Perthes, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his information on developments in the Sudan. We
have taken note of the report of Mr. Harold Agyeman,
Permanent Representative of Ghana to the United
Nations and Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005)
concerning the Sudan, on the work of that subsidiary
body of the Council in the past 90 days. We welcome
the participation in today’s meeting of Ambassador
Mohamed, Permanent Representative of the Sudan to
the United Nations. We listened closely to the statement
delivered by Mr. Ibrahim Mudawi.
The situation of the Sudan continues to be a difficult
one. The country’s political landscape remains fractured
and polarized. Against the backdrop of the suspension
of a significant share of donor funding, its humanitarian
and socioeconomic challenges remain unresolved. We
are troubled by the deadlock that began in July among
the local political forces in negotiations conducted with
the facilitation of the trilateral mechanism of the United
Nations, the African Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development. However, we have also seen
many initiatives aimed at addressing the situation. We
believe that their success will depend on the degree to
which they include the participation of all politically
significant actors in the country.
In that regard, we welcome the important steps
undertaken by the Government of the Sudan to
stabilize the political situation and its demonstrated
willingness to compromise. We specifically noted the
4 July statement by General Al-Burhan, Head of the
Sovereign Council, in which he announced the military
leadership’s withdrawal from the internal Sudanese
political process in order to enable the civilian
politicians to reach agreement among themselves on
the new transitional Government, and the military’s
22-58839

13/09/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

announcement of its willingness to dissolve the
Sovereign Council while reserving for itself issues
of defence and national security. We believe that step
demonstrates a responsible and constructive approach
on the part of the leadership.
We continue to believe that the Sudanese people can
and should resolve their internal issues independently.
Military intervention in the affairs of a sovereign
Sudan is unacceptable. We all know what became of
the attempts to create dubious democratizing and
socioeconomic schemes based on Western models,
which merely compounded the burdens on the people
and undermined trust in the civilian transitional
authorities. We disagree with the description of the
events of 25 October 2021 as a coup in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2022/667) on the activities
of United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS), which has been
actively promoted by a number of our colleagues on the
Council, especially those from the West.
We also consider it unacceptable that the report ties
the resumption of international development assistance
to the Sudan to the transfer of power to a civilian
Government. Mobilizing international support for a
country dealing with many different problems should
be treated as one of the main tasks of a special political
mission, not a reward for some achievements or domestic
political actions. Otherwise, such conditions could be
regarded as manipulative and a tool for putting pressure
on the Sudanese authorities. In that connection, we
urge the Head of UNITAMS, Mr. Perthes, to act strictly
in accordance with his mandate, every component of
which deserves equal attention. He might otherwise
lose the trust of the Sudanese authorities, and, no less
important, of the Sudanese people, which would be a
serious blow to the United Nations presence. We would
not want that to happen.
We fully support the steps taken by the Government
of the Sudan to normalize life in Darfur and contain the
outbreaks of intercommunal violence. We welcomed
the recent completion of the training of the first
2,000-strong contingent of the joint security-keeping
force in the region. We also welcomed the Deputy
Chairperson of the Sovereign Council Mohamed
Hamdan Dagalo’s extended visit to Darfur and the
reconciliation initiatives and other measures launched
during it. We believe that the Secretary-General should
include more information on those efforts in his reports.

S/PV.9129

We believe that the arms embargo imposed on
the Sudan 17 years ago no longer corresponds to
the current situation in Darfur and is hindering the
implementation of the authorities’ in the field of
State-building, maintaining law and order, as well as
the socioeconomic development of the region. In that
regard, we were disappointed by the decision of the
United States penholders of the Sudanese sanctions
dossier to end work on the Security Council document
on benchmarks for lifting the arms embargo. We
consider it an irresponsible approach that means that
for the second year in a row the Security Council
has sabotaged its own decisions on the review of the
Sudanese sanctions.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.
I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Volker Perthes and Mr. Mudawi for their
briefings. I also welcome the participation of the
Permanent Representative of the Sudan in this meeting.
I would like highlight three points.
First, we regret the political stalemate that has
persisted since the coup d’état of 25 October 2021. We
call once again on all the parties to find a way out of the
political crisis and make progress on forming a credible
civilian Government. We encourage all Sudanese
citizens from both civil society and the military to take
part in the dialogue by overcoming their differences
where the former is concerned and avoiding making
them worse where the latter is concerned. We call on the
military to refrain from any steps that could prolong the
current impasse. France continues to support the joint
facilitation of the United Nations, the African Union
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development.
We have noted the lifting of the state of emergency
and the release of many political prisoners, and
we also welcome the opening of investigations of
those responsible for violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law. Ending the violence
against demonstrators is crucial. In that regard, we are
concerned about the continuation of the extensive police
powers put in place during the state of emergency. We
call for lifting immunity for the security forces and for
preserving the evidence of violence against protesters.
Furthermore, the right to legal defence of those who are
still detained must be respected.

22-5883915/18

S/PV.9129

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Secondly, the political instability continues to
exacerbate the security, economic, and humanitarian
situation. The absence of legitimate authorities and a
positive outlook on the peace process are aggravating
the security situation in outlying areas, including
Darfur and the Blue Nile region, where there have been
major clashes since July. We welcome the integration of
2,000 former combatants into the joint security-keeping
force. We also note the information that the Sudan has
shared on the implementation of the National Plan for
the Protection of Civilians. It is vital that the authorities
accelerate the deployment of the joint security-keeping
force and the reintegration of the combatants.
In the light of the deteriorating economic and
humanitarian situation, France and the European
Union remain committed to the Sudanese people.
The Sudan is one of the countries most seriously
affected by the worsening food insecurity caused by
Russia’s aggression in Ukraine. The European Union
has allocated €41 million to the Sudan to address that
situation and will increase the amount to €189 million
by the end of the year. So far in 2022 European
humanitarian assistance has reached €69 million.
Lastly, in partnership with the United Nations, the
European Union is continuing its stabilization projects
in Darfur and in South Kordofan and Blue Nile states to
the tune of €15.75 million.
Thirdly, we welcome the Sudan’s efforts to
contribute to regional stability in a particularly difficult
context. We encourage it to continue to exercise restraint
in the border dispute with Ethiopia in the Fashaqah
triangle and to continue its helpful role in supporting
the transition in Chad and the implementation of
the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan.
I now resume my functions as the President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan): (spoke in French): Since
you gave the floor to Mr. Ibrahim Mudawi, Madam
President, I hope that I can have a minute or two to
respond to his comments.
(spoke in English)
Accordingly, I think that Mr. Mudawi is an
important man, an academician, and I welcomed his
statement, but I found it to be a very gloomy account
of the current conditions in the Sudan. As he is an
16/18

13/09/2022

academic, I will refer him to Professor Roger Mac
Ginty’s book, entitled Everyday Peace, in which the
author writes that peace is resilient, growing and
persisting within many disruptive elements. It requires
transgressing standard narratives and the involvement
of actors in peacebuilding. It is therefore is like a weed
growing up through concrete. Peacebuilding cannot
be achieved through highly politicized methods or by
taking sides. Calling a spade a spade sometimes does
not help.
(spoke in Arabic)
I would like to thank Mr. Volker Perthes, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS), for his briefing. I
also thank all the other speakers for their statements on
the Sudan today.
The political stakeholders in the Sudan continue
their efforts to reach a political consensus. There are
various initiatives to reach an agreement among the
Sudanese parties with a view to ending the political
stalemate and disparity and renew hope in democracy,
championed by young Sudanese through their
commitment and sacrifices, to build a bright future
where the values of freedom, peace and justice prevail.
The Sudanese political forces are aware that the
current stalemate is an exceptional situation and that
the country needs to reach a political consensus that
can lead to the formation of a transitional Government
that can accomplish the tasks needed for the transition
and set the stage for holding general elections in which
the people will be able to choose their representatives
fairly and freely. I can confirm that the political process
is under way and the dialogue will continue. Ultimately
all the parties want to prioritize the interests of the
Sudan and its security, stability and transition towards
the desired civilian democratic rule. Against that
background, I would like to focus on four points.
First, about two months ago, the Head of the
Sovereign Council announced that the military would
not participate in the current political process, which
I brought up in my previous briefing (see S/PV.9041)
to the Security Council in May. The military will
withdraw from the political scene to enable the political
and revolutionary forces and other national components
to form a national technocratic Government that will
carry out the tasks needed for the transition.
22-58839

13/09/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The Head of the Sovereign Council expressed hope
that the political and revolutionary forces would engage
in an immediate and serious dialogue. He stressed that,
after the formation of the executive Government, the
Sovereignty Council would be dissolved and a supreme
council of the armed forces would be formed to assume
command of the uniformed forces and be responsible
for defence and security, which are the customary tasks
of the armed forces of any country.
The political forces, facilitated by the tripartite
mechanism, are negotiating to find common ground
to lay the foundation for an intra-civilian dialogue
and broad political consensus that would ensure the
transfer of power to civilians, in accordance with the
pledges of the Head of the Sovereign Council. I would
like to note that the Sudanese Armed Forces have
repeatedly expressed their commitment to sponsoring
and protecting the transition in the Sudan until it
reaches the desired goals by organizing free and fair
elections that reflect the will and aspirations of the
Sudanese people. The Sudanese Armed Forces have
also committed to preventing any attempt to obstruct
the transitional process.
Secondly, we affirm our commitment to
implementing the Juba Peace Agreement, especially the
provisions related to security arrangements. We will
spare no effort to engage positively and constructively
with other factions that have yet to participate in the
peace process.
In that context, we renew our commitment to protect
civilians in Darfur, especially women and children, in
a manner that ensures human dignity and the rights
that the Sudan has been committed to upholding
since we acceded to the relevant international human
rights instruments. We will continue to implement the
National Plan on the Protection of Civilians and to
form and deploy the joint force for the protection of
civilians, which is one of our top priorities in Darfur
at this stage. We will also collect unauthorized small
arms and implement disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programmes.
A few days ago, we sent the Council the fourth
progress report on the implementation of our National
Plan on the Protection of Civilians. The Council has
undoubtedly noticed that the situation in Darfur is
improving incrementally, despite some obstacles here
and there due to the complex socioeconomic situation,
the impact of climate change on the entire region and
the scarcity of international financial support for the

S/PV.9129

implementation of the provisions of the Juba Peace
Agreement. We hope these issues will receive the
attention of the Security Council and donor countries.
In that regard, a number of inter-tribal reconciliation
meetings have been held in West and South Darfur over
the past weeks under the auspices of the Deputy Head
of the transitional Sovereign Council. Those meetings
have been successful and have enhanced the presence
of State institutions and the rule of law, and they have
also addressed land disputes and the return of refugees
and internally displaced persons to their villages.
In the context of the implementation of the Juba
Peace Agreement, the first batch of 2,000 armed
movement members who signed the Juba Peace
Agreement has graduated. They constitute the core of
the joint security-keeping and civilian protection force
in Darfur. The authorized strength of the force will be
12,000 members — half Government forces and half
Darfur armed movement members who signed the Juba
Peace Agreement. The Government is using its own
scarce resources to supply the force with equipment and
vehicles. The training of that first batch is an essential
step in the enforcement of the security arrangements,
whose proper implementation has faltered due to the
lack of international financial support and to the failure
of donors to honour their pledges.
The Government is facilitating the work of the
Permanent Ceasefire Committee, chaired by the United
Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the
Sudan (UNITAMS). The Committee is continuing its
work in Darfur.
We therefore appeal to the international
community to provide financial support for the
continued implementation of all provisions of the Juba
Peace Agreement, especially given that the security
arrangements for the Agreement and the related DDR
programmes are organizationally, logistically and
financially very expensive and complex. We thank
the friendly countries that have been supporting
those efforts and stress that UNITAMS has a role to
play in that regard. Rather than simply saying that the
implementation of the Agreement has been slow, what
efforts has UNITAMS made to do its part in order to
implement the Agreement at the desired pace?
Thirdly, the transitional Government has taken
economic and financial measures that include
deregulating the Sudanese pound against foreign
currencies, lifting subsidies on commodities and

22-5883917/18

S/PV.9129

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

addressing the Sudan’s accumulated foreign debt.
Those measures are necessary if the Sudan is to address
the inherited shortcomings of the economic structure.
We are also working on increasing productivity and
trade and creating favourable conditions to attract
investments that would benefit from the Sudan’s
promising potential.
We look forward to the resumption of cooperation
and development aid programmes with bilateral partners
so that those economic reforms can achieve their aims.
Those are important measures to take instead of simply
criticizing the situation. The reforms are important
to reduce the impact of foreign debt, access the debt
relief for which the Sudan has qualified by taking
the necessary steps under the Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries initiative and complete addressing inherited
economic distortion. The international community
must bear its responsibility and provide all aspects of
humanitarian assistance to the hundreds of thousands
of refugees from neighbouring countries and those
hosted by the Sudan, in addition to the thousands
affected by floods.
Fourthly, the Secretary-General’s report to the
Council (S/2022/667) failed to mention important
issues. For example, we expected the report to refer
to the efforts of the Sudanese Government to develop,
promote and protect human rights through the
Sudan’s cooperation with international human rights
mechanisms. The Sudan has twice hosted the human
rights expert, most recently in May. We facilitated
his mission, and he was able to meet with high-level
officials. In addition, the Sudan attended the fiftieth
session of the Human Rights Council in Geneva from
June to July and has cooperated with the country office
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights (OHCHR) in Khartoum and with
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
who issued his report from Khartoum for the first
time (see S/PV.9113). This is all part of our efforts
to promote human rights and justice. The report also
made no mention of the various initiatives of respected
parties from among the Sudanese people to resolve the
current crisis.
Instead, the report contained information that
went beyond the Mission’s purview. Peacebuilding in
the Sudan requires political neutrality. Otherwise, it
could negatively affect the political scene and delay
consensus. The report also referred to instances of

18/18

13/09/2022

rape and sexual harassment based on hearsay, without
the required documentation. Human rights issues fall
under the purview of the country office of the OHCHR.
As I noted, the Sudan has cooperated with international
human rights mechanisms and participated in the most
recent session of the Human Rights Council.
The statistics in the report of those dead and injured
does not include the injuries sustained by police. The
Mission should seek and rely on information from the
Public Prosecutor’s Office, the Ministry of Health and
the police. In addition, the source of the information
was not mentioned.
The report does include the efforts of UNITAMS
with regard to the political transition, but it disregards
the other three strategic objectives within its mandate.
That makes me wonder about the role of UNITAMS in
making plans to support the implementation of the Juba
Peace Agreement and its protocols, especially regarding
the security arrangements, the DDR programmes,
internally displaced persons, land disputes, hawakir and
supporting nomads and herders. Moreover, the Mission
has done nothing to provide logistical and financial
support for the implementation of the National Plan on
the Protection of Civilians.
There has also been no progress in the mobilization
of economic and development resources and the
coordination of humanitarian assistance at the
international level, although Mr. Perthes informed me
yesterday that he will make efforts this time with the
Security Council and the World Bank.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that our partners
in the transitional process will continue their efforts for
its success while emphasizing a commitment to dialogue,
which is indispensable to addressing the challenges of
the political transition in the Sudan. We reiterate that
we will work with the international community in order
to address the challenges that hamper the transitional
process and impede the attainment of our goals. I wish
Mr. Perthes every success.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I will now adjourn the meeting so that the
Council can continue its discussion on the subject in
closed consultations.
The meeting rose at noon.

22-58839
