United Nations

S/PV.5228

Security Council

Provisional

Sixtieth year

5228

th meeting
Monday, 18 July 2005, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Vassilakis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Greece)

Members:

Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Baali
Mr. Mayoral
Mr. Aho-Glele
Mr. Tarrisse da Fontoura
Mr. Zhang Yishan
Ms. Løj
Mr. De La Sablière
Mr. Kitaoka
Mr. Mercado
Mr. Dumitru
Mr. Chulkov
Sir Emyr Jones Parry
Mr. Mahiga
Mr. Brencick

Agenda
The responsibility of the Security Council in the maintenance of international peace
and security: HIV/AIDS and international peacekeeping operations

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

05-42552 (E)

*0542552*

S/PV.5228

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The responsibility of the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security:
HIV/AIDS and international peacekeeping
operations
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Jean-Marie
Guéhenno, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Guéhenno to take a seat at the
Council table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Dr. Peter
Piot, Executive Director of the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS.
It is so decided.
I invite Dr. Piot to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, and
Dr. Peter Piot, Executive Director of the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS.
I now give the floor to Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.
Mr. Guéhenno: It is almost five years ago to the
day that the Security Council adopted resolution 1308
(2000). To be frank, some of us initially wondered
whether it belonged on the agenda of the Security
Council. But that landmark resolution provided the jolt
that we desperately needed. I would like to

2

acknowledge the role of Ambassador Holbrooke in
putting this issue on the map. In retrospect, at that time
AIDS was not sufficiently on the radar of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations. It deserved to
be. It most certainly is now.
Conflict and post-conflict environments are highrisk areas for the spread of HIV. Since the adoption of
resolution 1308 (2000), we have developed a
comprehensive strategy to reduce the risk of
peacekeepers contracting or transmitting the virus
while on mission. That strategy has five key elements:
first, the creation of specific capacity within missions
to address AIDS; second, ensuring the availability of
condoms and observing universal medical precautions;
third, the development of voluntary counselling and
testing capacities in missions; fourth, establishing
monitoring and evaluation mechanisms; and fifth,
setting up projects for outreach to local communities
and mainstreaming the issue of AIDS into mission
mandates.
I welcome the opportunity to brief the Council
today on the concrete progress that has been achieved
in all five of those areas. Before doing so, however, I
must acknowledge with sincere gratitude the critical
technical and advisory support that Dr. Piot and his
team at the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) continue to provide the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO), both
at Headquarters and in the field. Our programmes
would not be where they are today without their
assistance. In fact, DPKO has been and remains
dependent on many partners throughout the United
Nations system and on host communities to achieve
progress.
Perhaps the most essential partners, however, are
the 105 countries that currently contribute uniformed
personnel to United Nations peacekeeping operations
around the world. The support of Member States is a
determining factor in the success of our programmes.
That is true of donor countries as well. In that regard, I
wish to express my gratitude to Denmark and the
United Kingdom for their contributions to the
HIV/AIDS Trust Fund.
The assistance we have received could not have
been more timely, given that the number of United
Nations peacekeepers deployed worldwide continues to
surge. There are over 66,000 uniformed personnel and
more than 13,000 international and national civilians

S/PV.5228

serving in 17 peacekeeping and related field
operations. That is a significant number of people who,
at any given time, need to be advised and trained on
how to do their part in the fight against AIDS. It is a
serious challenge, but I think we have made major
progress.
(spoke in French)
When I reported to the Council two years ago on
resolution 1308 (2000), I made a commitment to
deploy AIDS advisers to all major peacekeeping
operations. At that time, there were just four AIDS
advisers. We now have 10, supported by United
Nations Volunteers and professionals of the host
countries, and smaller missions have designated focal
points. Together, those advisers and focal points form a
valuable network linking all peacekeeping operations.
DPKO and UNAIDS carried out joint missions to
Haiti and the Sudan to establish AIDS awareness
programmes in advance of major deployments of
troops and civilian personnel. That set a new
precedent, which we hope will become the norm in the
future.
Since 2003, UNAIDS has seconded an AIDS
policy adviser to DPKO to provide policy guidance and
coordinate the various mission initiatives. At the end of
this year the post will be financed through the DPKO
budget, and I would like to thank Member States for
supporting its creation.
Awareness-training is central to DPKO’s strategy.
We work closely with troop-contributing countries and
UNAIDS to establish at least a basic level of awareness
of AIDS among all those who work in peacekeeping
operations. AIDS awareness-training activities are now
routinely included in all “train the trainer” courses, in
military observer programmes and in other sessions
organized and sponsored by DPKO to enhance national
peacekeeping capabilities. This year, for example, the
issue of AIDS was an important part of recent senior
management seminars held in Ghana, India and Russia
for high-ranking police officers from numerous
Member States.
AIDS awareness training is also central to predeployment training for mission-specific personnel,
such as that provided to Guatemalan and Peruvian
peacekeepers currently being deployed to Haiti, to
Rwandan peacekeepers being deployed to Sudan and to
African Union soldiers who served under the AU in

Burundi before becoming United Nations peacekeepers
there. The question of AIDS is also part of induction
training for all civilian personnel.
We recently revised our AIDS training module to
ensure that the important issues of gender, codes of
conduct and sexual abuse are fully reflected.
Our strategy has also been to reinforce support
for this issue and mobilize all personnel within DPKO
to deal with it. AIDS is high on the agenda of the
conference of all our force commanders from around
the world scheduled for next week, and it will
henceforth be part of the senior leadership training for
those serving in peacekeeping operations. In addition,
we have created modules tailored for specific
occupational groups, such as public information
officers and stress counsellors who serve in the most
difficult missions.
Within missions, AIDS advisers coordinate with
training cells to provide training and ongoing
awareness training to troops, military observers,
civilian police and civilian staff. All this must keep up
with rotations; we must ensure that each new
contingent receives training.
Missions also ensure the availability of male and
female condoms. Post-exposure prevention kits are
available at our medical facilities in case of exposure
to HIV. Screened blood supplies have long been part of
our basic medical equipment.
(spoke in English)
But what impact do we actually make? How do
we measure the effectiveness of our training
programmes? To find some answers, DPKO piloted an
HIV/AIDS knowledge, attitude and practice survey in
Liberia during May and June this year, in collaboration
with the United States Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention and UNAIDS. More than 660 uniformed
peacekeepers were randomly selected and individually
interviewed. The sample included military observers,
civilian police and troops of all ranks, from privates to
colonels, from eight different contingents. The results
are currently being analysed, but I would like to share
a few preliminary findings.
Awareness was generally high. For instance, over
94 per cent correctly stated, unprompted, two of the
key ways that HIV is transmitted: through unprotected
sex and exposure to infected blood. The vast majority,
over 87 per cent, of those who had been in mission for

3

S/PV.5228

at least a month had received AIDS awareness training
since their arrival.
However, one disappointing finding was that only
a small number had received training from within their
battalions or detachments, and less than two per cent
had been briefed on AIDS by their commanding
officers while in the mission area. The support of the
command structure is crucial to any efforts to
mainstream AIDS training, and I take this opportunity
to urge troop-contributing countries to ensure that
AIDS awareness is considered a command
responsibility.

awareness, human rights and child protection, we hope
to influence not only their own behaviour but also their
ability to recognize and respond to sexual violence and
exploitation.
Peacekeepers can also share their knowledge
about HIV with the local population. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, for example, awareness-raising
projects by peacekeepers have ranged from theatre
performances and football matches to high-profile
events attended by local dignitaries. Across missions,
peacekeepers link up with local groups to mark World
AIDS Day.

To create greater capacity among peacekeepers,
AIDS advisers run peer education programmes,
drawing on the UNAIDS peer education kit and
awareness cards. For example, the mission in EthiopiaEritrea, which was the first mission to be established
after resolution 1308 (2000), has trained approximately
1,100 peer educators in a series of two-week intensive
programmes. UNAIDS and DPKO are examining ways
to create a network to maintain the capacity of such
peer educators when they return home. I hope we can
do this in partnership with Member States so that this
expertise is reinforced, rather than lost.

Peacekeeping missions also develop AIDS
outreach projects that specifically target local
communities. For instance, the mission in Liberia has
held five-day programmes for local Christian and
Islamic leaders to encourage faith-based AIDS
prevention initiatives in the country and training
sessions for the local media and women’s groups. In
Haiti, a number of quick-impact projects have
supported AIDS initiatives, and the public information
office has worked with a local non-governmental
organization to fight stigma and discrimination and to
promote awareness among local journalists.

We are very aware, though, that knowledge in
itself does not protect people from HIV; it is what
people do with that knowledge and how they change
their behaviour that makes the difference.

All AIDS advisers are members of their
respective host countries’ Theme Groups on
HIV/AIDS. Those Groups assist in the development
and the implementation of national strategies to
respond to the epidemic. Such partnerships are central
to our overall response. For example, in Côte d’Ivoire
the mission has teamed up with the United Nations
Population Fund (UNFPA) to conduct a series of
programmes over one year with peacekeepers and local
communities, in particular targeting women and girls.
In Sierra Leone we have worked closely with the
Society for Women and AIDS in Africa. Engaging with
local women’s groups not only helps to reach the most
vulnerable but also strengthens training for
peacekeepers, as the testimonies of local women
provide a different perspective on AIDS and the
broader issue of sexual exploitation.

Strengthening voluntary counselling and testing
facilities across our peacekeeping missions is a
priority. This allows peacekeepers to make an informed
decision to find out their HIV status and is critical to
influencing behaviour and preventing transmission.
Of the peacekeepers surveyed, over 92 per cent
had been tested for HIV as part of their preparation for
deployment, but only half stated that they had received
any counselling with the test. The mission in Liberia
has two voluntary counselling and testing centres,
which have been visited by over 420 uniformed and
civilian peacekeepers since they opened in April this
year. The mission plans to launch a roaming facility to
ensure access for all personnel in the sectors. There are
similar facilities in other peacekeeping operations.
Our efforts focus not only on how to reduce the
risk of HIV transmission, but also on how to capitalize
on the positive potential of peacekeepers as agents of
change. When we train peacekeepers in gender

4

United Nations Volunteers (UNV) have often
played a pivotal role in the outreach projects of our
missions, such as by raising funds for school fees for
AIDS orphans in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo or helping former commercial sex workers in
Ethiopia and Eritrea find alternative sources of income.
In Sierra Leone, there is a UNV-funded reintegration

S/PV.5228

and transition-to-peace programme. At the request of
communities, the project has provided AIDS awareness
training for youth leaders in 12 districts of the country.

demands will need to be reviewed, especially if we
want to move beyond raising awareness to changing
risk behaviours.

DPKO is also collaborating with other United
Nations agencies to mainstream AIDS into mandated
mission functions. For example, AIDS is included in an
initiative involving 14 United Nations entities to create
integrated standards and guidelines for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration in peacekeeping
settings. The AIDS adviser in the Sudan is designing a
strategy to train AIDS peer educators as part of the
demobilization programme in that country.

We are constantly being challenged to find new
ideas and approaches, and we are ever mindful that any
success in tackling HIV/AIDS relies on working in
partnership. In 2000, we barely crossed paths with
agencies such as UNAIDS, UNFPA or the United
States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Today, we design and implement programmes together.
As I emphasized earlier, ultimately, addressing
HIV/AIDS initiatives in peacekeeping must be a joint
effort involving Member States, troop-contributing
countries, United Nations and other agencies and host
communities. I look forward to further strengthening
all those partnerships.

In Haiti, the mission is working with UNAIDS,
UNFPA and national bodies to build the long-term
capacity of the police force to address AIDS in the
ranks. At the time of our mission in Timor-Leste, a
special peer education programme for the police force
was part of a six-week schedule of living testimonies
conducted by an HIV-positive trainer.
Building on the survey in Liberia, we intend to
roll out similar monitoring and evaluation projects in
other missions. Immediately following this open
meeting, DPKO and UNAIDS are jointly hosting a
workshop for AIDS advisers and focal points from 16
missions. That will provide an opportunity for frank
discussion and the sharing of lessons learned so that we
can enhance our programmes.
I could provide more details on different
initiatives, but I hope that this brief overview gives the
Council a sense of the concrete measures that we have
been taking to tackle HIV/AIDS in peacekeeping
operations. Over the past five years, we have learned
many lessons from our partners, from our successes
and also from our mistakes. But we have to ask
ourselves, are we doing enough? Is our basic strategy
the right one? What additional investments need to be
made to sustain and strengthen our efforts?
My feeling is that we are on the right track. We
have overcome a lot of resistance. And as the value of
the programmes has become apparent, there is a
demand for more. But a number of areas still need to
be tackled. Testing, for example, remains a
controversial and divisive issue. And, as I mentioned
before, we need to ensure that AIDS awareness is
considered a command responsibility, moving beyond
rhetoric to engagement at the highest levels. We need
continued support for our HIV/AIDS Trust Fund, and
the capacity of missions to respond to growing

The President: I thank Mr. Guéhenno for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Peter Piot, Executive
Director of the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS.
Mr. Piot: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
invitation to brief the Security Council on the
implementation of resolution 1308 (2000).
When we look at the history of the fight against
AIDS, there is no doubt that resolution 1308 (2000) is
a milestone in the response to the epidemic. By
underscoring the fact that the spread of HIV/AIDS, if
unchecked, may pose a risk to stability and security,
the Security Council, through resolution 1308 (2000),
has transformed how the world views AIDS. I say
“transformed” because many now view AIDS as a
threat to national security and stability, in addition to
being a threat to development and public health alone.
While today it sounds normal to place AIDS in that
context, it was definitely a very bold step five years
ago. It took real leadership. That is why I am happy
that Ambassador Richard Holbrooke is here today. I
would say that without his push, this would not have
happened. From my experience in my advocacy work
to promote the response to AIDS, I can tell the Council
that the debate in the Security Council and the
resolution opened many doors for dealing with AIDS
that previously had been closed.
It is also because of that transformation that I
believe that today, for the first time ever, we have a
real opportunity to halt and begin to reverse this

5

S/PV.5228

devastating epidemic, as called for in Millennium
Development Goal 6. Indeed, reversing the spread of
AIDS is crucial if we are to make any progress in
meeting the broader Millennium Development Goals.
Today, there is true momentum in the fight
against AIDS. First, there is undoubted political
momentum. Forty heads of State or Government, or
their deputies, now personally lead their countries’
response to AIDS, including in Council members
Benin and China.
Secondly, there is financial momentum. An
unprecedented $8 billion is likely to be spent on the
AIDS response in low- and middle-income countries
this year, up from $1.5 billion when resolution 1308
(2000) was adopted. That is more than a fivefold
increase, and it is reflected in domestic budgets and the
budgets of the wealthy countries.
Thirdly, there is finally a momentum of results.
Because of stepped-up efforts, there are new successes
in almost every region of the world, with real signs of
success in the Bahamas, Cambodia, Ghana and Kenya,
adding to early achievements in Brazil, Thailand and
Uganda.
So, in sum, in these five years, the global
response to AIDS has entered a new era: the era of the
implementation of large-scale programmes. However,
sadly, it is true that the threat posed by the AIDS
epidemic has not dwindled at all. Last year, more
people than ever became infected with HIV and more
people died of AIDS than in any previous year,
reflecting both a massive failure of HIV-prevention
programmes and of treatment programmes.
That is the broad context within which the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS)
and its partners are now addressing AIDS and security.
I would like to take this opportunity to present the
UNAIDS progress report, “On the front line”, which all
Council members have received and which details our
actions in that area.
In response to resolution 1308 (2000), I
established an Office on AIDS, Security and
Humanitarian Response in the UNAIDS secretariat,
which has been working — as we just heard from
Under-Secretary-General Guéhenno — with the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO). I
would also like to thank Denmark, which allowed us to

6

jumpstart that initiative through support for our offices
in Copenhagen.
The strategy of UNAIDS and DPKO, building on
our formal agreement of January 2001, has been to
ensure that the United Nations sets the highest possible
standards in protecting from HIV both peacekeepers
and the populations with which they are in contact. I
would like to wholeheartedly commend DPKO for its
achievements in mainstreaming AIDS responses into
every United Nations peacekeeping mission. I can just
confirm everything that Mr. Guéhenno has said. I will
not repeat what he so clearly noted in his statement,
but I would like to add a few more things.
In addition to what we heard, some 1 million
AIDS-awareness cards have been distributed in 13
languages through peacekeepers and national security
forces. A peer education kit, available in 11 languages,
is becoming an integral part of the military training
curricula in several troop-contributing countries.
With the increasing focus on regional troop and
mission management for peacekeeping, we have
actively engaged with key regional bodies. We have
supported and are supporting the African Union with
its AIDS programmes for African Union peacekeeping
forces, as well as African militaries. We are now
helping the African Union Security and Peace Council
in its AIDS-related programmes for stand-by forces. In
addition, we are now working with the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization and the Caribbean Community
secretariat in developing comprehensive AIDS
programmes for uniformed services.
Despite all that has been achieved since 2000, it
is clear that there is still a long way to go, as we just
heard — a fact made evident by the recent reports of
sexual exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers. The
adoption by the General Assembly last month of a
comprehensive
strategy
to
eliminate
sexual
exploitation and abuse in United Nations peacekeeping
operations is a major step forward. I would say that
zero tolerance for any violation of the code of conduct
would also go a long way towards stopping the spread
of HIV.
Let me now turn to the wider issue of national
uniformed services, where international peacekeepers
are drawn from and return to. This was not the formal
intention of resolution 1308 (2000), but it has become
clear that, if we do not deal with troop-providing
armies, dealing with HIV only among peacekeepers is

S/PV.5228

not going to fix the problem. Thus, resolution 1308
(2000) really paved the way for us in UNAIDS to
engage uniformed services as key partners in the
response to AIDS. Today, UNAIDS is assisting 53
Member States with comprehensive programmes to
address AIDS among uniformed services.
As part of that work, we have signed formal
partnership agreements with 15 ministries of defence,
most recently with the Indian Government, covering
about 1.3 million active uniformed personnel. Each
programme includes HIV education, condom
promotion and distribution, the strengthening of
counselling and testing services, and improving the
skills of health personnel to provide HIV-specific care
and treatment.
A small, but nonetheless growing number of
defence, military and political leaders now fully
understands the need to address AIDS and has begun to
make what we hope will be sustained investments.
However, we are still too far from the point at which
responding to AIDS is considered to be a part of core
military business everywhere. That, again, will take
strong leadership not only here in the Council, but in
every single country.
Before concluding, let me highlight a few
challenges. There are two key challenges in working
with uniformed services, as set out in our progress
report.
The first is the need significantly to expand
access to HIV testing and counselling. As we heard,
that is a priority for UNAIDS and DPKO. Our
guidance on HIV testing continues to emphasize the
importance of counselling and testing in every setting.
While national policies vary with regard to HIV testing
during recruitment and active service, the evidence
clearly demonstrates that the provision of voluntary
confidential counselling and testing services is far
more likely than mandatory testing to result in
favourable behaviour change. The problem is that
neither is offered at a scale that is big enough. Troops
and civilians alike must therefore have unrestricted
access to HIV testing and counselling during
deployment, and — crucially — we must step up
efforts to encourage them to do so.
Secondly, there is the need to ensure the
consistent implementation of those AIDS programmes.
We just heard the quite disturbing data from the survey
in Liberia, and it is clear that we still have a long way

to go in making sure that, at every level in the
hierarchy, commanders understand that they will be
held accountable for what they are doing on AIDS as
much as on other essential military operations.
Turning to the future, I would like to outline two
great tasks that I believe we face in relation to AIDS
and security. The first task is to expand our knowledge
of the broader impact of AIDS on human security and
national stability in the most-affected countries, and
also those in conflict and post-conflict situations. How
those challenges will actually play out in countries
over the longer term is not fully known. We must start
today planning for the long-term future in our action on
AIDS. That is one of the big challenges for us at
UNAIDS.
We recently did a study, together with the Shell
oil company, on the development of scenarios for
AIDS in Africa by 2025 — 20 years from now. Those
scenarios clearly show how the worst-affected
countries will be plainly destabilized in all their
aspects by the AIDS epidemic.
As requested by the Council at its last review two
years ago, we are also building and reviewing the
evidence base on the long-term implications of AIDS
on security. This afternoon, for example, I will be
joining the Council for Foreign Relations here to
launch a new report we co-funded that presents some
preliminary evidence of the links between AIDS and
national security, which should help to inform our
policy agenda going forward. We have also
commissioned work from the London School of
Economics and are now collaborating with the
Government of the Netherlands in the development of
a research agenda on the linkages between AIDS,
security and conflict.
Finally, the second great task relates to classic
security matters. The unstated goal underpinning
resolution 1308 (2000) is that all peacekeepers and all
uniformed personnel must be given the knowledge and
means to protect themselves and others from HIV. That
goal has not been achieved as yet, so I hope that the
Security Council will make that an explicit and timebound goal and ensure that peacekeeping missions are
given the means to meet their responsibilities with
respect to HIV, and that they will be held accountable
for their performance on responding to AIDS.
Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to thank the Executive Director of the

7

S/PV.5228

Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS) for his briefing and for his informative and
exhaustive report on measures taken in the
implementation of resolution 1308 (2000).
I also thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations for his briefing and for his
tireless efforts to follow up on resolution 1308 (2000).
The mobilization and commitment of the
international community and the United Nations
system to address the HIV/AIDS pandemic have never
been as determined and resolute as they have been in
the past five years. Yet the epidemic continues to
spread, causing a large-scale human catastrophe,
undermining the socio-economic base and threatening
the stability and security of numerous countries. SubSaharan Africa continues to be the most affected region
of the world, with 64 per cent of the world’s HIV
infections and 74 per cent of all AIDS-related deaths in
2004. It is also clear that the numerous conflicts
affecting that region, as well as other regions of the
world, are, unfortunately, breeding grounds for the
spread of the pandemic.
In raising the issue of AIDS in zones of armed
conflict, we cannot but welcome the coordination and
strengthening of cooperation between the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and UNAIDS. It
is indeed important that the struggle against HIV/AIDS
be part of all peacekeeping operations. In that
connection, the steps taken by DPKO to improve
awareness among, and training for, peacekeeping staff
are welcome developments.
Having said that, and despite the fact that we do
not have comprehensive data on the role of
peacekeeping operations in spreading the epidemic, it
is clearly not a matter of demonizing peacekeeping
staff. On the other hand, it is useful to assess the
impact of peacekeeping operations in the fight against
AIDS. We also believe it necessary that there be
parallel action aimed at local communities, in
particular in peacebuilding and transition processes. As
suggested by the UNAIDS report, personnel deployed
in the field should be able to take on that task.
We also believe that combating AIDS must be
one of the priorities for national sectors in charge of
security, particularly armies and police. In that regard,
we note that UNAIDS supports the national
programmes of several countries, including those of
troop-contributing countries. We welcome that. The

8

idea of launching new programmes involving
uniformed personnel deserves full consideration.
The problem that is the subject of our briefing
today is a complex one, given its numerous
dimensions. Because of the Council’s mandate, its
actions are limited and it is not involved in the fight
against AIDS except in the context of peacekeeping
operations. In that regard, we should acknowledge that
its efforts have been extremely useful, even if much
remains to be done.
In order to be really effective, combating
HIV/AIDS must be a comprehensive, unified and timebound effort, regardless of the current circumstances.
Obviously, such an effort must be devised and carried
out by the General Assembly. The actions of the
Security Council must therefore be fully integrated into
that coordinated undertaking.
UNAIDS has called for the strengthening of
existing initiatives. We join that appeal, which is in
keeping with the spirit and letter of the Declaration of
Commitment on HIV/AIDS, adopted by the General
Assembly on 27 June 2001 (resolution S-26/2, annex).
As we know, in 2006 the General Assembly is to
receive a comprehensive report on international
progress thus far, which will provide us an opportunity
to continue the debate we began with the adoption of
resolution 1308 (2000), as well as to act in a resolute
and concerted manner to combat this modern scourge.
Lastly, my delegation would like to thank the
delegation of Greece for the preparation of the draft
presidential statement, as well as to assure it of our full
support.
Mr. Brencick (United States of America): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s open briefing on resolution 1308 (2000). We
would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Guéhenno and Dr. Piot for their statements and for the
comprehensive report on the progress in implementing
resolution 1308 (2000). The report demonstrates that
the response of the United Nations to the resolution is
increasingly institutionalized. We will study its
findings and recommendations closely.
We are pleased to note some of the achievements
since November 2003 — when we last met to discuss
resolution 1308 (2000) — particularly with respect to
peacekeeping missions. The assignment of HIV/AIDS
advisers or focal points to all missions is an important

S/PV.5228

accomplishment. We are encouraged that missions
increasingly have the tools to raise awareness among
peacekeepers. In that context, we commend the wide
distribution of the HIV/AIDS awareness cards that
Dr. Piot referred to, including their availability in
multiple languages, as well as the regularly scheduled
training on preventing the transmission of HIV/AIDS.
The United States is a world leader in its
commitment to combat HIV/AIDS, a fight that is one
of the moral imperatives of our time. Our commitment
is exemplified by the President’s $15 billion
emergency plan for AIDS relief, which is achieving
targets in the areas of prevention, care and treatment
ahead of schedule despite capacity constraints and very
difficult operational environments.
The United States has fully supported, and will
continue to support, Security Council resolution 1308
(2000). The United States Department of Defense and,
more recently, the President’s emergency plan have
provided resources and technical assistance to
implement long-term strategies for HIV/AIDS
education prevention, counselling, testing and
treatment in more than 70 military and peacekeeping
populations around the world.
Since the adoption of the resolution, the United
States has assisted in HIV/AIDS education for over
2 million uniformed personnel, trained 7,000
uniformed peer educators, established more than 200
HIV/AIDS counselling and testing facilities on or near
bases, provided HIV/AIDS diagnostic and screening
equipment to 30 militaries and trained 600 uniformed
medical personnel in the care and treatment of HIVaffected personnel and their families.
The United States plans to continue to expand our
assistance to uniformed populations through bilateral
programmes in countries around the world and in our
multilateral cooperation, including those that provide
personnel for peacekeeping operations. Our future
objectives include strengthening host-nation military
HIV testing capability, providing resources to support
more comprehensive and targeted HIV/AIDS
prevention education programmes for uniformed
populations and providing consultation for the
development of sound HIV/AIDS prevention, care and
treatment policies in ministries of defence. As Dr. Piot
noted, we also strongly support the further
development and expansion of HIV/AIDS prevention
activities in uniformed populations more generally, in

coordination with international organizations, other
donors and non-governmental organizations.
We commend the progress to reduce the spread of
HIV/AIDS through military and peacekeeping
operations, but we note the enormous challenges that
remain. We look forward to returning to this issue on a
regular basis. Again, we thank you, Mr. President, for
focusing on such an important issue during your
presidency.
Mr. Chulkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, let me join previous speakers
in thanking Mr. Guéhenno and Dr. Piot for their
extensive briefings, which will clearly be valuable to
us as we consider this extremely important issue.
HIV/AIDS is one of the most serious nonmilitary threats to peace and security. This devastating
epidemic depletes the resources and capacities of
countries and negatively impacts the overall socioeconomic situation. Like any equally significant global
problem, it ultimately has a negative impact on
international peace and stability.
Given the exceptional urgency and complex
nature of the problem, which requires overall
coordination of international efforts under the auspices
of the United Nations to deal effectively with the
threats and challenges posed by the epidemic, we agree
with the importance of addressing this issue in the
Security Council in the context of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We would like to take note of
the extensive substantive materials available on
relevant specific themes associated with this matter,
including the country-specific breakdown contained in
the report prepared for this meeting by the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS). We
believe that this represents a key contribution in
assessing the implementation of resolution 1308
(2000).
Because of the various aspects of duty in “hot
spots”, uniformed and civilian personnel of
peacekeeping missions are in a more vulnerable
position. In that regard, we would like to underscore
the importance of, and state our support for, the efforts
made by UNAIDS in implementing resolution 1308
(2000), in particular targeted preventive measures
geared to United Nations peacekeeping personnel,
including the gradual creation of posts for advisers and
focal points for HIV/AIDS in all peacekeeping

9

S/PV.5228

operations and the provision of tailored awarenesstraining modules to peacekeeping contingents.
Attention should also be focused — and we are
pleased to note that this is already the case — on
efforts to provide voluntary and confidential
counselling and testing to peacekeepers. It is important
also to encourage the practice of training volunteers
from peacekeeping operations and to ensure that, in the
context of the awareness-raising efforts carried out by
missions, careful account is taken of national and
cultural characteristics, with respect both to the
peacekeeping operation contingent and the population
of the country in which the mission is deployed.
All of those important efforts complement the
efforts undertaken at the national level and help to
build the capacities of countries in that area, including
those that contribute contingents to peacekeeping
operations.
The global fight against the scourge of HIV/AIDS
and all of its manifestations calls for firm political
leadership and specific and coordinated action that is
supported by technical and financial resources.
The General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council, which, in keeping with their respective
mandates,
are
charged
with
undertaking
a
comprehensive consideration of all aspects of the
question of HIV/AIDS, have already done a great deal
to craft an effective strategy to deal with the spread of
the pandemic.
We commend the practical actions taken in that
area by the relevant United Nations specialized
agencies, funds and programmes, in particular, as
already noted, UNAIDS, the World Health
Organization, UNICEF, the United Nations Population
Fund and the United Nations Development Programme.
A major role is also being played by Secretary-General
Kofi Annan through his sustained attention and
personal commitment to the fight against HIV/AIDS.
We are confident that consistent, coordinated
efforts on the part of the United Nations system,
working with other international organizations,
financial institutions and funds, and civil society, will
ultimately lead to a breakthrough in overcoming the
HIV/AIDS challenge at the global level.
Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this meeting on the
very important issue of HIV/AIDS in the context of

10

peacekeeping. I wish also to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Jean-Marie Guéhenno and the Executive
Director of the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), Peter Piot, for their respective
briefings.
This is a timely occasion to discuss the
implementation of resolution 1308 (2000), five years
after its adoption by the Council, as well as to assess
the achievements made and challenges ahead. As we
know, the resolution refers to personnel to be
employed, or already deployed, in peacekeeping
operations.
Given the extent of the HIV/AIDS pandemic
worldwide, and with around 100,000 uniformed
personnel involved in United Nations peacekeeping
every year — taking into account troop rotations — the
deployment of peacekeepers, whether in high- or lowHIV/AIDS-prevalence countries, is an issue that
continues to draw our attention. The latest UNAIDS
report, entitled “On the front line”, states that
uniformed service personnel continue to be at high risk
of acquiring or transmitting HIV/AIDS while deployed
in the field.
To respond to the challenge, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) has included the
topic of HIV/AIDS in pre-deployment training for
troop-contributing countries. It has also assigned
HIV/AIDS policy advisers to 10 missions, as
Mr. Guéhenno said in his briefing this morning, with
focal points designated in smaller missions, which is
extremely important. In providing sensitization for all
personnel, such units are responsible for awareness
training, including behaviour-change intervention and
personal risk assessment.
Within missions, UNAIDS, as pointed out by
Mr. Piot, distributes booklets and HIV/AIDS awareness
cards in a number of languages among peacekeepers.
The availability of condoms is ensured, leading
personnel to adopt safer attitudes. Attention is also
devoted to ensuring that applicable codes of conduct
are taken into account, so that prohibited behaviour is
clearly stressed. Voluntary and confidential counselling
and testing is another component, conducted within a
rights-based approach.
Brazil welcomes the cooperative work done by
DPKO and UNAIDS in terms of the response in the
field. At the end of the day, peacekeepers will not only

S/PV.5228

have received awareness training, but some of them
will also have been trained as peer educators.
HIV/AIDS advisers also become involved with
outreach projects to local communities, as mentioned
by Mr. Guéhenno. In that respect, aside from their
contribution to awareness-raising activities, it is
important to reflect on their role, in a high-prevalence
area, in dealing with people living with HIV/AIDS who
do not have access to life-saving medicines and
treatment.
Another challenge stems from the cultural
diversity of peacekeepers, as well as the frequent
rotation of troops, which puts at risk the sustainability
of programmes. This shows the importance of
HIV/AIDS initiatives among national uniformed
services. In that respect, we commend UNAIDS and its
sponsors for having worked so closely with a number
of countries. Starting last year, the Brazilian
Government, in partnership with UNAIDS, has been
intensifying its efforts in working with young people in
the military.
If I may take a wider view as concerns
HIV/AIDS, the alarming statistics underscore the
gravity of the problem. The pandemic is one of the
greatest challenges of our times. Today, at least 40
million people worldwide are living with HIV/AIDS,
most of them in developing countries. The pandemic
does not show any signs of weakening, but is spreading
very rapidly. Every year, there are 5 million new
infections and 3 million deaths. Only 12 per cent of
those who need treatment outside rich countries receive
it.
In sub-Saharan Africa, the most affected region,
HIV/AIDS is aggravating economic and social crises.
The devastating losses of human capital threaten
political stability and food security. That dramatic
situation requires urgent and exceptional action at all
levels.
The United Nations must continue to send a
strong signal as to the urgent need to strengthen the
global response to the pandemic. However, at the
current rate of progress, the international community
will not reach any of the time-bound targets and goals
set out in the Declaration of Commitment on
HIV/AIDS. As stressed by the Secretary-General
during the high-level meeting of the General Assembly
held last June, the response has not matched the
pandemic in scale. Indeed, resources to combat the

pandemic worldwide fall short of what is needed. But,
aside from the funds required, for there to be any real
hope of success in the global fight against HIV/AIDS,
our commitment must be comprehensive.
The results that Brazil has achieved in combating
the pandemic are based on a balanced approach and a
simultaneous emphasis on prevention and treatment, as
well as on the protection of human rights. The number
of people living with HIV/AIDS now totals less than
half of what estimates used to predict. Our campaigns
have been based on frank awareness messages. A wide
range of preventive measures have proved successful,
such as the distribution of free condoms. With regard
to treatment, Brazil’s positive experience related to the
impact of free and universal access to anti-retroviral
therapy is widely acknowledged. However, there is
room for improvement. We need to move forward with
strategies to reduce the price of drugs.
Access to treatment has a positive impact on
prevention efforts, because it puts people in closer
contact with the health system. Where treatment exists
and is accessible, individuals are more likely to seek
voluntary testing and counselling. Moreover, the
availability of treatment reduces stigma and
discrimination by enabling people to openly address
HIV/AIDS issues.
We encourage UNAIDS and its partners to
intensify their efforts to reach the global “3 by 5”
target and urge Governments to continue to work
collaboratively beyond 2005 towards the goal of
making HIV/AIDS prevention, treatment, care and
support services accessible to everyone. Those
elements are indeed mutually reinforcing and also
reinforce an effective response; they must be integrated
in a comprehensive approach to combat the pandemic.
Finally, we support the draft presidential
statement circulated by the Greek delegation.
Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): We
too extend our gratitude to Mr. Guéhenno, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for his
briefing on developments in the way HIV/AIDS issues
are addressed in peacekeeping operations. We also
thank Dr. Peter Piot, Executive Director of the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS),
for presenting a very informative progress report on the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1308
(2000).

11

S/PV.5228

We are encouraged by the progress that has been
made since the adoption of that resolution and
commend the work done by the United Nations in that
respect. However, we should not be complacent. The
threat and incidence of HIV/AIDS have not abated, and
in some regions and situations — as in Africa — the
threat is on the increase, although the opportunities and
prospects for reducing and containing it are improving.
We welcome the recommendations provided in the
UNAIDS report, which warrant our full attention; we
need to encourage more Member States to report on
their implementation.
The HIV/AIDS pandemic, as noted by the
Secretary General in his report on progress made in the
implementation of the Declaration of Commitment on
HIV/AIDS (A/59/765), is an exceptional problem
which demands an exceptional response. The
HIV/AIDS pandemic is a crosscutting issue that has an
impact on all sectors, and, as such, it needs to be
tackled in a coordinated manner by all United Nations
organs within their respective mandates. The Security
Council, by adopting resolution 1308 (2000),
highlighted the potential threat the epidemic poses for
national,
regional
and
international
security,
particularly in conflict and peacekeeping settings. It is
now five years since resolution 1308 (2000) was
adopted. We therefore need to take stock of what we
have achieved so that we can sustain those
achievements and identify what still needs to be done.
Resolution 1308 (2000) was a trailblazing
initiative in generating international awareness and in
promoting international action to combat HIV/AIDS
beyond international peacekeeping personnel. It
followed the path of the defining leadership and roles
of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council. It elevated the debate and action on
HIV/AIDS to a new level in the international
community. The resolution recognized the enormity of
the problem, which continues to claim more than 2
million lives globally every year, more than half of
them in Africa. It further recognized the implications
of the pandemic for international peace and security,
which implied a role for the Security Council beyond
the traditional confines of military-related threats to
international peace and security.
The devastating impact of HIV/AIDS on youthful
and adult populations alike is undercutting economic
productivity and disrupting essential social services in
many developing countries. Countries are obliged to

12

increase expenditure on health many times over as a
matter of equal priority to fighting poverty, hunger,
child mortality, malaria and tuberculosis. At the same
time, countries have to allocate resources to provide
for safe drinking water, universal education and
maternal health. It is therefore logical that combating
HIV/AIDS is one of the Millennium Development
Goals to be addressed simultaneously with the other
Goals.
If a nation’s state of health is a barometer of its
vitality and stability, then the HIV/AIDS pandemic is
not only a moral and ethical challenge to humanity, but
could also contribute to chronic weakness and
instability in nation-States and societies. As resolution
1308 (2000) recognizes, the impact of HIV/AIDS on
military establishments can be devastating. The
emphasis on combating the spread of HIV/AIDS
among peacekeepers is well placed and needs to be
constantly followed up.
In Tanzania, the military service has recognized
the threat of HIV/AIDS in the uniformed military
services. The Tanzania People’s Defence Force now
conducts awareness campaigns for all its personnel,
especially new recruits. However, despite the
awareness of HIV/AIDS, the challenge faced is to
make the behavioural changes that will enable one to
protect oneself all the time. For example, although
there is awareness of the benefits of preventive
strategies, the proper and consistent use of such
strategies ought to be mainstreamed in educational
systems and public campaigns. There is thus a need to
devise more innovative ways of creating awareness
that will also contribute to enduring changes in
behaviour.
As we tackle the HIV/AIDS pandemic in
peacekeeping operations, let us not forget the plight of
women and children, either as combatants or as victims
of sexual exploitation by parties in conflicts. Here, we
would like again to recall that there must be zero
tolerance of sexual exploitation in peacekeeping
missions. We thus urge the collaboration of UNAIDS
with the United Nations Development Fund for
Women, the Division for the Advancement of Women
and the system’s child protection bodies to ensure that
measures taken to combat HIV/AIDS take into account
the gender dimension as well the vulnerabilities and
interests of children.

S/PV.5228

Funding for HIV/AIDS programmes has
increased, but it is still inadequate. We note with
concern that uniformed civilian and military services
are often not included in bilateral support and thus
have to rely on national budgets, which may not be in a
position to provide adequate funding. There is thus,
first, a need for increased resources to fight HIV/AIDS
in funds such as the Global Fund to Fight AIDS,
Malaria and Tuberculosis; such funds need also to
allow for the funding of programmes in uniformed
civilian and military services.
The international response to the HIV/AIDS
pandemic has now to go beyond generating awareness
with regard to changing behaviour to include
community-based
testing and
treatment
with
antiretroviral drugs. As such drugs are beyond the
reach of ordinary people and as treatment also requires
a nutrition-based support infrastructure, the response
has to be multidimensional and backed by a collective
political response in order to mobilize the needed
resources. Research in that area must also continue in
order to find a cure and/or a vaccine for this
devastating pestilence of our modern time.
Finally, the Security Council should continue to
focus on the international security dimension of the
challenge, including with respect to peacekeeping
operations, while the rest of the United Nations system
and the international community should focus on
multisectoral preventive and curative responses. The
combination should constitute a total response strategy
in partnership with Governments, civil society and the
corporate world, especially the pharmaceutical
industry,
which
should
exercise
corporate
responsibility through enlightened consideration of the
price of drugs.
Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish at the outset, Mr. President, to thank you and your
delegation for the initiative of convening this meeting
to discuss the progress made in the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1308 (2000). I also wish to
thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, and Mr. Peter
Piot, Executive Director of the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), for their
presentations.
We wish to recall that yesterday marked five
years since the adoption of resolution 1308 (2000), by
which the Security Council sought to provide

recommendations and ways to deal with HIV/AIDS in
relation to uniformed personnel belonging to
peacekeeping operations.
Argentina has always believed that collaboration
and cooperation among the system’s various actors
responsible for this issue, together with assistance from
Governments and non-governmental organizations, are
indispensable in responding comprehensively to this
pandemic. We also believe that in the fight against
HIV/AIDS, it is essential to enhance mechanisms for
prevention and awareness without neglecting to treat
those affected. We recall that those principles are part
of resolution 1308 (2000) and of the draft presidential
statement to be adopted at the end of this meeting.
We believe it is essential that best practices and
lessons learned be properly disseminated and that
United Nations Member States implement them in their
preparation programmes for the men and women who
will be sent to participate in peacekeeping operations.
For our part, we wish to indicate that the Argentine
Joint Training Centre for Peacekeeping Operations has
incorporated those recommendations into its training
courses for Argentine and other Latin American Blue
Helmets.
We know that Blue Helmets must carry out their
tasks in a fragile, dangerous and extremely demanding
environment. HIV/AIDS is often one of the risks that
they must face. That is why training, knowledge and
solidarity are needed: the personnel of a peacekeeping
operation must have all of them. In that context, we
pay tribute to all the men and women who have
sacrificed their welfare, their health or their lives to
attain the objectives of peace and understanding among
peoples.
With regard to the ongoing process of
implementing measures to fight exploitation and sexual
abuse in the field, we want to affirm that that challenge
and the fight against HIV/AIDS must be addressed
together and that we must not run the risk of giving
priority to one at the expense of the other. In that
respect, we believe that the coordination of those two
strategies must be as efficient as possible.
In conclusion, we wish to thank the Government
of Greece for its draft presidential statement, which our
delegation supports.
Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I wish to thank Under-Secretary-General

13

S/PV.5228

Guéhenno and Executive Director Piot for their
comprehensive briefings. I wish also to thank the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS)
for its report on the subject of this agenda item. The
briefings helped us to understand the status of the
international
community’s
implementation
of
resolution 1308 (2000) over the past five years. The
recommendations put forward are highly enlightening
and deserve serious consideration by the Security
Council.
In recent years, the international community has
been increasingly concerned about the issue of
HIV/AIDS, particularly its disastrous affects. AIDS has
not only constituted a major threat to human life and
health, but has also seriously affected the economic
development and social stability of the countries and
regions concerned. Thus it has become one of the most
important non-traditional security issues. The Security
Council, in accordance with its mandate, has therefore
been devoting increased attention to the issue of
peacekeepers and HIV/AIDS and to the impact of
AIDS on peace and security.
China welcomes the series of measures
undertaken by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO), in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, aimed at improving
HIV/AIDS awareness programmes for peacekeepers,
establishing the post of HIV/AIDS policy adviser and
revising the code of conduct for peacekeepers. We
believe that all those measures will serve to protect the
safety of peacekeepers and to ensure the smooth
conduct of peacekeeping missions.
Over the years, UNAIDS has undertaken many
positive efforts, has contributed to international efforts
and has played an important role in coordinating with
and assisting United Nations missions in preventing
HIV/AIDS in peacekeeping operations. China
welcomes all those measures and hopes that DPKO can
continue its active coordination and cooperation with
UNAIDS and other international organizations.
China supports the draft presidential statement
submitted by the Greek delegation and wishes to thank
Greece for its efforts in that regard.
Mr. Dumitru (Romania): I would like to begin
by commending you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s meeting on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1308 (2000). I also wish to express
our thanks to Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno, Under-

14

Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, and to
Dr. Peter Piot, Executive Director of the Joint United
Nations Programme on AIDS (UNAIDS), for their
briefings on action taken to implement that resolution.
There can be no doubt that today — as we mark
five years since the adoption of the resolution —
HIV/AIDS remains an urgent threat to peace and
security. My delegation fully recognizes that there is a
clear link between the AIDS pandemic and peace and
security. Movements of people as a result of conflict
fuel the spread of HIV/AIDS, but the epidemic itself
also causes social and economic crises that can
threaten stability and security. Fighting the spread of
HIV/AIDS is therefore linked to preventing armed
conflict. It requires a coordinated response on the part
of all relevant United Nations bodies, including the
Security Council.
We agree that there is a need for continued efforts
to implement the already existing plans of action on
HIV/AIDS. The special session of the General
Assembly on HIV/AIDS, held in June 2001, was
another major step in fostering support for the global
fight against HIV/AIDS. Its outcome, the Declaration
of Commitment, General Assembly resolution S-26/2,
sets out a comprehensive framework for an effective
response. This process must be closely followed up in
the General Assembly and in the Security Council. We
therefore welcome the General Assembly’s High-level
Meeting on HIV/AIDS held on 2 June 2005, in which
many ministers participated, as well as today’s open
Council briefing.
Moreover, we are encouraged to learn from the
presentations of Mr. Guéhenno and Mr. Piot that the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and
UNAIDS have already implemented a number of
concrete steps. Together, they will help minimize the
threat of the spread of HIV/AIDS in conflict zones and
help protect the local populations and the peacekeeping
troops that are deployed there from infection.
In this regard, my delegation would like to
underline that prevention must be the mainstay of our
response. We fully subscribe to the idea that
peacekeepers and other uniformed personnel can and
must be important contributors in the fight against the
spread of HIV/AIDS. We therefore encourage DPKO
and UNAIDS to continue to emphasize predeployment
training, as well as continuous awareness and
educational activities during deployment, particularly

S/PV.5228

in high-prevalence
HIV/AIDS advisers.

countries,

including

through

My Government remains committed to pursuing
the full implementation of resolution 1308 (2000), and
we are exploring ways of making its implementation
more effective. The Government of Romania has
clearly shown that there is strong political will and a
readiness to undertake the necessary actions to
maintain a low prevalence of HIV/AIDS in the country.
In this respect, I would like to underline that the
Government of Romania last year approved a 20042007 national strategy on the overseeing, control and
prevention of HIV/AIDS infection. The strategy
stipulates as an objective the assurance of universal
access to information and education, as well as to
services for the prevention of HIV/AIDS and sexually
transmitted infections in the military services.
Among other things, the national strategy refers
to the elaboration and implementation on military
bases of a curriculum on the prevention of HIV/AIDS
and sexually transmitted infections, information and
education activities and the development of a protocol
and prevention kit on HIV/AIDS for members of the
armed forces who participate in military missions
outside Romania.
I would like to conclude by expressing support
for the recommendations made in the UNAIDS report.
Against this background, I would like to welcome and
support the initiative of the Greek presidency to
conclude today’s meeting in a practical way: with a
substantive presidential statement.
Mr. De La Sablière (France) (spoke in French): I
wish to thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno and Mr. Peter
Piot for their briefings on action undertaken since the
adoption of resolution 1308 (2000).
France naturally shares the concerns expressed by
previous speakers. The fight against the spread of the
AIDS virus calls for our total vigilance and justifies all
efforts. Since 2000, the Security Council and the
Secretariat have rightly been addressing this subject
that brings us together today. The battle against AIDS
needs to be waged on all fronts, including in areas of
conflict. By their nature, peacekeeping operations are
deployed in regions where the health situation is
precarious and where the populations are extremely
vulnerable. What is more, such missions are always
deployed as a matter of urgency. It is therefore
necessary to ensure not merely that mission personnel

not constitute a risk factor but that they contribute in
the theatre of operations to the fight against the
pandemic. The credibility and prestige of peacekeeping
operations — and hence, of the United Nations —
among local populations also entails action in the area
of public health.
Awareness-raising, prevention and follow-up
efforts depend on both the Secretariat and on
contributing States. The programmes of action pursued
by the Secretariat and the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) appear to us to
be particularly convincing and well adapted to the
constraints of peacekeeping operations. They dovetail
satisfactorily with the Council’s requests in resolution
1308 (2000). In addition, the extensive awarenessraising in recent months to prevent sexual abuse has
made it possible to put tough measures and principles
into place. We hope that those guidelines will
contribute to further increasing the accountability of
personnel deployed and to mobilizing contributing
countries.
Nonetheless, it is also incumbent among the
contributing States to act. In this respect, for many
years France has pursued a particularly tough policy
with respect to all of its personnel deployed abroad,
both in missions under United Nations mandate and in
national operations. Our forces practise a policy of
awareness-raising,
screening
and
systematic
monitoring of all of their personnel. These guidelines
are implemented, without exception, for all men and
women who are part of external missions, regardless of
rank or duties.
Only personnel who have satisfactorily passed the
tests are sent on mission. These measures are
accompanied by training activities and awarenessraising sessions in order to maintain vigilance, not only
on the part of the personnel, but also for the command
structure throughout the mission.
As we all know, the fight against the AIDS virus
is a daily and long-term effort. The programmes that
have been instituted and the action taken by UNAIDS,
the Secretariat and Member States need to be pursued
relentlessly. The coordinated efforts we all make need
to be pursued within the framework of an all-out
strategy to fight this pandemic. In our view, that
comprehensive fight needs to include not only
prevention, but also treatment, with access by infected
persons to treatment and medication.

15

S/PV.5228

Mr. Mercado (Philippines): Mr. President, we
thank you for convening this important meeting on
peacekeeping and HIV/AIDS in the context of Security
Council resolution 1308 (2000). We wish to thank
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie Guéhenno for
updating us on the steps taken by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) in implementing
resolution 1308 (2000). We also thank the Executive
Director of the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), Mr. Peter Piot, for his report on
the progress made on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1308 (2000).
The Philippines commends UNAIDS and its
sponsors for their continued efforts to fight the
HIV/AIDS pandemic since the Security Council
acknowledged five years ago that the scourge was a
threat to international peace and security and that
measures had to be put in place to develop further
HIV/AIDS prevention and education, particularly for
peacekeepers deployed to conflict areas.
We are pleased that UNAIDS has been able to
strengthen its partnership with DPKO, particularly in
mainstreaming HIV/AIDS awareness in United Nations
peacekeeping missions through the assignment of
AIDS advisers to major peace missions and in
providing technical support for strategies to address
HIV/AIDS among uniformed services.
We laud the work of UNAIDS, not only with
Member States’ international uniformed services, in the
development and implementation of national AIDS
strategies, but also with regional organizations; this has
led to the integration of HIV/AIDS prevention into
their operations.
While we acknowledge the significant strides
made by UNAIDS in mainstreaming HIV/AIDS
awareness among uniformed personnel since the
adoption of resolution 1308 (2000), the Philippines
believes that there is still much that needs to be done to
protect the vulnerable and to prevent our worst fears
from coming true.
The
present
unprecedented
demand
for
peacekeepers in conflict areas worldwide, especially in
high-risk areas, exposes peacekeepers to the possibility
of contracting and even transmitting the deadly
disease. As of June this year, more than 66,000
peacekeepers from 105 countries are serving in United
Nations missions in 18 countries in Africa, the
Americas, Europe and the Middle East. By the end of

16

the year, the total number of Blue Helmets rotating in
and out of those areas will be approximately 100,000.
That figure does not include other peacekeepers to be
fielded as the United Nations opens new fronts for
peace or expands existing ones.
One way to address the problem of protecting
peacekeepers and the populations with which they are
in contact is to ensure continuous retraining and the
transmission of knowledge gained from other
peacekeeping missions. Cooperation between troopcontributing countries and UNAIDS in providing
peacekeeping personnel, from officers down to enlisted
personnel, with adequate training at the predeployment
stage and with education on HIV/AIDS for the duration
of the mission should be pursued and strengthened.
Troop-contributing countries with no mandatory
screenings should encourage their troops to participate
in voluntary and confidential testing and counselling in
the national military setting, as well as treatment, as
part of their preparation for participation in
peacekeeping operations. We agree with UnderSecretary-General Guéhenno that AIDS awareness
should be a command responsibility.
It is also imperative to tailor HIV/AIDS training
to the wide range of cultures represented by
peacekeepers. Since peacekeeping personnel come
from more than 100 troop-contributing countries, we
welcome efforts to address language requirements for
HIV/AIDS training, such as by means of HIV
awareness cards. There is also a need to make a more
conscious effort to address the human nature factor —
that is, changing the attitudes of troops.
Although the Philippines considers itself
fortunate to have one of the lowest HIV/AIDS
prevalence rates in Asia, the dreaded disease continues
to be of great concern for my country. As of June 2005,
the Philippines has deployed military and civilian
police personnel to eight United Nations mission areas
across the world, including countries whose peoples
are among the hardest hit by the virus. With Philippine
participation in peacekeeping operations on the rise,
extra efforts are being undertaken by my Government
to ensure that this particular aspect of HIV/AIDS
awareness is covered.
My delegation is pleased to inform the Council
that the Philippines has put in place mechanisms to
address the threat of HIV/AIDS among its uniformed
services. As part of its implementation of resolution

S/PV.5228

1308 (2000), the Philippines has made predeployment
screening mandatory for all military and civilian police
personnel who wish to take part in United Nations
missions, along with post-deployment screening for
those who have just returned from missions.
Prevention education is a key component of the
predeployment programme for peacekeepers drawn
from the Armed Forces of the Philippines and the
Philippine National Police. UNAIDS-trained medical
professionals give presentations on HIV/AIDS
awareness and prevention, and former peacekeepers are
invited to share their experiences with new ones. Our
peacekeepers also benefit greatly from mission training
activities in their respective areas of assignment.
My delegation takes this opportunity also to
inform the Council that the Armed Forces of the
Philippines are finalizing new policy guidelines that
take into account not only resolution 1308 (2000) but
also recent recommendations on the prevention of
sexual exploitation and abuse and on stipulating
penalties for violators.
In closing, I once again commend UNAIDS, its
sponsors and DPKO for their efforts in implementing
resolution 1308 (2000). I also express support for the
recommendations contained in the reports of UNAIDS
and DPKO. The Philippines pledges to continue
working and cooperating closely with UNAIDS and
DPKO in this important endeavour.
Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I want
to begin by thanking the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Jean-Marie Guéhenno, and
the Executive Director of the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), Peter Piot, for
their informative briefings and UNAIDS for its report
on the implementation of Security Council resolution
1308 (2000).
Taking action on HIV and AIDS is a key priority
for the United Kingdom Government. The UNAIDS
report sets out in stark and honest terms the particular
threat that the AIDS epidemic poses to social stability
and security. We unreservedly support the efforts being
made across the United Nations, including here in the
Security Council, to ensure that substantial and
concerted action is taken to tackle the pandemic.
We see four broad issues that are relevant to the
links between AIDS and security: first, HIV and AIDS
in military and other uniformed services; secondly,

tackling AIDS in conflict and post-conflict situations
and in humanitarian emergencies; thirdly, AIDS,
conflict and gender; and fourthly, AIDS and fragile
States. The report and our meeting today focus
particularly on the first aspect. However, there are
links among all four broad issues that we must not
ignore.
The UNAIDS report documents some welcome
and encouraging progress. AIDS advisers are now in
place in nine major peacekeeping operations, and there
are focal points in other, smaller operations. Getting
the right people with the right skills on the ground is
the first essential step in tackling the problem.
The report also advocates a single national
monitoring and evaluation framework and the inclusion
of the uniformed services in that system. We agree with
that. As the report sets out, there are still significant
gaps in our knowledge. Infection rates among armed
forces remain, in many places, a matter of guesswork.
A robust mechanism for monitoring and assessing
impact is essential.
So, we welcome the steps that have already been
taken by UNAIDS, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) and other stakeholders to assess
the impact of their interventions on national
commitment, knowledge, attitudes and behaviour. We
look forward to reading the results of that work. It will
be critical for UNAIDS to use that learning to guide
their future programming and communications
material. We look forward to welcoming that emphasis
in the forthcoming report.
Tackling HIV and AIDS among peacekeeping
personnel is essential. But, as the report acknowledges,
efforts must not stop there. Peacekeepers and the
communities they are protecting are both vulnerable to
HIV and AIDS. United Nations peacekeeping
operations — with their military, police and civilian
elements — are in an excellent position to engage with
vulnerable communities that have been affected by
conflict in order to ensure that the epidemic does not
gain a foothold among them. So, the United Kingdom
very much welcomes the outreach to local communities
that is being done by peacekeeping operations in
Liberia, Côte d’Ivoire and Eritrea and Ethiopia, and we
would encourage similar activities in other missions.
The past five years have seen considerable
improvements in our knowledge of the epidemic and in
the methods being used to tackle it. There is now much

17

S/PV.5228

agreement on best practices and the need for a common
approach by all. We very much welcome the recently
agreed UNAIDS policy position on intensifying
prevention. We urge Member States to apply those best
practices to both their peacekeeping and their national
uniformed personnel. The role and the responsibility of
troop-contributing countries are crucial.
The report also highlights the importance of highlevel political commitment, support and advocacy. We
warmly welcome the leadership of UNAIDS, which
has helped ensure that the issue of HIV and AIDS
remains at the top of the international agenda. The
United Kingdom will play its part to provide political
commitment, sufficient funding and a response that is
coordinated and effective. We are therefore pleased to
be supporting the trust funds of UNAIDS and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations. It helps train
HIV counsellors and supports collaborative projects for
peacekeepers and local communities in situations
where expertise is often scarce.
I want to conclude by highlighting some of the
conclusions and recommendations of the UNAIDS
report. First, monitoring and evaluation need to be a
central component of all AIDS programmes in
peacekeeping operations. We cannot hope to tackle the
epidemic without the very best information on the size
and nature of the problem and whether the solutions
which are being used are working.
Secondly, the report highlights the need to link
action on sexual exploitation and abuse in
peacekeeping operations with action on HIV and
AIDS. On their own, sexual abuse and exploitation are
an issue of great concern. Adding the risks of HIV
infection exacerbates the critical and complex nature of
that issue. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and troop and police contributors are now required to
put in place policies and measures to prevent sexual
exploitation and abuse. It is essential that those
measures be coordinated and consistent with United
Nations policies and programmes to prevent the spread
of HIV and AIDS. The Under-Secretary-General has
said that the training for peacekeepers is being revised
to take that into account, and that is very welcome.
Thirdly, I welcome the recommendation for
UNAIDS to seek to strengthen the capacity of regional
bodies to engage with AIDS. Providing technical
assistance to those organizations, particularly those
involved in peacekeeping, will further contribute to the

18

fight against the spread of HIV. That contribution will
not only be directly through the activities of the
regional bodies, but also indirectly through the
dissemination of information to national and local
bodies.
Finally, I want to highlight the recommendation
that gender issues and expertise be fully integrated into
the planning and management of peacekeeping
operations. The United Kingdom very much supports
that. The Council has regularly discussed the issue of
women, peace and security since it agreed on a
resolution on the issue in October 2000. That
resolution, 1325 (2000), referred to the need to include
gender analysis and expertise in peacekeeping
operations. As the UNAIDS report recognizes, women
are especially vulnerable to HIV infection. The gender
component in any national plan for AIDS intervention
in uniformed services is of the utmost importance and
should not only aim to educate uniformed personnel,
but should also work closely with the female
population with which they come into contact.
I confirm our full support for the proposed
presidential statement.
Mr. Aho-Glele (Benin) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks you, Sir, for having organized this
public information meeting, allowing us to review the
implementation of resolution 1308 (2000) five years
after its adoption.
We express our appreciation to Under-SecretaryGeneral Guéhenno and to the Executive Director of the
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS), Mr. Piot, for the extremely informative
briefings that they have just made within that
framework. The briefings described the extent of
awareness-raising with respect to the gravity of the
problems posed by the HIV pandemic to the security
and stability of States and the challenges raised for the
United Nations in the area of peacekeeping.
Benin
welcomes
the
broad
partnership
established to promote the implementation of
resolution 1308 (2000). With respect to progress made
in identifying risk factors related to the specificities of
defence and public security forces and of troops
mobilized and deployed within peacekeeping
operations, resolution 1308 (2000) was a decisive
turning point with regard to the international
community’s actions. The corner was turned with the

S/PV.5228

adoption of a systematic and consistent approach to
controlling the spread of the disease in the areas noted.

be able provide significant support for Governments’
efforts to mobilize against the disease.

We welcome the commitment and tireless efforts
of UNAIDS and its sponsors in promoting
multidimensional cooperation with States, other
institutions of the United Nations system, and regional
and non-governmental organizations to implement the
strategies to counter the disease.

At the same time, it would also be desirable to
ensure the broadest possible dissemination of lessons
learned from recent assessments. That would make it
possible to raise leaders’ awareness of the importance
of AIDS programmes for uniformed personnel.

The statistical data on the disease’s prevalence
among armed and security forces — and specifically
within peacekeeping operations — lead us to three
conclusions. First, prevalence tends to decline in those
units that have been provided with appropriate training,
and to rise in those that have not. Secondly, mortality
rates are relatively low in the armed forces of countries
where antiretroviral therapy has been provided by the
public health system. Thirdly, among the factors
promoting the spread of the disease among troops
involved in peacekeeping operations, some can be
objectively controlled if administrative authority is
exercised. That is the case, for instance, with
continuous rotation of troops and personnel. Strict
compliance with the rules in that area can greatly
contribute to preventing the epidemic’s spread.
With respect to those three conclusions, we need
to intensify our efforts to strengthen preventive
practices and attitudes where they continue to lag.
Factors promoting the spread of the disease among
armed and security forces need to be addressed
adequately. Furthermore, the fact that only 109
countries are developing programmes for their
uniformed personnel clearly demonstrates how far we
still have to go in persuading States to recognize the
important of those programmes. The methodical
follow-up of the resolution’s implementation has
enabled UNAIDS clearly to identify the challenges
facing uniformed personnel. The means need to be
found to act on those challenges.
We believe that it is important to draw attention
to the need to take the fight against AIDS into account
within the framework of disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation or resettlement
programmes. Efforts remain to be undertaken to
mitigate the financial constraints that handicap the
campaign against the disease in certain countries where
it is rampant and decimating human resources. The
Global Fund to fight HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis and
Malaria and other funds working in that field need to

We feel that United Nations AIDS policies in the
deployment of peacekeeping operations are most
sound. There is an obligation to be consistent with
regard to respect for human rights and the fight against
stigmatization and discrimination. Specifically, the
zero tolerance policy with regard to sexual exploitation
is entirely appropriate, as is the campaign to prevent
rape as a weapon of war in armed conflict.
In general, we support the recommendations set
out by UNAIDS to enhance the effectiveness of United
Nations and State efforts in the defence and civil
protection sectors, particularly in their advocacy of
Department of Peacekeeping Operations funding for
AIDS programmes within peacekeeping operations.
Moreover, we must raise awareness among troops
involved in peacekeeping operations prior to their
deployment. We further support the recommendation to
establish a partnership between peacekeeping training
programmes and national AIDS programmes in host
countries. That would allow us to establish synergies
and better to benefit from the contribution of
peacekeeping operations in terms of human resources
and assets.
Ms. Løj (Denmark): I would like to begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for having taken the
initiative to organize this debate. Likewise, I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie
Guéhenno and Executive Director Dr. Peter Piot for
their respective briefings.
There might not be scientific proof that
HIV/AIDS poses a direct threat to peace and stability.
However, we know that AIDS is a killer and that more
than 3 million children, women and men died from
AIDS last year. More will die this year, and the
economic, social, cultural and political implications
will continue to worsen. We are seeing State
institutions being seriously weakened in the worst-hit
regions of Africa. That gradual collapse of governance
functions illustrates a new form of State collapse: the
fading State.

19

S/PV.5228

Fortunately, the world is responding, and the
comprehensive threat posed by HIV/AIDS is getting
more and more attention. In his report entitled “In
larger freedom” (A/59/2005), the Secretary-General
called for a new security consensus, one that includes
deadly infectious diseases and, in particular,
HIV/AIDS. In doing so the Secretary-General shared
the views of the High-level Panel on Threat,
Challenges and Change, which identified AIDS as one
of the most significant global threats today — a point
of view we share fully. It is now time for the
international community to demonstrate its firm
commitment. A strong statement on HIV/AIDS in the
declaration to be adopted by the summit to be held in
September 2005 will be an important step in the right
direction.
The risk of HIV infection increases in the postconflict phase, when the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of former combatants takes place.
Evidence indicates that women are most at risk. In all
its deliberations, the Security Council must address
that aspect where relevant.
The expected establishment of a Peacebuilding
Commission will mark a new beginning for a
comprehensive approach to countries emerging from
conflict. In the post-conflict phase, the Peacebuilding
Commission must in its strategies address this issue
and enhance the coordination of the fight against
HIV/AIDS.
Denmark recognizes that significant progress has
been made in the implementation of resolution 1308
(2000) in the five years of its existence. We commend
the efforts of the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) to mainstream
HIV/AIDS
into
their
mandated
activities.
Strengthening cooperation between DPKO and
UNAIDS and its partners — including nongovernmental organizations, bilateral and multilateral
donors and national Governments — would stimulate
further progress.
Allow me to refer to 5191st meeting, held in this
Chamber on the last day of May, on the theme of
United Nations peacekeeping operations. In the
presidential statement adopted at that meeting, the
Council condemned all acts of sexual exploitation and
abuse and expressed its support for the SecretaryGeneral’s zero-tolerance policy in that regard. It is our

20

sincere hope that the increased focus on the code of
conduct for United Nations peacekeepers and the
efforts made by troop-contributing countries to
implement the recommendations of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations will also have
the added benefit of positively influencing the issue we
have before us today. The transmission of HIV in a
conflict zone should never be an act of a United
Nations peacekeeper.
In April this year, the Danish Minister for
Development Cooperation presented a new strategy for
Denmark’s support for the international fight against
HIV/AIDS. The strategy builds on the Declaration of
Commitment on HIV/AIDS that emerged from the
special session of the General Assembly (resolution
S-26/2, annex) held in 2001 and highlights the
priorities for Denmark’s response to the epidemic.
Women, young people and children orphaned by
the epidemic are among the most vulnerable members
of a population. The strategy has a particular focus on
action directed towards supporting those groups.
Furthermore, the strategy highlights the need for
increased action to combat stigma and discrimination
in an HIV/AIDS context. It also points to the crucial
role played by civil society, including people living
with HIV/AIDS, in the fight against HIV/AIDS.
Let me conclude by commending UNAIDS and
DPKO for their collective and persistent efforts
regarding the important issues we are discussing here
today.
Mr. Kitaoka (Japan): Mr. President, your
initiative to hold this open briefing concerning
HIV/AIDS is much appreciated. I would also like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Guéhenno and Dr. Piot,
Executive Director of the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), for their very
comprehensive and illuminating briefings.
HIV/AIDS infection continues to increase
worldwide despite the efforts of the international
community. In response, Japan this month hosted the
International Congress on HIV/AIDS in Asia and the
Pacific. At that meeting, participants confirmed that
the Asian region is also confronted with the threat of
HIV/AIDS.
Resolution 1308 (2000) is proof that
comprehensive and integrated policies are necessary in
all relevant areas. This year is the fifth anniversary of

S/PV.5228

the adoption of that resolution. My Government
believes that it is important to assess the state of
implementation at this stage.
Japan thinks highly of the efforts made to date by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO)
and UNAIDS. We expect that not only will they reduce
the risk of HIV transmission to peacekeepers, but that
those efforts — which is to say, appropriate action
being taken by peacekeepers who have an accurate
understanding of HIV/AIDS and a high awareness of
gender and human rights issues — will also have a
positive impact upon the countries in which they are
carried out.
Concerning the Declaration of Commitment on
HIV/AIDS, which the General Assembly adopted in
June 2001 (resolution S-26/2, annex), we regret that it
is not likely that the goals for 2005 will be met.
Member States should be encouraged to carry out
comprehensive strategies that include education,
prevention, counselling and voluntary testing, care and
treatment and steps to counter the discrimination and
stigma often borne by those affected with HIV/AIDS.
Japan has spared no effort to fulfil its obligations
in that regard, including by providing enhanced
training to our peacekeepers. We are pleased to inform
the Council that, on 30 June 2005, our Prime Minister,
Mr. Junichiro Koizumi, announced that Japan had
decided to increase its contribution to the Global Fund
to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria by half a
billion dollars.
Finally, we would like to thank the delegation of
Greece for preparing the draft presidential statement,
which we fully support.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity as the representative of Greece.
Five years ago, on 17 July 2000, the Security
Council, in its collective wisdom, adopted resolution
1308 (2000), under the agenda item entitled “The
responsibility of the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security:
HIV/AIDS and international peacekeeping operations”.
For the first time, a health-related issue was linked to
international peace and security.
One can point to many notable statements in
looking back at the discussion that took place during
that meeting. To me, three stand out as the most
significant, namely, that the world was breaking the

silence around AIDS; that HIV/AIDS was not someone
else’s problem, but everyone’s problem; and that AIDS
was not just a problem of a single country or continent.
Resolution 1308 (2000) was the Council’s response to
the pandemic and its implications for international
peacekeeping operations.
I wish to extend our most sincere thanks and
appreciation to the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno,
and to the Executive Director of the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS),
Mr. Peter Piot, not only for their informative and clear
presentations, but also for all of their continuous
efforts in implementing resolution 1308 (2000). The
most recent report submitted to the Council is tangible
proof of the leadership of UNAIDS and of the level of
awareness that it has brought to the international
community.
HIV/AIDS is a worldwide threat, one that makes
no distinction as to gender, colour or age. AIDS is not
only a health problem; it also affects development and
security. It can have a uniquely devastating effect on
all sectors and at all levels of society.
Unfortunately, and despite all of the efforts made
so far, HIV/AIDS remains one of the biggest global
threats. We need to do more and to develop a long-term
strategy mobilizing all the available resources to fight
the disease and minimize its effects. The seriousness of
the problem calls for well-coordinated international
action.
Uniformed personnel is inevitably one of the
most vulnerable groups for a number of reasons,
including military life itself, interaction with local
communities, the tendency of young people to ignore
danger, and the inevitable exacerbation of the disease
under conditions of conflict and instability.
Resolution 1308 (2000) recognizes this particular
vulnerability. It encourages Member States to consider
developing, in cooperation with the international
community and UNAIDS, effective long-term
strategies for HIV/AIDS education, prevention,
voluntary and confidential testing and counselling, and
treatment of their personnel. These strategies are an
important part of their preparation for participation in
peacekeeping operations.
Every resource should be utilized in the fight
against HIV/AIDS. Raising awareness is the all-

21

S/PV.5228

important first step, to be undertaken through
education and special training programmes. We also
encourage a rights-based approach in order to ensure
an ethical process for the conducting of testing, to
address the implications of a positive result, and to
reduce AIDS-related stigmatization and discrimination.
The level of awareness of, and the approach taken
by, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO) in that respect are commendable. The
appointment of HIV/AIDS advisers within DPKO and
many peacekeeping missions is a considerable
achievement. This practice should be expanded to all
missions. The development of training material, policy
guidelines and the issuance of awareness cards are just
a few examples of the numerous significant
achievements made, but the nature of this devastating
disease dictates that more are needed.
We welcome the leading role played by UNAIDS.
We encourage the continuous strengthening of its
cooperation with interested Member States to further
develop strategies and best practices for HIV/AIDS
prevention, education, testing, counselling and
treatment. UNAIDS initiatives to develop, in
cooperation
with
interested
States,
national
programmes to address HIV/AIDS among their
uniformed personnel are very valuable. Well-informed
and trained peacekeepers can serve as a valuable tool
in the context of efforts to prevent the spread of the
disease.
Another initiative that could also be considered
by UNAIDS would involve the creation of regional
observatories for HIV/AIDS. Such observatories have
been tested successfully with respect to other issues.
They would contribute to the implementation of
resolution 1308 (2000) by registering data for certain
regions, raise the awareness of the risks involved
regionally, and contribute, at an early stage, to
preventing the spread of the disease by drawing
conclusions as to the necessary interventions and
changes. Such observatories should submit reports on
an annual basis.
We should not forget that the success of any
peacekeeping operation depends to a great extent on
the personnel who serve in the mission. The troopcontributing countries should ensure the highest
possible standards for their people. Voluntary and
confidential counselling and testing, as well as care
and treatment, should be the minimum standard for all

22

peacekeepers in the fight against the HIV/AIDS
pandemic.
Greece has not only recognized the sensitivity of
the issue but also follows a strict policy requiring all
Greek military personnel who participate in
peacekeeping operations — United Nations or United
Nations-mandated — to be tested for HIV/AIDS. The
test is mandatory and confidential for all. There are
also provisions for assistance to those soldiers who are
infected.
The fight against HIV/AIDS should be
continuous and intense, employing every available
asset. It has to be multisectoral and be waged at the
national, regional and international levels. Regular
briefings by DPKO and UNAIDS on the progress made
will help to strengthen commitment and accountability
at the highest levels and ensure sustained monitoring
and evaluation of the impact of programmes.
In closing, I wish to convey my congratulations
once again to DPKO and UNAIDS. Today’s discussion
has proved that they have unanimous support in their
efforts. I urge them to continue in the direction they
have taken so far.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to the full implementation of
resolution 1308 (2000). The Council also recalls
the
United
Nations
General
Assembly
Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS of
June 2001.
“The Security Council welcomes the
collaboration between DPKO and UNAIDS and
its co-sponsors to address HIV/AIDS awareness
among peacekeeping personnel, both uniformed
and civilian. The Council commends UNAIDS
for developing, in cooperation with interested
States, national programmes to address
HIV/AIDS among their uniformed personnel. The
Council recognizes the significant number of
direct and indirect beneficiaries of the
programmes worldwide.

S/PV.5228

“The Security Council recognizes that men
and women in the uniformed services are vital
elements in the fight against HIV/AIDS. The
Council welcomes the efforts by Member States,
including through existing national programmes,
DPKO, UNAIDS and other stakeholders, to
counter the spread of the disease. The Council
encourages Member States, in the preparation of
their personnel for participation in peacekeeping
operations, to employ best practices in HIV/AIDS
education, prevention, awareness, countering
stigma and discrimination, voluntary confidential
counselling and testing, and care and treatment.
“The Security Council recognizes that
United Nations peacekeeping personnel can be
important contributors to the response to
HIV/AIDS,
particularly
for
vulnerable
communities in post-conflict environments. The
Council welcomes the action taken by the
Secretary-General and the United Nations
peacekeeping missions to integrate HIV/AIDS
awareness in their mandated activities and
outreach projects for vulnerable communities,
and urges them to pay particular attention to the
gender dimensions of HIV/AIDS. In this context,
the Council encourages further cooperation
between DPKO and UNAIDS and its cosponsors, non-governmental organizations and

civil society, bilateral and multilateral donors and
national Governments.
“The Security Council recognizes that
significant progress has been made in
implementation of resolution 1308 (2000) but that
many challenges remain. The Council expresses
its readiness to further promote and support the
implementation of this resolution. In order to
maintain and consolidate momentum, the Council
welcomes regular briefings, as needed, by DPKO
and UNAIDS on the progress made, as a measure
to strengthen commitment and accountability at
the highest levels and ensure sustained
monitoring and evaluation of the impact of
programmes. The Council reaffirms its intention
to contribute, within its competence, to the
attainment of the relevant objectives in the
declaration adopted at the twenty-sixth special
session of the General Assembly in carrying out
the Council’s work, in particular in its follow-up
to resolution 1308 (2000).”
This statement will be issued as a document of
the
Security
Council
under
the
symbol
S/PRST/2005/33.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

23
