asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6844

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6844th meeting
Tuesday, 9 October 2012, 10.25 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rosenthal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Guatemala)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Ms. Guo Xiaomei
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Eick
Mr. Ahamed
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Karev
Mr. Laher
Mr. Menan
Mr. Tatham
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Sierra Leone

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-53881 (E)

*1253881*

S/PV.6844

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Sierra Leone
The President (spoke in Spanish): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Sierra Leone to participate in this
meeting.
On behalf of the members of the Council, I welcome
Her Excellency Mrs. Ebun Jusu, Deputy Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Sierra
Leone.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Justice Shireen Avis Fisher, President
of the Special Court for Sierra Leone, and Ms. Brenda
Hollis, Prosecutor of the Special Court for Sierra Leone,
to participate in this meeting.
I should like to acknowledge the presence in the
Council Chamber of Ms. Binta Mansaray, Registrar
of the Special Court for Sierra Leone, and Ms. Claire
Carlton-Hanciles, Principal Defender of the Special
Court for Sierra Leone.
I extend the warmest welcome to the four
representatives of the Court.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Justice Fisher.
Mrs. Fisher: On behalf of the Special Court for
Sierra Leone, I thank the Council for this opportunity
to address members on the achievements of the Special
Court and the upcoming completion of our mandate.
We are especially privileged to be speaking during the
presidency of Guatemala, a nation that shares with us
a commitment to fighting impunity and to striving for
gender justice.
We are also very pleased to address the Council on
the twelfth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000). The
Special Court of Sierra Leone is a living example of the
progress of the resolution. For the first time in the history
of international tribunals, all four principals — the
President, the Prosecutor, the Registrar and the Principal
Defender — are women. We owe a special thanks to
UN-Women, Women’s Initiatives for Gender Justice
and the United Nations Development Programme, first,
2

because of their tireless efforts in advancing the goals
of resolution 1325 (2000). On a more personal level,
we thank them for financing our journey here, without
which we could not appear before the Council today.
The Special Court for Sierra Leone will soon
complete its final case. We will deliver the final
judgement in the appellate proceedings in the case of
Mr. Charles Taylor, former President of Liberia. That
final judgement will determine Mr. Taylor’s guilt or
innocence. The Court will then transition to residual
status and close its doors. It will be the first international
criminal tribunal to do so.
I could say that the Special Court has delivered on its
mandate, that it has contributed to ending impunity and
that it has brought justice to the people of Sierra Leone.
I could say that but I think that it is more important that
members hear it from the people of Sierra Leone and
Liberia themselves.
At the end of May, with funding from the European
Union, an independent nationwide survey was conducted
in Sierra Leone and Liberia. It was designed to measure
the impact and legacy of the Special Court for Sierra
Leone. Some 79.16 per cent, that is, almost 80 per cent,
of the people surveyed believe that the Special Court
had accomplished its mandate.
The document rightly attributes such results to the
vision established during the early stages of the Court
of it being an institution embedded in and responsive to
the expectations and needs of the people of Sierra Leone
and Liberia.
For that, credit and thanks are owed to the
Registrar, Ms. Binta Mansaray, whose vision it was
to take the Court to the people and who designed an
outreach programme that was both geographically and
demographically inclusive and participatory.
When questioned on what that mandate entailed,
the people surveyed expressed their understanding that
it was to prosecute those with the greatest responsibility
for the war from all factions, without regard for the
side on which they fought or the power of the position
they held. For that, credit and thanks are owed to the
Prosecutor, Ms. Brenda Hollis, and her predecessors.
But the people surveyed also indicated that they
believed the mandate was to bring justice and the rule
of law to their war-torn part of the world. It cannot be
forgotten that faith in the outcome of those cases depends
on faith in the process — that it be fair, that the rights

12-53881

S/PV.6844

of the accused be respected and that they be zealously
represented. For that, credit and thanks are owed to the
Principal Defender, Ms. Claire Carlton-Hanciles, and
the dedicated defence teams she oversees.
Most heartening and humbling is the fact that the
survey found that 91 per cent of people in Sierra Leone
and 78 per cent of people in Liberia believe that the
Special Court has contributed to bringing peace to their
countries. The Court that the United Nations established
and has supported for the past 10 years has been judged
by 91 per cent of the people surveyed to have contributed
to bringing peace to Sierra Leone. For that, credit and
thanks are owed to the Security Council. The Special
Court’s successes are truly the Council’s. Celebrating the
success of the Special Court is celebrating the Council’s
steadfast commitment to the work of the Court. On
behalf of the Special Court, the four Principals would
like to thank the Council, the States Members of the
United Nations and the international community as a
whole for their enduring support and assistance over
the past decade. We congratulate them on their vision
and dedication, and we encourage them to recognize the
immensity of our joint achievement.
Because of that vision, the Special Court for Sierra
Leone is the first of its kind. It is the first partnership
between national authorities and the United Nations
to create a credible system of post-conflict justice
that meets international standards. It is the first hybrid
tribunal created to assist a State that desired post-conflict
justice but did not have sufficient capacity to ensure it.
It is the first United Nations-sponsored tribunal to carry
out its work in the territory where serious violations of
international humanitarian law were committed, thereby
ensuring that the survivors of conflict are participants in
justice, and not mere bystanders to it.
And it has been successful. That success is not only
an accomplishment for the present, but an important
one for the future as well, because it is a proven model
for positive complementarity. As the Special Court’s
success proves, complementarity is a reality, not just
an aspiration. My colleagues and I, the four Principals
of the Court, are visible evidence of that reality. We
are two Sierra Leoneans and two internationals united
in our commitment to post-conflict justice. What is
special about the Special Court is the synergy of local
commitment, knowledge and talent with international
financial and human resources. Complementarity works.
The Special Court’s example should dispel doubts
that positive complementarity can succeed in difficult
12-53881

environments. It must be remembered that the Court
came about because the Government of Sierra Leone
had the courage and innovation to request a partnership
with the international community at a time when the
situation in Sierra Leone continued to constitute a
threat to international peace and security in the region.
The conflict had destroyed national legal and judicial
institutions, and Sierra Leone alone did not have the
human and financial resources to realize its desire for
justice.
Confronted with challenges, the Special Court
innovated. Faced with isolated communities, a
multiplicity of languages and limited communications
infrastructure, the Special Court’s outreach programme
innovated. Under the leadership of Registrar Mansaray,
a Sierra Leonean who knows her country and its people,
it literally took the Court to the people. Traveling over
roads that were no more than trails, outreach workers
crisscrossed the country again and again with the latest
video summaries of the actual trials, in mobile units
consisting of video players and a generator they carried
with them.
When, from the first, the unique concerns and
experiences of women and girl survivors of the war were
recognized, as were the personal and cultural barriers to
participation in the justice process, the Court innovated.
Gender-sensitive approaches to witness support and
outreach were developed in partnership with local
women’s organizations and resources. Accommodations
were made by judges in the courtroom to encourage
women’s voices to be heard. Those voices have been
reflected in the jurisprudence of the Court, which was
the first to recognize forced marriage as a crime against
humanity and sexual violence as a form of terrorism.
Other jurisprudential firsts have been truly
remarkable. The Special Court was the first to
develop jurisprudence on the recruitment and use
of child soldiers — jurisprudence that was used and
acknowledged by the International Criminal Court in
its first trial judgment in the case of The Prosecutor vs.
Thomas Lubanga Dyilo. The Special Court was the first
to rule on the effect of national amnesties in international
law, on the issues of immunity involving sitting Heads
of State, and on a matter close to the hearts of those in
this Chamber — the crime of attacks on peacekeepers.
On front after front, the Special Court has developed
not only jurisprudence but also tools, practices
and programmes to address the specific needs of a
post-conflict society. The Special Court stands ready
3

S/PV.6844

to share the knowledge and expertise it has gained. We
invite Member States to draw on the Court’s work and
to utilize its programmes as part of their own national
strategies.
We must keep in mind how fragile our
accomplishment will be if we fail to keep faith with the
people of the region who put their trust in the Council
and the Court. Our responsibility to those people will
not cease. It must be taken up and advanced by the
Residual Special Court of Sierra Leone.
Residual responsibilities are not an afterthought
or burden. Ensuring the protection of witnesses who
appeared before the Special Court encourages more
people to come forward and to be witnesses in other
courts involved in fighting impunity. Failing to ensure
their protection will guarantee the opposite result.
Preserving the archives ensures that the work of the
Special Court remains an accessible, unequivocal
record of the war. Failing to preserve them invites
revisionist history and denial of the suffering endured
by Sierra Leone’s people. Supervising the enforcement
of sentences ensures that the Special Court continues
to lead by example in protecting the human rights and
dignity of all people, as demanded by the rule of law.
Failure to provide that oversight erodes our reputation
as a just institution and undermines the moral authority
of all our work.
The Residual Special Court will face particular
challenges in obtaining voluntary contributions to fund
its operations. The support of the Security Council will
be essential to ensuring that it can carry out its important
responsibilities.

faced by the Office of the Prosecutor, our responses to
those challenges and certain challenges the Residual
Special Court for Sierra Leone may face.
I turn first to the achievements of the Special
Court. President Fisher has mentioned some of its
many successes. In my view, the principal achievement
of the Court, and its most important legacy, will be
the fulfilment of our mandate to prosecute those who
bear the greatest responsibility for the horrific crimes
committed against the people of Sierra Leone. All
the members of the Office of the Prosecutor, past and
present, can be proud of their significant contribution to
that accomplishment. The achievements of the Special
Court are the product of the hard work and dedication
of all the organs and members of the Special Court, who
are to be commended for their untiring efforts. With the
Council’s permission, I will limit my comments to the
achievements of the Office of the Prosecutor.
The Office of the Prosecutor has acted expeditiously.
We commenced operations in mid-2002 and presented
the first indictments in March 2003. Guided by the
Special Court’s statute, we focused our efforts on
prosecuting those who bear the greatest responsibility.
Consequently, we presented 13 indictments, charging
senior leaders of the three main factions in the Sierra
Leone conflict and Charles Taylor, the then President of
Liberia. The first trials began in 2004. With the exception
of the case against Mr. Taylor, all cases were completed
through appeal by October 2009. Unfortunately, it was
not until 2006 that Mr. Taylor was surrendered to the
Special Court, three years after he was indicted.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Ms. Hollis.

The Office of the Prosecutor expeditiously and
effectively prosecuted Mr. Taylor. We amended the
indictment against him, reducing the charges in order to
present the case more speedily. We presented evidence
that resulted in Mr. Taylor’s conviction on all charges, a
result noted by the Security Council in resolution 2065
(2012). This is the first conviction of a former Head
of State by an international criminal tribunal since the
Nuremberg trials in 1946. On the basis of that verdict,
Mr. Taylor was sentenced to 50 years’ imprisonment.

Ms. Hollis: I echo the comments made by President
Fisher and thank the Council for its decision to convene
this briefing on the Special Court for Sierra Leone. As
the Prosecutor of the Special Court, I am honoured to
be given this opportunity to brief the Council. I will
focus my remarks on the achievements of the Special
Court and on those of the Office of the Prosecutor in
particular. I will also discuss some of the challenges

Mr. Taylor was convicted of the charges for
two reasons. First, he was convicted of planning the
attacks that culminated in the January 1999 invasion
of Freetown and the mass crimes that resulted from
those attacks. Secondly, he was convicted of aiding
and abetting members of the Revolutionary United
Front and the Armed Forces Revolutionary Council in
the commission of the charged crimes. Both the Office

On behalf of the Special Court for Sierra Leone,
we once again extend our sincere thanks to the Security
Council, the States Members of the United Nations
and the international community as a whole for their
enduring support and assistance. And we congratulate
them on that accomplishment.

4

12-53881

S/PV.6844

of the Prosecutor and Mr. Taylor have appealed the
judgement and the sentence.
We are proud of our other achievements as well. The
Office of the Prosecutor has been an active participant
in the Special Court’s excellent outreach programme,
which has been widely commended for its effectiveness.
Through the programme we have succeeded in engaging
the people of Sierra Leone in a judicial process carried
out in their name, and have fostered a two-way
conversation between the Prosecutor and the affected
communities.
The Office of the Prosecutor has also contributed
significantly to international jurisprudence. We were the
first to charge and prosecute the crimes of enlistment,
recruitment and use of child soldiers, attacks on
peacekeepers and forced marriage as a crime against
humanity. The resulting jurisprudence can be relied on
by other international as well as national courts.
Many deserve credit for the Special Court’s
achievements, and I would like to express my gratitude
to them. They include, in particular, the people of
Sierra Leone, whose demand for justice — the Council
will recall — resulted in the creation of the Court; the
Security Council, which, through resolution 1315 (2000)
and subsequent others, responded to that demand; the
Secretary-General, whose work advanced the creation
of the Special Court and whose continued support
strengthened it; very importantly, the victims, survivors
and those members of the perpetrator groups who
showed the courage and commitment needed to give
information and to testify, both for the prosecution and
the defence; the Government and the people of Sierra
Leone, for their continuing commitment to the Court and
the support they have provided; the Member States that
have faithfully served on the Special Court Management
Committee; the 51 States, the United Nations, the
European Commission and other organizations that
have provided funding and other support for the Special
Court; and civil society organizations in Sierra Leone,
Liberia and worldwide, for their commitment to justice
and support for the Court.
Particular mention must be made of the United
Nations and the Government of Sierra Leone as partners
in establishing the Special Court. Together they created
a statute that achieved two important goals. First, as
I have already discussed, the statute, appropriately,
focused our efforts on those who bear the greatest
responsibility. Secondly, the statute ensured that the
Special Court would build on the strong foundation
12-53881

put in place by the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, both as to substantive and
procedural law. The Special Court has indeed built on
that foundation in carrying out its mandate. I encourage
all tribunals and courts that have followed to build on
that expanded foundation.
As President Fisher has stated, the Special Court
has faced numerous challenges during its decade of
operation. I will now highlight some of those challenges
relating to the Office of the Prosecutor. The record will
show that we have responded positively to them in ways
that may be relevant for other courts and tribunals. Of
the most demanding challenges before us, I would like
to address three: indictment, staffing and witness issues.
I will first address indictments. Charges are
determined, first and foremost, by the evidence
before a prosecutor. As with other prosecutors faced
with a multitude of crimes committed across a wide
chronological period and geographic area, we had the
task of developing indictments that balanced two goals:
first, arriving at a true reflection of the nature and scale
of the crimes to which an accused could be linked and
the full extent of his criminal conduct, and, secondly,
bringing charges that could be expeditiously proved.
To achieve that balance, we focused our indictments on
representative crimes and on the scope of the criminal
conduct of each accused person.
I now turn to staffing challenges. The Office of
the Prosecutor had the task of recruiting a sufficient
number of staff to fulfil our exacting mandate and
with retaining enough experienced staff to maintain
the continuity of our work. Those challenges were
amplified by the uncertain nature of voluntary funding.
We responded by using short-term contracts whenever
possible, giving us flexibility in meeting our needs; by
reducing permanent posts in an orderly manner as we
reached prosecution milestones; and by relying heavily
on experienced, talented professionals seconded to us
by States. Those secondments proved to be an effective
and financially desirable option. For example, we could
not have conducted our investigations without the local
knowledge and expertise of Sierra Leonean investigators
loaned to us by the host Government.
I will now address witness issues. Of course,
without witnesses, no trials would be possible. Our
main challenges were to communicate and meet with
some 800 potential witnesses in a safe environment and,
in cooperation with the Registry’s Witness and Victims
5

S/PV.6844

Section, to ensure the security before, during and after
the trial, of the more than 300 prosecution witnesses who
testified. We have relied extensively on investigators
seconded from the Sierra Leone police to enable us
to contact our witnesses in a manner that protected
their security. We have also had regular contact with
our witnesses before and after trial, ensuring that we
receive timely alerts of any security risk or harassment.
Allow me to emphasize that the security of witnesses
and the enforcement of witness protection orders were
and remain significant challenges. For example, in their
testimony, many witnesses named individuals who had
committed horrific crimes; those witnesses continue to
live among the individuals named and their supporters.
I now turn to the Residual Special Court for Sierra
Leone. Some of the challenges it may face can be
anticipated today. The Residual Special Court plans to have
a relatively small footprint. That is a positive response to
the challenge of balancing the requirements of its mandate
with efficiency and financial stability. Such efficiency may
be enhanced by sharing an administrative platform with
other courts. As already emphasized, ensuring the security
of witnesses and the enforcement of witness protection
orders will be a continuing and significant challenge.
Indicative of that challenge, this year, the Special Court
has convicted five individuals of contempt for interfering
with witnesses; those convictions are, of course, subject
to appeal. As made clear by article 18 of its statute, the
Residual Special Court shall be responsible for ensuring
the security of witnesses and those put at risk by witness
testimony. It shall also be responsible for the enforcement
of the protection orders of the Special Court and any put
in place by the Residual Special Court.
In order to fulfil that mandate, it is critical that
the Residual Court will have the resources necessary
to protect witnesses and ensure that people who came
forward, often at the risk of their well-being, will
continue to receive the protection of the Court they have
so well served.
I wish again to thank the Security Council for this
opportunity to brief its members about the Special Court.
In preparing my briefing, I was reminded of resolution
1315 (2000). The prudence of that resolution has been
made clear to me every time I engage the people of Sierra
Leone. I thank the Council for its wisdom, including
in adopting that resolution, and for its support for the
Special Court.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Prosecutor Hollis, for her briefing. I now give the floor

6

to Mrs. Ebun Jusu, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of Sierra Leone.
Mrs. Jusu (Sierra Leone): At the outset, allow me,
as I take the floor for the first time, to congratulate
the President on his assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of October and to
wish him full success during his tenure. I would also
ask that he accept our thanks and appreciation for the
inclusion of a briefing on the Special Court for Sierra
Leone in the Security Council’s programme of work. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
unwavering support for the work of the Special Court
for Sierra Leone and for backing the efforts undertaken
by the Court to carry out its mandate.
We commend the President of the Court and the
Prosecutor for their comprehensive briefings to the
Council on the Court’s operations during the period
under review, and also for the Court’s unremitting
efforts in implementing its mandate in accordance with
resolution 1315 (2000), adopted on 14 August 2000,
including the Agreement between the United Nations and
the Government of Sierra Leone on the Establishment of
a Special Court for Sierra Leone, signed on 16 January
2002. Accordingly, we welcome the new completion
strategy adopted by the Court’s management committee
and wish to underscore the various challenges outlined
in the strategy, in particular the perennial funding
gap for the completion of the Court’s mandate and its
residual tasks.
The Special Court represents an effective
partnership between the Government and the people of
Sierra Leone and the United Nations for the purposes
of promoting justice and fighting impunity for heinous
crimes committed in Sierra Leone during the civil war.
As the first hybrid tribunal created to assist a State in
addressing impunity for crimes against humanity, the
Special Court has made unprecedented contributions
to gender justice and has laid the foundation in
international criminal jurisprudence for designating
acts of forced marriage, sexual violence, sexual slavery
and the recruitment and use of child soldiers during the
conflict as punishable crimes. It has also successfully
established that wanton attacks on United Nations
peacekeepers are proscribed and that perpetrators
are liable to be prosecuted. Furthermore, the Special
Court’s jurisprudence underscores the importance of
understanding gender-related traumas from the point
of view of those who experienced them, as well as the
importance of understanding suffering within local

12-53881

S/PV.6844

cultural contexts. It has also made critical contributions
to national reconciliation efforts and to the restoration
and maintenance of international peace and security in
the subregion.
Taking into consideration what I have just said, one
cannot gainsay that the Special Court has successfully
delivered on the goals set for it by the Government
of Sierra Leone and the United Nations. Indeed, that
tribunal has proven to be equal to the task as evidenced
by its landmark judgements and contributions to the
rule of law at both the national and the international
levels and as an important adjunct to our peacebuilding
initiatives.
Despite those special and compelling accolades,
it is a matter of common knowledge that the Court
continues to face significant funding gaps that endanger
the completion of its judicial mandate and its residual
mechanism. We wish to express much appreciation
and gratitude for Member States’ support for the Court
in the form of voluntary contributions and for the
life-saving subsidies from the United Nations, as well
as to underscore the need for the United Nations and
the international community to continue to support the
Special Court so that it can complete its good work.
Needless to say, the successful completion of the
Court’s mandate would send a powerful message that the
international community strongly supports institutions
established to hold accountable those responsible for
war crimes and, in so doing, would deter or minimize
the incidence of the perpetration of such atrocities in
the future. We therefore count on Member States and
the international community to continue to support the
Court so that it can complete its work and help facilitate
its effective transition to the Residual Special Court
immediately upon completion.
In conclusion, Sierra Leone underscores the
importance of the Special Court in fighting impunity for
war crimes, crimes against humanity and other serious
violations of international humanitarian law, and in
contributing to peace and stability in Sierra Leone and
the subregion.
Some notable and recognizable milestones attained
by the courts so far would include victory for hundreds
of former child soldiers and adoptees, who had the letters
“R-U-F” carved or engraved with a hot iron on their
back and chest to prevent them from escaping. It would
be a victory for victims of sexual violence and a victory
for human rights and democracy. However, the victory,

12-53881

so greatly acclaimed, will be incomplete if the want of
adequate resources and financial impediments deter the
tribunal from fairly and fully completing its mandate
and its residual task to their logical conclusions. We
therefore count on the Council to spare no effort to avoid
such an undesirable scenario and to launch appropriate
mechanisms to provide the much needed relief and
assistance to the Court for its continued survival.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Minister
Jusu for her statement.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Ahamed (India): Let me begin by thanking the
Guatemalan delegation for organizing today’s briefing
on the Special Court for Sierra Leone. Having started
my career as an advocate, the topic under discussion is
of special interest to me. I would also like to thank the
President of the Special Court, The Honourable Justice
Shireen Avis Fisher, for presenting the report on the
activities and achievements of the Court since the last
briefing to the Security Council on 16 July 2009 (see
S/PV.6163).
The Special Court was established in 2000 by
resolution 1315 (2000) at the request of the Government
of Sierra Leone. Since its establishment, the Court
has successfully carried out its mandate set out in the
Statute of the Court. Three of the four main cases have
been completed, and the last case is in the final stages of
judgement in the Appeals Chamber.
Keeping in view its track record, we hope that the
Special Court will successfully accomplish its mandate
by 30 December 2013, when the Appeals Chamber
is expected to give its verdict in the Charles Taylor
case. We appreciate the efforts of the United Nations
and the international community to assist States, upon
their request, in restoring peace and stability, including
through the fight against impunity.
The enforcement of sentences with the assistance
of the Government of Rwanda is a good example of
international cooperation in furthering the cause of
justice. We have also taken note of the Special Court’s
outreach activities, witness protection efforts and
archive development programme, including through
capacity-building initiatives that will strengthen
national judicial institutions in Sierra Leone. We also
appreciate the creation of a Peace Museum, which will
contribute to the efforts aimed at national reconciliation
in the country.

7

S/PV.6844

As the Special Court prepares for closure, focusing on
residual issues such as the enforcement of sentences, the
protection of witnesses and the preservation of archives of
the Special Court assume great importance. In that regard,
there is a need for continued support to the Special Court
as well as to the Residual Special Court.

heard from the President and the Prosecutor of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone, that vital task is almost
complete. The United Kingdom congratulates the
Special Court for its significant achievements. And we
would like to thank the President of the Court and the
Prosecutor for their briefings.

India has a long history of a cordial relationship
with Sierra Leone. India played a major role in the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone until 2001.
Since then, India has continued to partner with the
Government of Sierra Leone in its reconstruction
efforts. India has extended loans and credit lines
worth $94.45 million over the past few years to enable
Sierra Leone to procure agricultural equipment and to
modernize and expand its national telecommunications
network, SierraTel. Our partnership has included the
restoration and rehabilitation of six potable water and
solar street lighting projects. As part of our bilateral
cooperation programme, India is providing 45 training
slots to Sierra Leone this year. India has also offered to
set up an India-Africa information and communication
technology centre in Sierra Leone.

We are also grateful to Guatemala for convening
this meeting during its presidency of the Council. Like
Guatemala, the United Kingdom believes that it is
important and timely to take stock of the progress made
by the Special Court — to acknowledge how much it has
achieved and to better understand the tasks that remain.

Before I conclude, I would like to convey our
best wishes to the Government and people of Sierra
Leone as they prepare for national elections next
month. The successful conduct of the elections will
be a major milestone in post-conflict peacebuilding
in Sierra Leone, which should help in the process of
national reconciliation and the further consolidation
of democracy in the country. India remains committed
to continuing its partnership with the Government of
Sierra Leone, particularly in capacity-building and
human resources development.
Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): In September
2000, with the adoption of resolution 1315 (2000),
the Council demonstrated its commitment to the fight
against impunity and the restoration of peace and
security in Sierra Leone. Given its deep concern that
serious violations of international humanitarian law
had been committed in Sierra Leone, the Council was
determined to bring those responsible to account, in
accordance with international standards of justice,
fairness and due process of law.
The Council requested the Secretary-General to
work with the Government of Sierra Leone to establish
an independent special court to prosecute those persons
bearing the greatest responsibility for the commission
of those crimes, including those leaders who threatened
the peace process in Sierra Leone. Today, as we have
8

The United Kingdom looks forward to September
2013, when the Special Court is due to become the first
modern war crimes tribunal to successfully complete
its mandate. We do not underestimate the complexity
and significance of the appellate proceedings in the case
against Charles Taylor. The United Kingdom strongly
believes that the completion of the trial of Charles Taylor
by the Special Court was a landmark for international
justice.
As the Foreign Secretary of the United Kingdom at
the time said, the trial proceedings played an important
role in helping the people of Sierra Leone come to terms
with the past and consolidate national reconciliation. It
is heartening to hear from the President of the Special
Court that the people of Sierra Leone and Liberia feel
so strongly that the Special Court has contributed to
bringing peace to their countries. The Special Court’s
prosecution of Charles Taylor sends a strong message
that the international community will not allow serious
crimes to be committed with impunity. It signals that the
reach of international justice is long and patient.
Since its inception in 2002, the United Kingdom has
been a leading supporter of the Special Court.
United Kingdom funding has reached approximately
$44 million and accounts for some 20 per cent of the
Court’s voluntary contributions to date. That includes a
contribution of almost $1 million in March. We reaffirm
our commitment to imprisoning Charles Taylor in the
United Kingdom if the Appeals Chamber upholds his
conviction and if the President asks us to do so.
Our support for the Special Court will remain
strong long after the Taylor appeal and the high-profile
work of the Special Court has come to an end. But the
achievements of the Special Court do not begin and end
with Charles Taylor in The Hague. The United Kingdom
commends the Special Court in Freetown for successfully
12-53881

S/PV.6844

completing three important trials of eight former rebel
leaders and conducting five contempt proceedings.
Furthermore, the Special Court’s invaluable role in
building the capacity of the Sierra Leonean legal system
will certainly be a lasting legacy, as will the Court’s
vital outreach programmes, which have made its work
accessible to many people in Sierra Leone and Liberia,
contributing to reconciliation and raising awareness
on important issues such as child soldiers and sexual
violence in armed conflict. We welcome the way in which
the Court has developed gender-sensitive approaches to
witness support and outreach in partnership with local
women’s organizations and resources.
But the United Kingdom cannot fail to acknowledge
the Special Court’s serious and challenging financial
circumstances. Funding shortfalls risk the completion
of appellate proceedings in the Taylor case. Funds are
needed urgently. Longer term, the Residual Special
Court requires secure and sustainable funding in order
to continue to protect witnesses, manage the detention
of those convicted, and protect the archives. The United
Kingdom is considering all funding options for the
Special Court and the Residual Special Court, and
we urge other members of the Council, and indeed all
Member States, to do so as well.
The United Kingdom applauds the Special Court for
its groundbreaking achievements. We remain ready to
support the Court as its completes its mandate in order
to sure that it’s legacy is preserved.
Mr. Eick (Germany): I thank the Guatemalan
presidency for having organized this briefing with
representatives of the Special Court for Sierra Leone.
We are also very grateful for the presentations made
today by the Court’s President and Prosecutor. I would
like to take this opportunity to commend them once
again for their work and for the Court’s achievements. I
would also like to thank the Deputy Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Sierra Leone for her statement.
I would like to make the following points. First,
Germany recognizes the invaluable contribution of the
Special Court to the rule of law, ending impunity and
maintaining peace and security in Sierra Leone and
beyond. By trying those accused of the most horrendous
war crimes and crimes against humanity committed
during the brutal conflict in Sierra Leone, the Court has
brought some justice to the victims of those crimes, and it
continues to stand out as a testament to the determination
and capacity of States to prosecute international crimes
in partnership with the United Nations.
12-53881

The Court has undertaken major capacity-building
initiatives aimed at rebuilding the criminal justice
system of Sierra Leone. I would also like to express
our appreciation for the important outreach activities
undertaken to inform the people of Liberia and Sierra
Leone of the Court’s work.
Secondly, the Court has made legal history on
many accounts. Both its Statute and jurisprudence have
recognized the need to address gender-based crimes,
including forced marriage, and have thus transformed
the commitment contained in resolution 1325 (2000)
into practice. The Court has set a precedent for
prosecuting the crimes of enlisting, recruiting and using
child soldiers, and has thereby shaped international law
in this area, not least by providing important references
for the recent conviction of Thomas Lubanga by the
International Criminal Court (ICC).
Most important, the indictment, trial and conviction
of Charles Taylor represent a landmark in criminal
proceedings against a head of State. Together with
the conviction of Thomas Lubanga by the ICC and of
those responsible for atrocities committed in the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda by the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia and International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, respectively, the Taylor
case has made clear that the age of accountability has in
fact begun.
Thirdly, the work of the Court is not yet complete.
The appeals process in the Taylor case needs to be
concluded, and several contempt proceedings against
individuals who have threatened witnesses are pending
before the Court.
At the same time, the Court is preparing its transition
into a residual mechanism, with the target date of
30 September 2013. We look forward to the conclusion
of the relevant agreements between the United Nations
and Sierra Leone.
This briefing is a welcome opportunity to highlight
the Council’s appreciation of, and full support for, the
Special Court. The draft presidential statement to be
read out later today does just that.
Germany has made significant financial contributions
to the Court’s budget, as well as for witness protection
and legal experts programmes. In addition, we have
been actively engaged in ensuring the United Nations
subvention granted to the Court in 2010.
As we are aware of the Court’s present dire
financial situation, Germany supports further efforts to
9

S/PV.6844

find practical solutions in order to ensure the successful
completion of the Court’s work.

I also thank the Minister from Sierra Leone for her
briefing.

Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): At the outset, I would like
to thank the President of the Special Court for Sierra
Leone, Justice Shireen Avis Fisher, and the Prosecutor,
Ms. Brenda Hollis, for their briefings. We also thank
Her Excellency Mrs. Ebun Jusu, Deputy Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Sierra Leone, for her statement. We
welcome the report of the Special Court, which was
shared with the Council.

We welcome the fact that the Special Court for
Sierra Leone has been able to overcome at least two
features that could have been considered as defects that
would generate doubt regarding its ability to execute its
mandate satisfactorily.

Let me reiterate Pakistan’s complete support for
the important work of the United Nations-established
special courts and tribunals. We commend their work in
promoting accountability and fighting impunity in the
particular situations of relevance.
The Special Court for Sierra Leone was established,
pursuant to resolution 1315 (2000), to prosecute persons
responsible for the horrific crimes committed during the
conflict in Sierra Leone. As the Court approaches the
conclusion of its mandate, it deserves recognition for
its work in addressing the most painful chapter in the
history of Sierra Leone. The Court has dealt well with the
crimes within its jurisdiction. The outreach activities of
the Court should help facilitate national reconciliation.
Programmes and activities for strengthening the national
legal and criminal justice system in Sierra Leone is
another important contribution of the Court.
As the Court winds up its activities, there are still
important areas of work that need to be brought to a
conclusion. Most important is the completion of the
appellate proceedings with regard to Mr. Charles Taylor.
We take note of the work under way for transferring
the long-term aspects of the Court’s mandate to the
Residual Special Court for Sierra Leone, including
the enforcement of sentences, witness protection, the
management of archives and the trials of those still at
large. We urge all concerned stakeholders to cooperate
in this endeavour.
I would like to conclude by commending the
President, Prosecutor and other members of the Special
Court for their efforts and achievements.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I wish to thank the President and the Prosecutor of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone for their very informative
briefings on the achievements of the Court, its ongoing
work and progress in the completion strategy of the
Court and on the establishment of the Residual Special
Court.
10

First, there were the uncertainties related to the
financing of a hybrid or internationalized jurisdiction
based on an agreement between the United Nations
and the Government of Sierra Leone. It is therefore
unlike the two ad hoc tribunals, namely, the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
and the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) — which are subsidiary bodies to
the Security Council and thus benefit from guaranteed
United Nations financing.
Secondly, it was also the first time that such a
jurisdiction had been located in the territory of a
country that was the theatre of the acts that were to be
the subject of prosecution, where the socio-political
trauma and resentment risked generating insecurity and
compromising the country’s position in terms of proper
implementation of the mandate.
Despite those features that were part of its creation,
there is remarkable proof today that the Special Court
has contributed to strengthened stability in Sierra Leone
and in the West African subregion, while working to put
an end to the culture of impunity.
It is also recognized that the Court has fostered
unexpected progress in the area of international criminal
justice and notable enrichment of international criminal
law. In that connection, Togo welcomes the work of the
Special Court, which has enable it to bring to conclusion
numerous key trials, among which we would include the
trial of Charles Taylor, which is currently on appeal and
is slated for completion on 30 September 2013.
It goes without saying that elements of jurisprudence
from the Special Court will continue to contribute to
enriching debates aimed at promoting progress in
international judicial systems, both nationally and
internationally, in areas including forced marriage as a
crime against humanity and sexual violence in times of
war and terrorism, among others.
My delegation also welcomes the fact that the
Special Court has been able to tackle one of the major
challenges facing jurisdictions of its nature, in reaching
an agreement with the Government of Rwanda to
12-53881

S/PV.6844

ensure the execution of sentences handed down to those
convicted.
Moreover, my country’s delegation believes that
the commitments made by the Special Court to ensure
the lasting effect of its achievements in the fight against
impunity, through the conservation of its archives, as
well as awareness-raising and dissemination of its
results, are notable signs of progress.
In particular, Togo would like to support the
idea of preserving memory on the part of the Special
Court, which it pursues under its mandate by creating
museums and mausoleums in order to shape and fix
images that are aimed at informing the collective
awareness so that those acts are never committed again.
However, given the fact that imagery can sometimes
surprise, and therefore produce results opposite to those
anticipated, my delegation hopes that the Court will be
able to take steps to accompany those images with the
teaching activities necessary to quell perverse effects
that could — contrary to our desire - inspire and incite
repeated atrocities.
As in the case of the two ad hoc tribunals for
Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia, the Special Court’s
completion strategy should not in any way open doors
to hasty trials or impunity. We welcome the fact that the
work of the Special Court for Sierra Leone is to continue
after it has closed, through the implementation of the
mandate of the Residual Special Court for Sierra Leone,
to fight against impunity and bring to account those who
are still fugitives from the law, ensuring the execution
of sentences and promoting the protection of witnesses.
It is therefore important that the Special Court work
relentlessly to respect the timetables and forecasts for
the completion strategy and for the closing of the cases
that are still pending.
My delegation remains convinced that the Special
Court’s success has been made possible partly thanks
to active cooperation among States, and that that
cooperation is also crucial not merely at the current
critical phase as the mandate draws to a close, but also
as the Court seeks to ensure the launching and success
of the Residual Special Court.
That is why Togo calls upon all States to continue
to cooperate with the Special Court in contributing to
its budget, on the one hand, and, on the other, to extend
equal support with regard to cooperation and financial
support to the Residual Special Court.

12-53881

Mr. Laher (South Africa): Allow me to thank Justice
Shireen Avis Fisher, President of the Special Court for
Sierra Leone, and Ms. Brenda Hollis, Prosecutor of
the Special Court for their comprehensive briefings
on the current status of the work of the Special Court.
We also appreciate the perspectives put forward by the
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Sierra Leone.
The fight against impunity remains an important
building block for an international community free of
conflict and violence. Long-lasting peace must therefore
include the establishment of the rule of law and the
promotion of justice.
The Special Court for Sierra Leone should be
commended for the positive role it has played in
strengthening stability in Sierra Leone and the wider
subregion. The Court is an example of how the fight
against impunity can be promoted by international
cooperation between situation countries and the
international community.
South Africa pays tribute to the Court for its sterling
work in the fight against impunity and in particular,
for the fact that it remains on track to complete its
substantive work by September 2013. Three major cases
have already been completed up to the appeals phase,
while the trial judgement has been delivered in the final
case of the Prosecutor, namely, the case of Charles
Taylor, which is now in its appellate phase.
As highlighted by both the President and the
Prosecutor of the Court, the contribution and achievement
of the Special Court in setting jurisprudence precedent
will have a lasting impact on our collective efforts to
ensure accountability and establish rule of law.
We are also pleased to note the smooth
implementation of the prisoner transfer agreement with
Rwanda.
We commend the Special Court for its efforts to
reach out to affected communities. The outreach to
victims of sexual and gender-based crimes is particularly
welcome, given that women, girls and children often
carry a heavy burden of conflict. The outreach activities
are critical in ensuring the reintegration of societies and
breaking the circle of violence.
That the outreach work has been successful is
borne out by the approval figures produced in the
recent surveys on Sierra Leone and Liberia. As the
report before the Council notes, the Court is a model of

11

S/PV.6844

positive complementarity. That is a principle that South
Africa strongly advocates.
My delegation wishes to reiterate what the President
of the Court has said. The Special Court shows that
complementarity is a reality, not simply an aspiration,
and that it works.
We have taken note of the preparations for the
winding down of the Court, including the signing and
ratification of the Agreement on the Establishment of
the Residual Special Court for Sierra Leone and the
minimal functions it is expected to perform. We are
particularly pleased that the agreement provides for
assets of the Special Court to be transferred to Sierra
Leone.
We hope that the lasting legacy of the Court will
not only be the accountability of those responsible
for egregious crimes, but also national reconciliation
and sustainable peace, not only in Sierra Leone but
throughout the region and our continent. We are
confident that the Peace Museum will contribute to that
very important objective.
The Special Court has made an important
contribution to the cause of international justice. In that
regard, it is be vital for the international community to
continue its support for the work of the Special Court
until the completion of its mandate.
Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, we would like to thank the
President of the Special Court for Sierra Leone and the
Prosecutor and the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of Sierra Leone for their
briefings on activities.
Today’s briefings have been of particular importance
in summing up the essence of the work of the Special
Court.
The Special Court is scheduled to close on
30 September 2013, after which date a small residual
mechanism will be launched. International judiciairy
mechanisms already have experience in transitioning to
a mode of residual jurisdiction. As the Council knows,
the Rwandan office of the Residual Mechanism for
International Criminal Tribunals for Rwanda and the
former Yugoslavia opened in July.
Taking into account the effective work of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone in terms of phasing
out its activities, we hope that it will be able to avoid
the problems that other courts have encountered. We
12

note the rapid pace with which the Special Court has
conducted its proceedings, including the most recent
case, that is, Charles Taylor’s. The report provides
particularly indicative information to the effect that the
Appeals Chamber never exceeded the time allotted to it
for its cases. That is a good example for those courts that
constantly violate the timetables for proceedings while
saying that it is ostensibly impossible to accurately
predict the time needed for their trial activities.
Overall, the outcome of the work of the Special
Court should be evaluated positively. It has made
a considerable contribution to the development of
international criminal justice. In being the first such
hybrid court, including both international and national
elements, and having been established in a post-conflict
phase, it has contributed to strengthening the rule of law
at both the international and the national levels.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to first welcome the President of the Special Court
for Sierra Leone, Justice Shireen Avis Fisher, the
Prosectuor, Ms. Brenda Hollis, and the Deputy Minister
for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of
Sierra Leone, Mrs. Ebun Jusu. The briefings that they
have given us today give a clear indication of the
important work and mission that the Special Court for
Sierra Leone has completed.
This is also a good opportunity to reiterate the firm
support of the members of the Security Council for
the Special Court and to express our appreciation and
recognition for all that has been accomplished and for
all of the progress that has been made. Of course, among
those results is one that we would consider most visible,
namely, the prosecution and sentencing of Charles
Taylor. That represents a true watershed in the area of
prosecuting individual criminals under international
law. The Special Court has made an extremely important
contribution to developing international criminal
justice. It has also had a positive impact in both Sierra
Leone and Liberia.
In that respect, we believe that the activities aimed
at disseminating and promoting the Court’s work have
been essential, as they are the best way to ensure a direct
positive effect on the rule of law and governance in
those countries and the region.
Lastly, I would like to underscore that the Special
Court has also been very active in implementing its
completion strategy. In that connection, we welcome
the signing of an agreement between the United

12-53881

S/PV.6844

Nations and the Government of Sierra Leone regarding
the establishment of a Residual Special Court for
Sierra Leone. We call upon States and international
organizations that are in a position to provide financial
support for the implementation of that instrument to
do so. Of course, without that support, the completion
strategy will encounter serious obstacles.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Guatemalan presidency of the Council
for convening this meeting to hear a briefing on the
current status of the work of the Special Court for Sierra
Leone and the completion of its mandate. We are grateful
to the President of the Special Court, The Honourable
Justice Shireen Avis Fisher, and the Prosecutor,
Ms. Brenda Hollis for their presentations. I would
also like to welcome Her Excellency Mrs. Ebun Jusu,
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Sierra Leone to the Council.
Azerbaijan commends the Special Court for
its efforts to end impunity for serious violations of
international humanitarian law, thus contributing
to national reconciliation and the restoration and
maintenance of peace in Sierra Leone and the region
and advancing the rule of law in the country. We agree
with the report’s assessment that the Special Court has
achieved unprecedented success in delivering on the
ambitious goals set for it by the Government of Sierra
Leone and the United Nations. Indeed, the establishment
of the Special Court was the first partnership between
national authorities and the United Nations to create
a credible system of post-conflict justice that met
international standards of justice. It was the first hyrbid
tribunal created to assist a State that desired post-conflict
justice, and it was the first tribunal to carry out its work
in the territory where serious violations of international
humanitarian law had been committed.
The Special Court’s constribution to the development
of the jurisprudence of international criminal law
particular to the law of war crimes and crimes against
humanity can obviously benefit other national efforts
to pursue post-conflict justice, especially in those
situations where the prevailing culture of impunity for
the most serious crimes of concern to the international
community represents a considerable obstacle to peace
and reconciliation.
We take note of the Special Court’s approach to
victims, especially children and women who suffered
from displacement, recruitment as soldiers, sexual
abuse and other crimes. We also note the Special
12-53881

Court’s contribution to gender justice and commend the
development of a special programme for the protection
of women victims. I would also like to commend the
Government of Sierra Leone for the cooperation and
assistance it rendered to the Special Court during the
course of its operation.
While encouraged by the commitment of the Special
Court to complete its remaining work as expeditiously
and efficiently as possible, and to ensure a smooth and
successful transition of responsibilities to the Residual
Special Court, the Security Council, Member States and
the international community should continue to support
the Court during the final phase of its work. In the same
spirit, it is important to extend to the Residual Special
Court the international community’s encouragement
and financial assistance.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to thank the President of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone and its Prosecutor for
having shared with us their assessments of the work
and the record of the Special Court, as well as for
having expressed to us here their passion for the noble
mission that they were entrusted with. I would also
like to welcome the participation of Her Excellency
Mrs. Ebun Jusu, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation for Sierra Leone, and to
reiterate to her Morocco’s commitment to supporting
that friendly country in its efforts to consolidate peace
and to transition towards stability and development.
We welcome the achievements of the Court since
it was launched in 2002. The Security Council had
an opportunity to express its satisfaction last April
following the verdict of the Special Court in the trial
of Mr. Taylor. The Council underscored the importance
of that ruling for the victims of the crimes committed
in Sierra Leone during the conflict as they awaited the
final verdict, which is scheduled to be issued shortly.
That highly symbolic verdict was preceded by
the completion of two other cases involving the heads
of the Civil Defence Forces and the Armed Forces
Revolutionary Council. But beyond those specific
cases, we continue to believe that the importance of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone transcends the goal of
the completion of its trials. The Court contributed to
the process of consolidating peace in Sierra Leone and
in the subregion and to the efforts made to restore the
rule of law and end impunity. As a result of its work
and the outcomes achieved, the Court represents an
innovative model of mixed international justice that is
13

S/PV.6844

based on complementarity and national ownership. For
all of those reasons, we endorse the draft presidential
statement that is before the Council.
We noted with satisfaction the efforts undertaken
and the progress achieved by the Special Court with
respect to implementing its completion strategy and
preparing for a transition towards a residual special
court immediately following the completion of its
mandate, by 30 September 2013. While commending
the agreement on the issue between the Government
of Sierra Leone and the United Nations, we deem it
important to maintain the same level of political support
and ensure that it has sufficient resources, so that it can
meet the many challenges inherent in this critical stage
of the process, in particular the protection of witnesses,
the enforcement of sentences, the preservation of
archives, the protection of its physical and legal legacy,
and the creation and the building of the capacities of the
local judicial system.
It is indisputable that one of the major successes
of the Special Court lies in its ability to involve all of
the actors of Sierra Leonean society and in its outreach
and awareness-raising efforts aimed not only at the
general public in Sierra Leone but also at neighbouring
countries. We welcome the fact that those activities will
continue in the context of programmes involving the
Government of Sierra Leone, the United Nations and
local actors, including with respect to setting up a peace
museum to preserve the collective memory.
The progress made on the path to peace, justice
and reconciliation by the people of Sierra Leone is all
to the credit of that brotherly country, which has taken
ownership of its own destiny with the support of the
international community. We were able to see that
directly during the recent visit of the Security Council
to West Africa. In this phase of critical transformations,
it is important that the international community stand
mobilized for Sierra Leone so as to help it overcome
its challenges in terms of strengthening democratic
institutions and promoting economic development.
My country, Morocco, which has supported the
brotherly people of Sierra Leone in the various phases
of its ending the crisis, continues to stand ready to assist
our brothers in order definitely to close this chapter
of years of conflict and enable it to continue to move
towards stability and prosperity.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): Allow me at
the outset to thank Ms. Fisher, President of the Special

14

Court for Sierra Leone, and the Prosecutor of the Court
for their briefings, and, more generally, the entire
Special Court team for the job that they have done. I
also welcome the presence here and the statement made
by Mrs. Ebun Jusu, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of Sierra Leone.
France endorses the presidential statement drafted
by the United Kingdom to commend the work of the
Court.
The seriousness of the crimes perpetrated during the
civil war called for a response commensurate with the
gravity of the violations committed. That is why France
has provided, since the inception of the Court in 2002,
its full political support for the actions of this criminal
court, which was jointly established by the Government
of Sierra Leone and the United Nations.
As we all know, the Court will conclude its work in
September 2013. Its legacy is vast: the indictment of a
head of State while still in office and his arrest, at a time
many deemed inappropriate, have shown that arresting
those who massacre civilians so as to seize or remain
in power is indeed possible and effective, and that this
serves the cause of peace and justice.
That is a lesson that can be applied to other cases,
such as that of Bosco Ntaganda, of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, who formerly was a pillar of the
Congrès national pour la défense du people but today is
a henchman of the M-23 movement. Among the historic
decisions of the Court, we note the judgement of Charles
Taylor, of 30 May 2012, on which the Council has
expressed its views. We welcome the jurisprudence of
the Court on sensitive issues, including the recruitment
of child soldiers and forced marriage.
The capacity of the Court to transfer its activities
to a residual mechanism and to national courts will also
be valuable as an example for other special courts. We
noted the particular concerns expressed with respect to
ensuring the long-term protection of witnesses. That is a
key concern for all of the international criminal courts.
Lastly, we wish to highlight the assessment,
financed by the European Union and described in the
report, which underscores that more than 75 per cent
of the people of Sierra Leone and of Liberia believe
that the Tribunal has advanced the cause of justice and
that an even greater number believe that the Court has
served the cause of peace. These are numbers that we
will need to bear in mind when, in several days, we
will hold our debate on international justice. When the

12-53881

S/PV.6844

Security Council enables justice to take its course by
doing what is necessary and by ensuring full compliance
with its resolutions, justice, in turn, can serve the cause
of stability.
Today we have in place a standing system of justice
with the International Criminal Court (ICC), which the
Council can resort to, under Chapter VII of the Charter,
at any time and on any situation. This makes the creation
of new special courts obsolete in the areas of the ICC’s
jurisdiction: war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide.
The inception and the activities of the Court have
illustrated the at times tragic interplay of the history of
the neighbouring countries of Liberia and Sierra Leone
and the manner in which the fragility of one country
can affect another. But it also shows how the United
Nations can contribute, by means of holistic strategies,
to putting an end to crises. The Security Council was for
instance able to assess, during its visit to Sierra Leone
last May, the progress made: the holding of elections
in November, democratic oversight, non-interference
on the part of the army, the success of demobilization
efforts and economic growth. There is no doubt that the
Court has also contributed to those developments.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
should like to welcome to the Council today the President
of the Special Court for Sierra Leone, Shireen Fisher,
and the Prosecutor, Brenda Hollis, as well as the Court’s
Registrar, Binta Mansaray, and the head of the Defence
Office, Clare Carlton-Hanciles. I thank them for their
briefings, and I congratulate them and their staff for the
significant achievements of the Special Court to date.
We are grateful for their dedication and commitment to
the pursuit of justice.
I should like also to thank Guatemala for having
scheduled this briefing today and to welcome the
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Sierra Leone to the Council.
Today’s briefings come at a pivotal juncture, as
the Special Court moves towards the end of the final
phase of its mandate, the extensive appeals process in
the Charles Taylor case. The Special Court has been
instrumental in contributing to peace and stability in
Sierra Leone.
By creating a transparent and independent judicial
process, the Court has brought justice and provided
accountability for the people of Sierra Leone and has

12-53881

helped them to move on from a painful chapter in their
history and that of the region.
The Special Court, moreover, has broken new
ground in the field of international criminal law,
including through its jurisprudence on the use of child
soldiers and its recognition that sexual slavery can be
a war crime and a crime against humanity. It has also
shown a powerful commitment to gender issues and
to combating gender-based violence. We particularly
appreciate that as we mark the twelfth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and security
this month.
Although the trial proceedings in the Charles Taylor
case have finished, the work of the Court is not yet done.
We therefore welcome the finalization of the agreement
between the United Nations and the Government of
Sierra Leone on the establishment of a Residual Court
that will come into existence after the conclusion of
the appeals process. Its important responsibilities will
include witness protection, investigations and trials for
contempt, oversight of prisoners and the handling of
archives.
The United States was instrumental in the
establishment of the Special Court for Sierra Leone.
We have appreciated the opportunity to serve on the
Special Court’s management committee and commend
the work of the Commitee’s Canadian Chair and United
Kingdom co-Chair. We are proud to have been the
Court’s largest financial supporter, contributing more
than $83 million since its inception, including a recent
$2 million disbursement for fiscal year 2012. Given
those contributions, we especially appreciate the efforts
of President Fisher and Registrar Mansaray to reduce
costs, to improve efficiency in the Special Court’s
operations and to lay the groundwork for an efficient
and successful Residual Special Court.
The United States welcomes the broad financial
support that the Court has enjoyed so far. That must
continue for the Court to complete its critical mandate.
President Fisher has reported a projected budget shortfall
of $15 million to conclude the Court’s work. The United
States will endeavour to contribute towards closing that
gap and urges the continued support of the international
community to both the Court and the Residual Special
Court so that justice is served and impunity not tolerated
and so that Sierra Leone and the region can move
forward in peace and security.

15

S/PV.6844

The Government of Sierra Leone has been a strong
and committed partner of the Court. We fully support the
Court’s efforts to transfer its institutional knowledge to the
Sierra Leone authorities. It is important to the country’s
ongoing democratic development that all lessons of the
past be fully absorbed. The Special Court has much to
offer in that regard. Once the Court completes its mandate,
the international community will, of course, continue its
support for peacebuilding and long-term socioeconomic
development in Sierra Leone.
The Special Court has built a powerful legacy of
fighting impunity and of working to bring justice to the
people of Sierra Leone. The United States looks forward
to the successful completion of the Court’s work and the
smooth transition to the Residual Special Court.
Ms. Guo Xiaomei (China) (spoke in Chinese): Let
me begin by thanking President Fisher and Prosecutor
Hollis for their respective briefings on the work of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone. I would also like to
thank the Deputy Minister for her statement.
We note that since 2009 the Special Court has
continued to make substantive progress in its work. The
judgment in the final major case has entered its last stage.
The Special Court will become the first international
criminal tribunal to complete its mandate and close its
doors. We acknowledge the efforts made by the Court
over the years. We trust that its positive achievements
will serve as a reference for other international tribunals.
The Chinese Government has always supported the
work of the Special Court. We note that, in accordance
with the agreement between the United Nations and the
Government of Sierra Leone, when the Special Court’s
work concludes, the small-scale Residual Special Court
will come into operation.
We expect the Special Court and the Residual Special
Court to continue to cooperate with the Government of
Sierra Leone and to contribute to the lasting peace and
national reconciliation of that country and the region
through their judicial and other activities. To that end,
we hope that the countries that are in a position to do so
will continue to provide financial support to the Special
Court, the Residual Special Court, Sierra Leone and the
other countries concerned.
Mr. Cabral (Portugal): At the outset, allow me to
thank the President and the Prosecutor of the Special
Court for Sierra Leone for their comprehensive briefings
today. I would also like to welcome and to thank the

16

Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sierra Leone for
her statement.
We fully agree with the preceding interventions,
which have highlighted the important role that the Special
Court has played in providing justice and in fighting
impunity. In the spirit of note 507 by the President on
the Council’s working methods (S/2010/507) and in
order to avoid repeating contents, I will spare members
the delivery of yet another statement. Our full statement
is being circulated.
Allow me, however, to thank the President and the
Prosecutor of the Special Court for Sierra Leone for their
efforts. I would also like to thank all those who work or
have worked with the Court in ensuring that the mission
entrusted to it will come to a successful end very soon.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Guatemala.
We are grateful for the information provided by
the President of the Special Court for Sierra Leone,
The Honourable Justice Shireen Avis Fisher, and by the
Court’s Prosecutor, Brenda Hollis. We also appreciate
the presentation today of Her Excellency Mrs. Ebun Jusu,
Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Sierra Leone, and we thank her for her
statement.
We are pleased to hear of the achievements of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone over the years, and we
wish to commend its members on their important work.
Guatemala, which is also emerging from an armed
conflict, recognizes the important and valuable role
of such a court in fighting impunity and in enforcing
justice in the country.
We recognize the important contribution of
the Special Court for Sierra Leone to national and
international criminal justice through its legal
proceedings against those individuals who bear the
greatest responsibility for the serious violations of
international humanitarian law and of Sierra Leone’s
national law committed since 30 November 1996.
We also underscore the Court’s contribution to
national reconciliation and to the restoration and
maintenance of peace in Sierra Leone and in its region.
We applaud its historic contribution to the
understanding of the impact of armed conflict on women

12-53881

S/PV.6844

and girls, reflected in its jurisprudence and its treatment
of survivors as participants in post-conflict justice.
We look forward to the final outcome of the Charles
Taylor case, a paradigm case in the international criminal
justice sphere, expected to conclude by 30 September,
2013.
We recognize the complex work that the Court has
been conducting since its establishment in 2002 and
look forward to the successful completion of its duties
in September 2013. In that regard, we urge that the
transition process is orderly and effective and that the
Residual Special Court for Sierra Leone performs its
duties in a timely and efficient manner.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:
“The Security Council expresses its warm
appreciation to the President and Prosecutor of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone for their briefing to
the Security Council on 9 October 2012.
“The Security Council reiterates its strong
support for the Special Court and commends the
progress the Special Court has achieved. The
Security Council particularly notes the contribution
of the Special Court to strengthening stability in
Sierra Leone and the subregion and bringing an end
to impunity.
“The Security Council congratulates the
Special Court on the completion of the trial
proceedings in the case of Charles Taylor on
30 May 2012. The Security Council takes note of
the commencement of appellate proceedings in the
case of Charles Taylor and the projected schedule
for the completion of those appellate proceedings
by 30 September 2013.
“The Security Council also acknowledges the
Special Court’s progress towards completion. The
Security Council underlines its expectation that all
organs of the Special Court will do their utmost to
finish the remaining work of the Court, including any
contempt cases, in accordance with the completion
strategy.
“The Security Council commends the
important outreach activities of the Special Court

12-53881

in bringing its judicial work to the attention of the
people of Sierra Leone and Liberia, and thereby
contributing to the restoration of the rule of law
throughout those countries and the region.
“The Security Council commends the Special
Court for the important contribution made to
international criminal justice concerning the crimes
within its jurisdiction, namely, crimes against
humanity, serious violations of article 3 common to
the Geneva Conventions and of Additional Protocol
II, and other serious violations of international
humanitarian law, as well as certain crimes under
Sierra Leonean law, and recognizes its work in
the areas of women, peace and security, and the
protection of children affected by armed conflict,
including through its outreach and witness support
programmes.
“The Security Council recognizes the need to
address residual matters after the closure of the
Court, including the supervision of the enforcement
of sentences for convicted persons, the protection
of witnesses, and the preservation of the archives
of the Special Court. In this regard, the Security
Council welcomes the Agreement between the
United Nations and the Government of Sierra
Leone on the Establishment of a Residual Special
Court for Sierra Leone.
“The Security Council urges the international
community to continue to support the Special
Court as it moves into its final stage of work.
“The Security Council in particular takes
note of the Special Court’s ongoing and urgent
need for financial support. The Security Council
emphasizes the vital need for further pledges of
voluntary contributions in order to allow the Special
Court to complete its mandate in a timely manner.
The Security Council calls upon Member States to
contribute generously to the Special Court and for
the implementation of the Agreement establishing
the Residual Special Court for Sierra Leone, and
encourages the Secretary-General to cooperate
with the Registrar of the Special Court in order to
find practicable solutions to address the needs of
the Residual Special Court in the most efficient and
effective manner.
“The Security Council will continue to offer
strong support to the Special Court as it nears

17

S/PV.6844

the completion of its mandate and to the Residual
Special Court as it commences its functioning.”
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Council under the symbol S/PRST/2012/21.

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m

18

12-53881
