16

General Aa1embl,.-Twent7-fifth See1ion

Noting with increasing concern that nuclear weaPon
tests in the atmosphere and underground are continuing,
Taking into account that several concrete suggestions have been set forth in the Conference of the
Committee on Disarmament as to possible provisions in
a treaty banning underground nuclear weapon tests,
1. Urges all States that have not yet done so to
adhere without further delay to the Treaty Banning
Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer
Space and under Water;
d
2. Calls upon all nuclear-weapon States to suspen
nuclear weapon tests in all environments;
3. Requests the Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament to continue, as a matter of urgency, its
deliberations on a treaty banning underground nuclear
weapon tests, taking into account the proposals already
made in the Conference as well as the views expressed
at the current session of the General Assembly, and to
submit to the Assembly at its twenty-sixth session a
special report on the results of its deliberations.
1919th plenary meeting,
7 December 1970.
2664 (XXV). Implementation of the results of
the Conferenc.e of Non-Nuclear-Weapon States

The General Assembly,
Having reviewed the report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of the results of the Conference
of Non-Nuclear-Weapon States, 111 prepared in pursuance of General Assembly resolution 2605 A
(XXIV) of 16 December 1969,
Having reviewed in particular the comprehensive
report, annexed thereto, regarding action taken by the
International Atomic Energy Aaency on the recommendations of the Conference ofNon-Nuclear-Weapon
States, 20
Recognizing the importance of increasing the number
of major nuclear proJects in the developing countries,
Noting with satisfaction that the International Atomic
Energy Agency is maintaining a fund of special fissionable materials and intends to continue its efforts to
ensure the supply to States members of the Agency,
when required, of such materials, including materials
for power reactors,
Appreciating the assistance given by the United
Nations Development Programme, through the International Atomic Energy Agency, to meet the growing
demand of developing countries in the field of the
peaceful uses of atomic energy,
Noting the launching in 1970 of the International
Nuclear Information Service to improve the identification and availabilit.Y of information relating to nuclear
science and its applications for peaceful purposes,
Noting the recent steps taken by the International
Atomic Energy Agency tc ,r et its increasing responsibilities,
1. Notes with satisfaction the report of the Secretary-General and the reports of the International Atomic
Energy Agency annexed thereto;21
2. Takes note of the increase in the target for voluntary contributions to the programme of technical assistance of the International Atomic Energy Agency and
19 A/8079.
20 A/8079, annex.
21 A/8079 and Add.1.

draws the attention of States members of the Agency
to the appeals made to increase the funds availa6le to
the Agency for multilateral assistance in the nuclear
field;
3. Recommends that the international sources of
finance should keep under review their policies regarding
the financing of meritorious nuclear projects, bearing
in mind not only the short-range but also the lon,range contribution such projects may make to economic
and technical development;
4. Invites the specialized agencies, the International
Atomic Energy Agency and other bodies to punue
as appropriate their action concerning the recommendations contained in the resolutions of the Conference of
Non-Nuclear-Weapon States;
5. Invites the Director-General of the International
Atomic Ener$Y Agency, in consultation with the specialized agencies and other bodies concerned, to submit,
in his annual report to the General Assembly, information on further developments concerning the question
of the implementation of the results of the Conference
of Non-Nuclear-Weapon States;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to include in the
provisional agenda of the twenty-sixth session of the
General Assembly the question of the implementation
of the results of the Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon States.
1919th plenary meeting,
7 December 1970.
2665 (XXV). E8tabll8hment, within the framework of the International Atomic Energy
Agency, of an international 1ervice for nu•
clear explosions for peaceful purpoaea under
appropriate international control

The General Assembly,
Having reviewed the report of the International
Atomic Energy Aaency 22 on the establishment, within
the framework of the International Atomic Energy
Agency, of an international service for nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes under appropriate international control,
Appreciating the work undertaken by the International Atomic Energy Agency in this respect,
Noting that the International Atomic Energy Agency
has convened a number of expert groups to advise
the Director-General of the Agency on the technical
aspects of this technology and on the character of the
international observation it might perform pursuant to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons,
1. Expresses its appreciation of the studies recently
performed on this subject;
2. Commends the International Atomic Energy
Agency for its efforts to compile and evaluate information on the present status of the technology and to
make it available on an international scale;
3. Requests the International Atomic Energy
Agency to continue and intensify its programme in
this field;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to include in
the provisional agenda of the twenty-sixth session of
the General Assembly an item entitled "Establishment,
within the framework of the International Atomic
Energy Agency, of an international service for nuclear
22 See

A '8080.

Reeolutlon1 adopted on the reporll of the Flnt Committee

explosions for peaceful purposes under appropriate
international control".
1919th, plenary meeting,
7 December 1970.

2666 (XXV), Status of the implementation of
General AHemhly resolution 2456 B
(XXIII) concerning the signature and ratification of Additional Protocol D of the
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear
W eapon1 In Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco)
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1911 (XVIII) of 27 November 1963, in which it expressed its confidence that the
States that possess nuclear weapons would give their
full co-operation for the effective reali7.ation of the
initiative aimed at the military denuclearization of
Latin America,
RecalUng also its resolution 2286 (XXII) of S
December 1967, in which it welcomed with special
satisfaction the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America (Treat7. of Tlatelolco) 2•
and declared that the Treaty constituted an event of
~st~c significance in the efforts to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons and to promote international peace and security,
Bearing in mind that the Treaty has an Additional
Pro~l II, which was opened for signature by States
possessmg nuclear weapons on 14 February 1967
Noting that the Conference of Non-Nuclear-We;pon
States, in its resolution B,24 expressed the conviction
t:!3at, for the maximum effectiveness of any treaty establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone, the co-operation of
the nuclear-weapon States is necessary and that such
co-operation should take the form of commitments
likewise undertaken in a formal international instrumen~ which is legally binding, such as a treaty, convention or protocol,
Considering that accession to that Protocol only entails the following obligations for the nuclear-weapon

States:

. ~a) To respect, in all its e,:tpress aims and proV1S1ons, the statute of denucleanzation of Latin America in respect of warlike purposes, as defined delimited
and set forth in the Treaty of Tlatelolco,
'
(b) Not to contribute in any way to the performance
of . acts involving a violation of the obligations of
article 1 of the Treaty in the territories to which the
Treaty applies,
(c) Not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons
against the contracting parties of the Treaty,
Convinced that these obligations are entirely in conformity with the general obligations assumed under
the Charter of the United Nations, which every Member of the Organization has solemnly undertaken to
fulfil in good faith, as set forth in Article 2 of the
Charter,
Noting that, despite the appeals that the General
Assembly has addressed to them on two occasions in
resolutions 2286 (XXII) of 5 December 1967 ~d
2456 B (XXIII) of 20 December 1968, and the appeals they have received from the Conference of
28 Unit~d Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 634 (1968), No. 9068.
24 Official Records of the General Assembly Twenty-third

Session, agenda item 96, document A/7277 and° Corr.l and 2,
p. s.

17

Non-Nuclear-Weapon States, in resolution B, and from
the General Conference of the A,ency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America, in resolution 1 (1), 211 only two of the States that posseu
nuclear weapons have so far signed Additional Protocol II and only one has ratified it,
Noting also that the Treaty of Tiatelolco, which has
been signed by twenty-two Latin American States. la
already in force for sixteen of them,
Bearing in mind the repeatedly stated declaratiom
of the nuclear-weapon States to the effect that nuclearweapon-free zones established on the initiative of the
States within the zone should be supported,
Noting that the Treaty of Tiatelolco is the only one
it has been possible to conclude for the establishment
of such a zone in a densely populated area and that,
as a result of the Treaty, there already exists a statute
of total absence of nuclear weapons covering an area
of 6.6 million square kilometres with a population of
approximately 117 million inhabitants,
Noting also that the A$Cncy for the Prohibition of
Nuclear Weapons in Latin America has been duly
establi~hed in conformity with the Treaty and became
operative on 2 September 1969,
1. Reaffirms the apPCals it has addressed to the
nuclear-weapon States, m its resolutions 2286 (XXII)
and 2456 B (XXIII), to sign and ratify Additional
Protocol II of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco) as
soon as possible;
2. Notes with satisfaction that one of those States
has already signed and ratified the Protocol and that
another has signed it and is now actively en1aged in
the ratification process;
3. Deplores that not all nuclear-weapon States have
as yet signed the Protocol;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-sixth session an item entitled "Status of the
implementation of General Assembly resolution 2666
(XXV) concerning the signature and ratification of
Additional Protocol II of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of
Tiatelolco) ";
S. Requests the Secretary-General to amnge for
transmittal of the present resolution to the nuclearweapon States and to inform the General Assembly
at its twenty-sixth session of any measure adopted by
them in order to implement it.
1919th plenary meeting,
7 December 1970.
2667 (XXV). Economic and social consequeneee
of the armaments race and it• extremely
harmful effects on world peace and security
The General Assembly,
Conscious of the threat to mankind posed by the
ever spiralling arms race, especially in view of the
existing large stockpiles of, and impending new qualitative advances in, nuclear armaments,
Aware that world military expenditures have been
continuously increasing, in spite of the achievements
in the field of arms limitation and disarmament during
the 1960s,
Convinced that unless vigorous measures are taken
without delay to stop the arms race and to make con2G See A/7681,

annex, chapter I.
