UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL
RECORDS
FORTIETH

YEAR

2598*

MEETINO:

21 JUNE 1985

NEW YORK
CONTENTS
Page

RovisJonal agenda (WAgendai2.599

1

,...,................................

AdoptJon of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

dated 17 June 1985 from the Permanent Rcpmsntativc of Etotswana to the
UnitcdNatioRoadbcsocdtotkcReeiQentoitlrtgccvrityCollRCil(8/17239)...

J

htter

s/w.2598

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with tigures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol s/ . . . ) are normally published in
quarterly Supplments of the O#cti Reconh of the Security Councit. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
3Ite resolutions of the Security Council. numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 19&, are published in yearly volumes of Resokionk and Dec&ons of the
Sect&y CoMcil. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted lefoff 1 January l%S. became fully operative on that date.

259&b MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 21 June 1985, at 10.30 a.m.
“1 have the honour to request the Security Council to
permit Mr. Uddhav Deo Bhatt, Vice-Chairman of the
Special Committee against Apartheid, to participate
under the provisions of rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure in the consideration of the
item ‘Letter dated I7 June 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of Botswana to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council”‘.

President: Mr. D. H. N. ALLEYNE
(Trinidad and Tobago).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso. China, Denmark, Egy& France,
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

On previous occasions the Council has extended invitations to representatives of other United Nations bodies in
connection with the consideration of matters on its
agenda. In accordance with past practice in this matter, I
propose that the Council extend an invitation under rule
39 of its provisional rules of procedure to the ViceChairman of the Special Committee against Aparrheid.

Pmvkioaal agettda (S/AgenW2!Wg)
I.

Adoption

of the agenda

2.

Letter &ted 17 June 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Botswana to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/17279)
i%e meeting was called to. or&r

II Ms so ikci&li

at II.50 a.m.

3. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council is meeting
today in response to the request contained in a letter dated
I7 June 1985 from the representative of Botswana
addressed to the President of the Council [S/17279).
Members of the Council also have before them document
S/ 17291, which contains the text of a draft resolution submitted by Burkina Faso, Egypt, India, Madagascar, Peru
and Trinidad and Tobago.

The ogen& was aabpted.

4. I should like to draw the attention of members of the
Council to the following documents: Wl7274, letter dated
I4 Jtme 1985 from the repmsentative of Botswana to the
Resident of the Council; s/17278. letter dated 14 Jum
from the repmsentative of Zimbabwe to the President of
the Council; S/17282, letter dated I7 June from the representative of South Africa to the Secretary-General:
S/17283, ktter dated 18 June from the representative of
Democratic Kampuchea to the President of the Council;
S/17288. letter dated 29 June from the representative of
Spain to the Secretary-General; s/17289. letter dated 20
June from the representative of Italy to the SecretaryGeneral; and S/17290, letter dated 20 June from the repmsentative of Liberia to the President of the Council.

I. The PRESIDENT: 1 should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the reprmentatives of the
Bahamas, Botswana. the German Demoaatic Republk,
Lesotho. Liberia. Seychelles, South Africa and the Sudan in
which they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, 1 propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to parlicipate in the discussion,
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 ofthe provisional rules
of procedure.
Al the invitolioh of the Pees&tit. MLIJ Chkpe (Botswana)
took

o place

(II the CotmU

mbie:

Mr. Schlegel (German Dewerotic

Mr.

Hepburn

(Bahamas):

Rep&/k):

Mr. Makeka
(Seychelles);
Mr.
of the Comcil

5. The first speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
p-ly-arG , ,.,,.
..L,v “*“*,I,~.
c...,:...,
Y T1. m:A.w
L..-.
4,.
h.r.ep. ,. ~,C~
“...“..I.
and invite her to make her statement,

2. The PRESIDENT: I shouM like to inform the Council
that I have received a ktter dated 19 June 1ffS from the
Acting Chairman of the Special Committee against Apthe/d. which reads as follows:

6. Miss CHIEPE (Botswana): Mr. President, let me
begin by acknowledging the satisfaction that derives from
repmemtive
of Trinidad and
S&tgyWhthCCbk.S
Tobago, a country with which Botswana enjoys the most
cordial relations. I must also express to you most sincerely

(Lesho):
Mr. Ko/o (L&ria);
Ms. Go&&r
van Schimding
(South AfTka) and Mr. Biri&
the p[IIEps reserved for them at the side

(&km)

teak

chamber.

I

our gratitude for the expeditious manner in which you
acceded to our request for this meeting.

mandos found not one military camp or centre on their
arrival in our capital ou that fatcfuul Friday morning, but a
peaceful, even placid town, in bed, fast asleep. It has been
the sacrosanct policy of the Botswana Government since
independence never to permit the presence in our country
of instruments of war intended to be employed against any
of our neighbours. That we have apprehended, tried publicly in our courts of law and imprisoned or deported all
those we come into contact with who carry weapons of
war bears more than ample testimony to our adherence
and commitment to the inviolability cf our policy.

7. Your predecessor performed brilliantly in the dir
charge of his onerous responsibilities as President of the
Council for the month of May. We extend to him our
sincere congratulations.
8. Thr case we have brought to the Council is a simple
one. though tragic. The world already knows that on Friday, 14 June 1985, at 0140 hours, the peaceful capital of
my country, Botswana, wzs invaded by South African
commandos who murdered in cold blood, in their sleep.
six South African refugees, two residents, two visitors, one
of whom was a six-year-old child from Lesotho, and two
Botswana nationals. The invasion was unprovoked and
unwarranted. It was the culminarion of a progressively
aggressive South African attitude towards my country, an
attitude that has deteriorated as the agitation for change
has intensitied inside Sottsh Africa.

13. However, in fulfilment of our statutory obligations as
a State party to the Convention Relating to the Status of
Refugees signed at Geneva in 1951’ and the Convention of
the Organ&ion
of African Unity Governing the Specitic
Aspects of Refugee Problems in Africa concluded at Addis
Ababa in 1969*. and as a humanitarian and moral obligation and duty, we do give political asylum to refugees
fleeing the persecution and the brutalities that result from
the inhumanities of apartheid in South Africa. This we will
do, regardless of the consequences, for we are a freedomloving people and country. It would he morally repugnant
to us to deny hospitality to our fellow men in their flight
from racial tyranny.

9. Botswana and South Africa have always coexisted in
peace, despite their conflicting philosophies of lie. My
people abhor without reservation the evil policy of uparrheid and the rabid racism that feeds and sustains it, but
they are realistic enough to appreciate that they and the
people of South Africa have been thrown together by fate
to share space in the part of the African subcontinent they
presently occupy. and will always occupy. They have to
live together in peace, or they will perish together in conflict. That is why my country has never allowed its very
determined opposition to umheid
to tmdermine itscommitment to the principle of peaceful cacxistencc. Ottr Fidelity to this principle is unquestionable. our determination to
uphold it sacrosanct.

14. The train of developments leading to the Friday
aggression against our capital is an uncomplicated one.
Having failed to get us to sign a non-aggression pact whose
utility could be best known to and appreciated by South
Africa, in January of this year the rulers of South Africa.
through the bantustan of Bophuthatswana. issued an
unveiled threat that unless Botswana stopped allowing its
territory to he u.d as a launching pad to attack South
Africa, South Africa would invade Botswana and take
retaliatory action. When we publicized that threat, the
South African Minister for Foreign Affairs Mr. Botha,
denied that it had been isued by his country and said he
had simply reported what he had been told by Bophuthatswana. For our part. we reminded 8outh Africa of our
well-known policy regarding the rtgime that governs the
presence of refugees in our country.

IO. This is so despite the fact that south Africa has. in
the past two years. continuously insisted that we sign with
it a non-aggression pact, as if our country is capable of
committing an act or acts of aggression agahtst so deadly
powerhI a neighbour. My country has commtly refused
to sign such a pact. We would be mad even to imagine that
we could attack South Africa. Botswana i, a peace-loving
country wh;ase only desire is to develop -ically
and
coexist peacefully with all its neighbours.

15. At the request of the South African Minister for Foreign Affairs, a meeting was arranged for 22 February 1985
between him and myself. In the meantime. on I3 February, nine days before the meeting was to take place, a
bomb blasted a house in Gaborone. our capital, in which
some South African refugees lived. Miraculously, the occupants escaped unhurt. On 22 February the two sides met
and had full and frank dixusrions on the state of relations
between our two countries. Botswana on= again explained at length why it refused to sign a non-aggressioa
pact. We aurgued that, since it was neither our intention to
launch an attack a@nst South Afriw my &! WC !EI\?* !.k
capacity to do so, we saw no reason why we should sign a
non-aggression pact with South Africa. We harboured no
warlike intentions or ambitions towards South Africa, for
that would be sheer madness on our part, as we had
repcatediy stated.

I I. We have repeatedly argued tkt the signing of a socalled non-aggr&on
pact with South Africa would, in
addition to compromising our sovereignty. serve no w&l
purpose.since a mere signature cannot cnhan~~ our capacity to be more vigilant than we are now against guerrilla
inftltration into South Africa. if &uth Africa itself, with
all the overwhelming murca~
at its command, is
incapable-as is obviously the case-of scaling its borders
dwa,nai iniiiirarion, how much more so oi our small country. with meagre resource?
12. Our country has always been punctilio&y
scrupulous in honouring its word, The truth is that we have never
alhwd. can never allow and will never allow our vulncrable country to be used as a base for guerrilla operations
against South Africa. That is why the South African corn-

16. In answer to the hackneyed South African staple
charge that freedom fighters use our country to infiltrate
2

South Africa, we aurgued that. jnst as South Africa neither
allowed its nationals to leave their country as refugees nor
allowed them hack in as so-called terrorists. but thot they
constantly eluded it. despite that country’s highly sophisticated and practically unliniited intelligence-gathering
capacity and over-abundant material, financial and human
resources. Botswana cannot be Named when the same
people occasionally elude us and cross into and attack
South Africa. We reminded Mr. Botha of the case of two
British tomists who had a few days earlier been murdered in
Mozambique by people who had crossed into Mozambique
from South Africa and returned to that country after committing the murder. We asked him if South Africa were to
blame for allowing them to commit the murder. Mr. Botha
agreed that a Government could not be blamed for acts of
terrorism perpetrated in such circumstances, In keeping
with our well-known policy and tradition of honesty and
fair-mindedness, we have always asked the South Africans
to give us timely warning whenever they knew of incidents
which needed to be followed up quickly. We reminded Mr.
Botha of that tradition at the meeting of 22 February.

block of flats adjacent to a primary school blew up as the
owner tried to start it. Needless to say. the hapless refugee
was blown to smithereens. Had he started the car earlier,
when schoolchildren were tiling in and workers going to
work, innocent schoolchildren, Botswana citizens and foreign nationals would have been maimed or killed. The
perpetrators of those ghastly atrocities have now revealed
themselves.
21. During the week beginning 3 June, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of South Africa suggested that we have a
meeting either on 26 June or 2 July. His office was
informed that I was away and owing to standing commitments could not meet him before 23 July. In the small
hours of I4 June, South African commandos raided our
capital, and later the same morning of 14 June, before we
could recover from the shock of the early morning’s carnage, Mr. Botha sent a telex to my offke accepting 23 July
as suitable for a meeting.
22. If this is not a Jekyl and Hyde situation, it is ditlicult
to imagine one, when a responsible Minister can appear to
want to discuss issues of mutual interest while at the same
time he plans and executes the most cold-blooded terrorism with mathematical precision. Is the meeting being
called just to replay the televised wanton destruction,
accompanied by the display of sadistic pleasure at the fantastic and intoxicating success of the operation? Or is it to
deliver uttotlter foretaste of things to come when South
African commandos will once more strike Botswana with
ruthless efficiency’? The warning has been given in no
uncertain terms. llte South African newspapers, led by the
Govemtnent-aupported
28e U~izen,radio and television,
and the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Chief of the
Army ate beside them&es with the sheet delight they
have derived from the whole sordid aflair.

If. We did not agree on everything; we did not solve
everything. But the meeting ended amicably with the
South African Minister for Foreign Affairs assuring US
that South Africa fully believed what we had said and
therefore would not again ask us to sign any agreement.
He also assured us that South Africa would no longer
block our economic projects. which they had attempted to
link to the signing of a non-aggression pact, in contravention of the terms of the Customs Union Agreement to
which both our countries belong. Mr. Botha then
announced to the world that our meeting had been so
fruitful that Botswana would no longer be pressed by
South Africa to sign a non-aggression pact.
IS. The sense of relief we felt can be imagined. We went
beck to Botswana with a sense of achievement, and 1 was
abk to say the following to the Botswana Parliament:

23. Tlte excuse given by South Africa is that the recent
attempt in Cap Town on the lives of two Coloured
members of parhatttent was pktnned and executed from
G&orone, and it was the last atraw for the South African
Govemrnmt.

“I am pleased to inform honourabk members that,
after diffiiult negotiations lasting more than a year, during whiih South Africa pressed Botswana to sign a nonaggression accord with it, the South Aftin
Government has fhtally accepted our stand and publicly
announced that there is no need for Botswana and
South Africa to sign an accord, It is my hope that this
particular chapter in our relations with South Africa is
now closed and never to be reopened.”

24. Since Cape Term is about 2,000 kilometres from
Gaborone, our @taI, several questions arise in one’s
mind. fn view of South Africa’s sophisticated
intelligence.
comnttmkmiom and other resources. why did they not
intercept and/or forestall the operation? Was it because
the Ciovemntettt of South Africa wanted the operation to
succeed in order to use the assassination of the Coloured
IUPs to strengthen Pretoria’s war against the ANC (A/rlun
Narld
coyltnr
o/ Snd Alncrr)? Was it in order to
pnttny Borswana as an unsafe country, the centre ofguerrilla activity, and frighten prospective investors away from
It? Did South Africa allow it to happen in order to have a
pretext to launch an attack on a peace-loving neighbouring
country7

19. We were pka.sed with what appeared to us to be a
clear signal of the end of the inexplicable nastiness of Pm@
ria’s attitnde towards our country, but not nafve enough to
believe that all would henceforth be plain sailing. We could
never be lulled into believing that we had suddenly earned
the unquestioning respect and trust oi a seii-appointed
regional Power accustomed to bullying its weak neighbours. We expected more bullying and arm-twisting in
some other direction, but not what happened on Friday. I4
June.

25. Yes, more nagging questions. If the real reason for
the brutal attack.on our small defenceless capital was to
flush out ANC nerve centre, as was the reason given for
theabortedraidontheC&indaoilcompkxafewweeks
ago, then, timt. would every house in which a refugee lived
be a nerve centre? Secondly, could that justify the rhoot-

20. On Tuesday, I4 May. at around 1000 hours. a cat
belonging to a South African refugee parked outside a
3

ing, point blank. of a frightened. fleeing six-year-old child?
Thirdly, did they have to shoot a Dutch couple because
they lived in a house that had been vacated by the ANC
refugees a month earlier? They should have known this,
since they claim to know everything that takes place in the
houses which they attacked on 14 June. Fourthly. why did
they murder two Botswana women who had absolutely
nothing to do with the ANC? Fifthly, why did they shoot
at Botswanas going to their homes from a dinner at a
hotel?

The so-called ANC guerrillas lived all over town because
the houses they occupied were located all over town. These
were refugees who could not be moved to the refugee centre, called Dukwe, in the north because they were in established employment; and so they lived peacefully with their
families in ordinary houses mostly rented from the Botswana Housing Corporation. Some in fact lived even
closer to the South African border, in a village adjoining
Gaborone. a village traversed by a popular highway to
South Africa-yes. next to a popular road to South Africa.
Even there the South African commandos murdetcd some
of what they called ANC guerrillas and two of our
natiorrls.

26. Let us look at the particulars of the victims of the
Friday attack to see if there is any truth to Pretoria’s
charge that they were guerrillas planning military attacks
against South Africa from our capital.

31. But even more fantastic is the fact that one of the
murdered “ANC guerrillas” occupied a house that was
sandwiched between two houses owned by two members
of the Botswana police, the same police whom refugees
should dread if they had anything to hide, such as the
planning from our soil of military attacks against South
Africa. How could they have engaged in guerrilla activities
against South Africa in that kind of location without being
discovered?

27. The murdered l‘ANC guerrillas” were: a Wyear-old
man who emigrated from South Africa in the early 195Us,
the holder of a residence permit that was to expire in
December this year; a 7l-year-old man who came to Botswana in 1981 to spend the remaining days of his waning
life in peace and freedom in exile; a 47-year-old businessman and his social-worker wife who worked for our Ministry of Local Government and Lands; a student at the
University of Botswana; a Dutch national of Somali origin
who worked for a data-processing company and may
never have heard of the ANC, a musician; a teacher at one
of our secondary schools; a young visitor who had been a
student in South Africa; two young Botswana housekeep
em, who very likely had never heard of the ANC, and,
worst of all, a six-year-old child who, as I said earlier, had
been shot to death fleeing for his dear life. The six
wounded are: a Dutch national who, like her Somali husband murdered in the raid, is not even remotely connected
to the ANC, two innocent Botswana who were shot going
about their own business in their own home town and
country; and three refugees, one of whom was a 15yearold dependent of a refugee,

32. All the houses attacked by the South African commandos were scattered all over the city. They were well
known to everybody, including our police, and, as it has
turned out, even to South Africa itself. They could not by
any stretch of the imagination be used as guerrilla bases or
nerve centres and fail to attract the vigilance of our police
force. Inspection of what remains of the destroyed houses
has turned up no evidence that the houses had ever been
used, as charged by Mr. Botha: no caches of weapons,
other than the two suspicious pieces given to the pressthe pieces could simply have come from South Africa’s
own arsenal to try to prove a very difftcult point-were
found, no dramatic, staged display of morning-after loot
in Pretoria and Capt Town. There was. on the contrary,
overwhelming evidence that the murdered refugees had
been nothing but peaceable civilian refugees who had been
so nonchalant about their innocent stay in Botswana that
they did not even have a knife to defend themselves with
when they were shot in their sleep.

28. ‘Ihe are the so+alled guerrillas of the ANC-all.
including the eix-year-old, who were said to be the masterminds of the raging revolution in South Africa. Now let us
look at the geographical location in our capital of the
llowcs they occupied.

33. Permit me at this stage to comment on some of the
specific alkgations, the facts and the fiction, contained in
the press statement made on I4 June by Mr. Rotha. I shall
comment only on those I have not already touched on.

29. Gabot0.r is a free and open city accessible to visitors, including South Africans, who require no visa to
enter our country. The city is only I2 kilometres from our
common border with South Africa and is the location of a
popular Southern Sun casino hotel heavily patron&d by
South Afric-ns of all colours and races in search par&uiarly of a weekend of non-racial freedom. These funseeking, freedom-hungry victims of the Group Areas Act
and Immorality Act-the tatter now abolished-are
free
to walk the stmets of our capital, visit their friends in its
suburbs and go anywhere they like.

34. In the second paragraph of Mr. Botha’s statement it
is stated that my predecessor, Mr. Archie Mogwe, was
given a list at a meeting held on 21 April 1983 at Jan Smuts
Airport, Johannesburg, containing names of “terrorists in
Botswana totuther with an indication of their active panicipation in the planning and intended execution of viclena in South Africa” [see S/17282, annox]. Yes, the list
was given to him and the allegations were thoroughly
investigated. it turned out that the so-called terrorists were
ordinary refugees who had never violated the legal &ime
which governs their stay in our country and their recognition as refugees. Most of them were not even in Botswana
at the time. having left our country some time earlier to
seek safer refuge abroad. Thus, we could not take action

30. This L dz s :rRa!! city dciC&ed 50 ipiiy by ihe
London obsprvrr Sunday last as being “the size of an
English market town, the kind of place where everybody
know everybody else”-indeed,
the kind of place where
not even one guerrilla can hi& without being discovered in
no time, let alone so many living publicly in our midat.
4

against innocent refubces legally resident in our country,
strictly abiding by the laws which govern them, or against
people who had left the country.

39. But all this is most irrelevant. for the undebatable
issue is that South Africa has violated the territorial inte$rity of my country with the impunity of a modem scienttftc
Goliath. And why has it done so? Botswana is not responsible for the crimes committed inside South Africa bjj the
policies of upartheid or by those who enforce them. We are
not responsible for the mounting upheaval in that country.
South Africa, and only South Africa, is responsible.

35. Mr. Botha speaks at length in his statement about
several meetings held in the course of 1984 between Botswana and South African officials aimed at reaching an
agreement on ‘*appropriate measures*’ to be taken “to prevent the planning and execution of acts of violence, sabotage and terrorism against each other” [ibid.]. This is clearly
a nostalgic reference to the long series of meetings we had
with South Africa on the signing of a non-aggression pact.
Mr. Rotha knows that Botswana has always co-operated
with his country on matters of common security. We have
done so without the encumbrances of a meaningless formal treaty. so the measures he is referring to have always
been there. That is why we have arrested, charged, imprisoned and deported those who have violated our policy of
not allowing them to operate from our country.

40. We have long warned that the pestilence of racism
will consume all of us in the region if it is allowed to go on
unchecked; no commando raids against the front-line
States will bring South Africa, or the region as a whole,
nearer to zalvntion. Salvation lies soiely in putting an end
once for all to the brutalities of upartheidin South Africa
EOthat there will be no more Sowetos, Uitenhages. Sharpevilles, Langas and the rest, no more refugees scattered all
over the subcontinent and the world at large taring to
return to their country at all costs.

36. There is. of co~me, a presumption in Mr. Botha’s
statement which must be rejected with the contempt it
deserves. This presumption is that but for the intransigence
of the political side of the Botswana Government our security services would have signed some non-aggression pact
“because of a realization on their part of the destabilizing
effect of the growing ANC presence in Botswana” [Ibid].
This is a fabrication. No part of the Botswana Govemment has ever felt that a solution to the problem of security
along our common border with South Africa lies in the
signing of a non-aggression pact; the contrary is true.

41. ‘Ilte ANC, the dreaded scourge of white minority
rule in South Africa, would not need to resort to armed
struggle as an instrument with which it seeks to pry open
the barred doors of freedom if the movement were allowed
to operate freely and to articulate without fear of persecution the frustrated aspirations of a black South Africa that
has been wallowing in misery for so long.
42. For my people in their hour of crisis and tragedy I
ask of the Council nothing more or less than the strongest
possible condemnation, unequivocally expressed, of South
Africa’s brutal terrorism perpetrated against our capital
and against refugees given refuse in our country. I appeal
to the Council to demand that South Afriat desist from
f&&r acts of terrorism against Botswana and abandon its
planned attack on our country. I appeal to the Council
and to the international community to find ways of ensuring security in our region. I request the Council to dispatch
a mission to see and assesson itx behalf the damage caused
and to examine the question of possible assistance.

37. Mr. Botha further lays great stress on what he calls
repeated waminga by his Government about “ANC terrorist activities” in Botswana. He admits having thnatened in
January to invade Botswana if wt continued to allow the
ANC to use it as an “infiltration route to South Africa”.
What Mr. Both eannot admit is that in all thc3e charges
hehaeranlygivenusproofor~tltstthcANCis
indeed doing from our territory what he says they are
doing. All WC are given are &en nebulous vituperative
statements of charges based on mete suspicion, or simply
dehkrate fabrications de&ted to force us to get rid of
gcnttlnc dtgcaa. Mr. Botha know that wtmever m arc
givenf&tswefouowthemuptmtilwcarcsatisfi~that
indecdm,oneisbrreki~outLa~byJ~grcountryas
an “infiltration route to South Africa”. llte facts are there
for anybody to set.

43. Let me end by assuring the Council that WCwill never
give up our values. As the President of Botswana said on
Satulliay,
“Botswatm wiU neither wawr nor compromise its
principled position of s&guafding
innocent lives that
are jeopardizcd and of providing a sanctuary for refit8#e. It is not poaiibk, in spite of all the military power
South Afrfca pcxsesa and may u&ash upon us, to
destroy our belief’ in the rule of bw, our traditions, our
customs and our dvilization.”

3% But South Africa till be asking for the impostdbk if
its new polii is that no country in its ncighbourhoad
should act as host to nfugees front South Africa and that
d should all treat victims ofoporrwand
facial tyranny
as enemies of “regional stability” and peace and accept the
cynical view that the most dangerous “terrorist’* is a South
African refugee who lives in Gaboronc, Maseru, Mbabane, Mapuro or Hararc and who keeps crossing into
South Africa clandestinely to spit his venom there. Our
very humanity, our sense of morality, the international
legal instruments relating to t&m
to which we arc party
and 0I’r love of freedom as a people will never allow us to
bar our doors a&wt victims of political circumstances.

lltat

is our fundamental

promise to the Council.

44. Mr. VERMA (India): It is with pieasure. Sir, that we
express once again our satisfacrion ai Yaing you i&i ii-i
Chair.
45. We are meeting today to consider the dastardly military attack, a week ago, by forcu of the racist Pretoria
r&he on Gaborone, the capital of Botswana. lltat attack
5

constitutes the latest entry in the grisly catalogue of South
Africa’s crimes against its independent African neighbours. The cowardly and brutal assault, under cover of
darkness, on innocent men, women and children, most of
them murdered in their beds, was indeed true to Ptetoria’s
style. No scruples appear to inhibit the racist r&me from
spilling innocent blood, whether within its own borders or
elsewhere in the entire region that is victim of its terror and
intimidation.

assistance and support to these countries to strengthen
their defences as well as to create conditions to avert
bloodshed in the whole of southern Africa.” [Ibid,
para. 68.1
49. The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries stands by
Botswana, a peace-loving, non-aligned country, in its hour
of travail. We assure the Government of Botswana of our
continuing solidarity and support.
50. Pretoria has once again put forward the familiar
argument seeking to justify its action in terms of the
defence of its own security. The statement of I4 June by
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the racist regime reads:

46. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Botswana
apprised the Council this morning of the details of the
latest act of aggression perpetrated by the fotces of the
racist regime against Botswana and the loss of human life
and material damage inflicted as a result. There can be
little doubt that South Africa’s action has been unprovoked, unjustified, premedittted and cold-blomied, that it
is in complete contravention of the Charter of the United
Nations and international law, and that it is in violation of
United Nations resolutions. It is an actiort that evokes our
strongest condemnation.

“The South African security forces had no alternative
but to protect South Africa and its people from the
increasing number of terrorist attacks emanating from
Botswana. . . .
“It is an established principle of international law
that a State may not permit on its territory activities for
the purpose of carrying out acts of violence on the territory of another State. It is equally well established that a
State has a right to take appropriate steps to protect its
own security and territorial integrity against such acts.**
[see s/f 7282, wme.c J

47. The Government of India issued the following statement on 18 June 1985:
“The Government of India have learnt of the umvarranted and unprovoked attack made by the tacist South
African regime on civilians residing in Botswana which
has resulted in the loss of several lives. This is the latest
in a series of brutal incidems caused by the racist
regime, which has shown no respect for the territorial
integrity or sovereignty of States which arc its neighbours. The savage killing of these people living in Botswana, a country whiih has given repeated assurances
of not permitting its territory to be used for launching
attacks on neighbouring countries, showa yet again that
the racist South African r6gime is willing to flagrantly
violate all laws of civilized behaviour. The Govemmem
of India stror@y condemns the racist South African
regime for perpetrating this outrage, which is part of its
continuing pattern of aggressive and unlawful behaviour towards its smaller and weaker neighbours. The
Government of India also offers its profound sympothka to the Government of Botswana and to the retativw of the deceas&.”

Such references to international law sound strange coming
from a regime that makes a mockery of law and, indeed, of
the elementary norms of civil&d behaviour.
51. The threat to the apn&e&f r&gime stems not from
peace-loving and law-abiding Botswana or Angola, or any
other State for that matter; that threat is rooted within
South Africa itself, embodied in the odious system of
apartheid, That system eats at its own vitals and is responsible for all the tension and instability that afflict southern
Africa. Pretoria’s forays against its smaller, wreker neighbours and its killing of defenceless people are mmly pan
of its attempts to place its own crimes at somebody else%
door. The Council must recqgnizc that fact and act
accordingly.
32, Mr. MAXEY (United Kingdom): I listened carefully
and with profound sympathy to the moving and eloquent
statement made by the Minister for Foreign Atfails of
Botswana this morning. 1 am sure other members of the
Council were similarly impressed.

48. The Seventh Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at New
Delhi from 7 to I2 March 1983, in its Politicai De&&m,
“noted with great concern the increased acts of military.
political and economic destahilization perpetrated by
the South African racist regime against the independent
neighbouring
States , . . [includirtg] Botswana”
[S/l5675 and Cow.! and 2, annex, sect. I, para. 6Oj.

53. It is an extraordinary and, perhaps, unprecedented
state of affairs that the Council should today be entering
its third separate debate within a single week on the
actions of one Member State. This, of itself, is a fact of
which all the pcopk of South Afti
~ow!d take note.
Though I appreciate the presence here today of the representative of South Africa and till listen carefully to what
he has to say this afternoon. 1 regret that his Government
all too often gives the impmssion that it dots not wish to
take account of the very serious prooredings of the Council. It would be most unwise for the South African Govem-

“commended the front-line States and other neighbouring States for their courage and &termination
in the
face of brazen intimidation by South Africa and called
upa!
the wor!d community to provide afl possible
6

ment to ignore the views expressed and the resolutions
adopted here.

ing that it enjoys not a vestige of support in the intemational community for such actions?

54. I need not rehearse the events which took place in the
capital city of Botswana in the early hours of 14 June; they
have been fully and faithfully described to us. Nor do I
wish to repeat the remarks which I made about the attack
on Gaborone in my statement to the Council on that same
day [25w/h mee&tg]. I have asked to speak, however,
because I wish to make emphatically clear at the beginning
of this debate that the British Government regards the
explanations which the Government of Sonth Africa has
sought to make since 14 June as entirely unsatisfactory
and in no way justifying the violation of sovereignty and
+he killing or wounding of innocent people.

59. I trust that the South African representative will at
once convey the strength of our feelings to his Govemment, and will persuade it to answer these questions in the
only acceptable way. In the meantime, I hope that Botswana’s many friends will join in providing all possible assistance and that the Council will take a clear and unanimous
decision today.
60. Mr. KHALIL (Egypt) (inrerpretarion from Arabic):
As the representative of the United Kingdom said at the
beginning of his statement, the Council is meetingto consider a third complaint within a week aga:nst the racist
Pretoria Government, which has persisted in committing
illegal acts and in its aggression against neighbouring
States. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Botswana has
unequivocally explained all the facts.

55. The United Kingdom is not blind to the complexities
of the internal situation in South Africa and to the tension
in that unhappy country. The United Kingdom is utterly
opposed to the use of violence and to acts of assassination.
But, in South Africa’s own best interests, as well as in the
interests of all neighbouring countries, the South African
Government must come to recognixe that a solution to its
internal problems will never be found by attacking neighbouring countries. It is for the people of South Africa-all
the people of South Africa, of whatever race or colour-to
resolve their own future. It is within South Africa, not
outside, that upur&id must be completely dismantled and
that different groups and races must learn to live together
in justice and equity and with full respt for the rights of
each individual-and
that will happen sooner or later.

61. It is ironic that the racist Pretoria rkgime should call
on a peace-loving, peaceful State such as Botswana, which
has no army, to enter into a so-called non-aggression pact.
The recent aggression against Botswana was committed
after a series of threats, which culminated in the perpetration of a deliberate, abominable act that can in no way be
justified or explained. We listened attentively to details of
the scope of that act of aggmssion, the deep psychological
effects and the loss of life and property, as described by the
Foreign Minister of Botswana.
62. Once again within a week, we are forced to repeat
that the situation requires the Council to apply the measures provided by the Charter of the United Nations in
order to deter the racist r&me. Egypt reiterates that it is
ready to go all the way with the Council, including the
application of measures under Chapter VI1 of the Charter.

56. As the Council knows, the British Government has
expressed its views on the attack on GaM~orte to the
Government of South Africa in the strongest possible
terms. The Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Alfairs, Sir Geoffrey Howe, has condemned the
violation of Botswana’s sovereignty and deplored South
Africa’s act of violence. He has left the Sot@. African
Government in no doubt that we regard the attack as
utterly indefensible.

63. Yesterday the repreacntative of the Government of
South Africa arrogantly told the Council of the conditions
that the racist dgim 4eek4 to impose on its tteighbours in
-Red
peaceful cocxistettce. Those words deceive no
one. Moreover, in pemkuhtg in violating Council resolutiotu, South Africa claims for itself the right to call its acts
of aggmsion Wot pursuit”.

57. We have at the same time kept in the closest possible
contact with the Government of Botswana, and have
offered our support. The relationship between Britain and
Botswana, as fellow members of the Commonwealth,
could not be warmer or more extensive, and I am delighted
today to renew our oiler of assistance to the Minister for
Foreign Allairs of Botswana. Her country, as I said on I4
June, threatens no one and has not the slightest intention
of attacking anyone. Botswana has lived in peace and
democracy since independence. The way in which Botswana has coped with the burdens of geography and of
nature and with conflict and turbulence in neighbouring
States has attracted universal admiration.

64. We ha= often dimmed the acts of the mcist
Government of Pmtoria. We hope that today the Council
will faa the deteriorating situation with the necessary
fimmess.
65. The PRESIDENT: lhe next speaker is the representative of the Bahamas, who wishes to make a statement in
his capacity as Chairman of the Group of Latin American
and Caribbean States for the month of June. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

58. ln attacking Gaborone, South Africa has made an
incomprehensible as well as a tragic error. Is it too much to
hope that the South African Government will itself
acknowledge this, and will at once repair the enormous
harm it has done? Is it too much to hope that South Africa
will desist henceforth from cross-border violence. recogniz-

66. Mr. HEPBURN (Bahamas): Statistics support the
view that the month of June is the luckiest for men.
because that is the period when most are chosen as husbands, For a slightly different reason, I4hatl have to adopt
7

June as my lucky month, having for the second time in as
many days had the honour to address the Council in this
Chamber. Who knows? Today is only 21 June, and, given
the state of affairs among nations on this civilized planet
on which we live, I may break yet another record.

metic changes that the South African Government has
brought into force uphold the sentiment just expressed. It
is a simple fact. The black majority have no role to play in
the system, either for themselves or for their country. Their
contribution must be made through subservience and deprivation. Is it any wonder, then, that raids like the one
perpetratedagainst the people of Botswana can be carried
out with such impunity?

67. The words “luck” and ‘civilized”, despite the frivolity and facetiousness their use may convey, are not cited
merely for levity, but to bring out the gravity and seriousness of the issue before us, so ably expressed by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Botswana. We may say, on the
one hand, that the people of Botswana had bad luck on 14
June and, on the other, that the Government of South
Africa used c%lized weapons to execute its nefarious plan.
The response by the Govcmment of Botswana to the
attack once again underscores a fundamental virtue inherent in persecuted people-the ability to persevere. Perseverance in this context is the reverse of subjugation or
fatalism, and it is for that spirit of patience and detetmination that we commend the black majority of South Africa
and, indeed, abused people everywhere.

72. We in the Latin American and Caribbean region feel
a sense of indignation as well as a sense of helplessness. We
speak here today because we are convinced that unity is
strength. We believe in the interdependence of all States
and the signiftcance of carrying one another’s burdens.
Above all, we believe in the sanctity of human lives and the
importance of justice.
73. We share in the sorrow that the bereaved families
must feel. We sympathize with the Government of Botswana, which, besides being frustrated, must harbour
anger, anxiety and fear of further aggression by South
Africa’s commandos.

68. By no stretch of the imagination could the United
Nations be called fledgling. Of course, maturity need not
be synonymous with age, but it can be assumed that the
Organization, which will be 40 years old in Cletobar, has in
that period of time experienced, in one fomt or another,
ewry international catastrophe. Time has shown that, no
matter how incensed or elated npmentatives might feel
about an issue, they could only rehash the old facts in a
new way, and that not very often. Similarly, the matter
before us is not a new one, but it augurs weIl for thii body
that, rather than the matter’s being shelved, it is being
recycled with the hope that the spin-off may IX put to
some other useful advantage.

74. We in the Latin American and Caribbean region welcome this occasion to reiterate our condemnation of all
acts of aggression, and in particular, the current attack
ma& against the people of the sovereign State of Botswana. We reject the reasons given as unjustiliIble, espy
cially since there have been mutual expressions of
willingness to negotiate and to seek the best methods of
fInding a just solution. We are cotteemed that the meaning
and value of trust is diminishing and that the South African Government will continue to make unilateral decisions
that eannot help but endanger the concept of international
peace and security. There is no doubt, then, that the South
African Government dtstrv#, the strongest condemnation
by the Counell.

8. llte South African Government’s installation of an
interim government in Windhoek, its violation of the
human rights of the people of Soweto, its dii
for the
territorial integrity of Angola and now the attack on the
capital of Botswana are clear signs that the Premtia r@inte
cannot be coaxed into peaceful change.

75. On b&l
of the Member States of I&t
America
and the Caribbean, I would wish the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Botswana to exprass our shteere condolences to
tItefamiliesofthevictimsandtoassuretheGovemtnent
anddnpopkafhercountryrhatmshallcontinwto
support the struggIe for justice and freedom and work with
all peace-loving nations for the promotion and impletnentation of gcnn%neighbourliness, interdependence and selfdetermination.

70. The oppressed people of the African continent and,
indeed, rational human beings everywhere, must be asking: if such atrocities and unilateral decisions persist, irrespective of genuine elforts being made by the international
community to achieve a fair, lasting and non-violent sohttion. what can be the next step? Are the people of Batsward to accept these attacks as a foil accompk? Are
families to live in constant fear for their lives and property7
Are human beings to be subjected forever to invasion of
privacy and loss of integrity because of the colour of their
skin?

76. Mr, GRUNNM
(Denmark): Gn the morning of I4
June, South African troops once more violated the borders
of a neighbouring country spreading death and destntction, this time in an attack against Botswana’s capital.
AtnongthemanyvictimswcrebothSouthAfricanrefugeca and citizens of Botswana. South Africa’s attack was
particularly repugnant because it was directed agahtst a
w-loving
country which has the policy not to allow its
territory to be used as a springboard for attacks against
any of its neighbours, including South Africa.

71. These may seem like general, hypothetical and meI+
dramatic queries, but they go to the core of the problem
before us today. Under the Pretoria regime, for instance,
black South Africans have no freedom. Th9 have no
legal, political, social or economic rights, because the policy of clprrrrhpid strips them of their reason for being. The
law reinforces double or even triple standards, The cos-

77. The attack was also a deliberate and highly provocative act. ‘Ibe South African Government has openly stated
that the attack was carried out after careful deliberations
8

and after calculating the effect it would have on the jnternational community. It confirmed that South Africa was
hypocritical when it declared its willingness to co-operate
with neighbouring countries in controlling cross-border
violence and settle problems by peaceful meaus.

recent years had to pay a heavy price for its geography and
for its humanity in dealing with refugee problems posed by
the policies of South Africa in Angola, Namibia and in
South Africa itself.
86. Botswana’s is a voice which is widely respected in the
United Nations, in the Commonwealth and in Africa. Botswana has never attacked any neighbouring country and,
as the representative of Botswana reminded us this moming, does not represent any threat to any of its neighbours.
Yet it has been the subject of a brutal and cowardly incursion by South Africa against which it has little capacity to
retaliate. The international community has a resconsibility
to condemn South Africa for its actions in Botswana and
to do all that it can to ensure that such actions do not

78. The news about South Africa’s latest and blatant
violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of a
neighbouring country was received with a profound sense
of horror and deep shock in the internatioual community.
79. The Danish Minister for Foreign Affairs has
expressed the strongest condemnation of this new example
of South Africa’s reckless conduct. Furthermore, he
deeply deplored that the inhuman uportheid
regime in Pmtoria once more had demonstrated tha! it does not refrain
from violating even the most fundamental principles of
international law in its endeavours to suppress the black
majority in South Africa and its representatives.

EClU.

87. It is inevitable that after the exhaustive debates of the
last weeks on developments in Namibia and Angola, our
statements will have a Sense of d&j6VU. It is important.
however, that notwithstanding
the coincidence of three
consecutive Council debates. the issues be stated clearly
and unequivocally in response to these specitic situations.
This has been done in the cases of Namibia and Angola
through the adoption of resolutions 566 (1985) and 567
(1985). and it will again. we trust, be done through the
adoption of the draft resolution before us dealing specifttally with Botswana.

80. It has by now become abundantly clear that South
Africa has little intention of ending its military and potitical aggression against the front-line States and that South
Africa is totally indifferent to its moral standing in the eyes
of the international community. This state of affairs is
becoming increasingly unacceptable. South Africa must be
brought to understand that it cannot continuewith impuuity to violate the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
neighbouring States.

88. South Africa’s armed incursion was strongly condemned in a statement issued on behalf of the Australian
Government by the Deputy Prime Minister and Acting
Minister for Foreign AfTairs, Mr. J.ionel Boweu, on 16
June, and the concern of the Australian Govemtneut was
strongly registered with the South African Government
through the South African Ambassador in Canberra.

81. !n the Council, Denmark has consistently argued in
favour of unanimity with respect to South Africa’s 4pmrheidpolicy and other violations of human rights, its conduct on the Namibia question and its aggression agahtst
neighbouring States. To us. the South African attack on
Botswana underlines the necessity of a unauimous decision
by the Council.

89. South Africa’s incursion represented a blatant breach
of international law and underlined a complete disregard
for Botswarta’s sotiguty.
It was clear that the raid had
been carried out with premeditated vioknce and without
concern for the rights and safety of the people of
Gabonme.

82. The members of the Council have to cwpcrate in a
spirit of compromise in order to reach agreemeut on measures
against South Africa which can in au effective way
increase and sustain an international pressure directed
against the totally unacceptable couduct and policy of
South Africa.

90. South Africa’s actions were particularly deplorabk
because they took place at a time when Botswana and
8outh Africa wm holding talks on security measures.

83. Mr. WOOLCOTT
(Australia): The Austrahan dckption listened this morning to the poignant and detaikd
statement of the Minister for Foreign Affaita of Botswana
with genuine feelings of sorrow and respect-sorrow that a
peaceful country should be so abused by its larger neighbour and respect for its unprovocative humanitatian and
principled policies towards its neighbours, which the Minister so eloquently described.

91. Austdii
does not condone the use of violence to
settk probkms. South Afric3’s actions in Botswana, as
indeed its recent a&us in relation to Angola and Namibia, deserve the strongest condemnation of the intematioual community. As other repmentatives have pointed
out this morning, it wouki be in South Africa’s own interests to respond to the increasing frustration and anger of
the intematiorml community and abandon its ilkpal and
dangerous policies of seeking to destabilize its neighbours.

84. It was with a sense of frustration and deep cotnzem
that the Australian Government learned of the armed
incursion by South African forces into Botswana on the
night of 13114 June.

92 Mr. LOUET (France) (interpretathnfrom Fmh):
For the 4
time this week we are meeting to consider a
complaint by a neighbouring State of South Africa that
has been a victim of an unprovoked attack. As soon as we

85. Botswana. a fellow member of the Commonwcahh.
is a country with which Australia has warm and friendly
relations. As one of the front-line States, Botswana has in
9

heard the news. on 14 June, of the death-dealing raid perpetrated against the capital of Botswana, France unequivocally condemned that violation of the territory of a
sovereign, independent country in flagrant disregard 01
international law. The very next day, the SecretaryGeneral of the Ministry of Foreign Allairs convoked the
Ambassador of South Africa to France to reiterate that
condemnation.

themselves and are unlikely to cause any doubts in the
mind of anyone present here in the Council chamber. We
arc talking about an act of aggression carefully planned
and carried out in cold blood. We are also talking about a
violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of that
African country.
101. As a result of the bandit-like raid by the racists on
the capital of Botswana on I4 June. I2 peaceable people
died. including a six-year-old child, and significant material damage was caused.

93. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Botswana has
come here to describe to us the events that led to the
convening of the Council. We listened with keen attention
to, her,particularly eloquent statement. At least I2 persons
died and several others were wounded in the course of the
raid by the South African forces. Among the victims are
women and children. I respectfully request the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Botswana to convey to the families of
the victims the deepest condolences of the French Government and my delegation.

102. In recent years. Angola, Mozambique, Zimbabwe.
Botswana, Lesotho and the Seychelles have been victims of
the international lawlessness of the racist Pretoria regime.
The international community has repeatedly characterizcd
the aggrtssive acts of Pretoria as a serious threat to intemational peace and security, and has condemned them. The
most recent such condemnation came from the Council
just yesterday. Clearly. the aggressive policy of South
Africa with regard to African countries represents an evergrowing threat to the peoples of southern Africa and to the
security not just of that region but of areas beyond it. It is
also quite clear that recent events in Botswana and Angola
are not isolated incidents; they are inseparable parts of the
South African policy of force and pressure. of destabilization and terrorism against sovereign States of Africa-a
policy of maintaining the criminal system of apartheid at
any cost.

94. The incursion perpetrated last week in Gaborone at
the very moment the Council was meeting to remind
South Africa of its international commitments regarding
Namibian independence has served to remind us that the
problems of southern Africa are closely interconnected. It
is because of the welcome that has been granted South
African refugees victims of apartheid that South Africa has
struck Botswana, just as it struck Lesotho in December
1982 and Mozambique in 1983. How can one ignore the
implications of such delitnce?

103. The ruling circles of South Africa are virtually
boasting of openly ignoring the decisions of the Council.
They have come to believe in the impunity of their agenssive actions because they can count on support from the
Western Powem. They know that when it cornea to a vote,
the Western Powers block the adoption of effective measures against the South African r&me and proteet it from
the application of international sanctions.

95. None of the problems of southern Africa can be
solved by violence. Armed actions perpetrated in crossbordr r violence can in tto way mitigate the internal tensions caused by the policy of apartheid.
96. Several States of the &on have demonstrated that
they ate ready to talk. South Africa showed respond in
good faith to their opening and commit itself to the path of
pacification. It has everything to gain by doing so, and a
great deal to lose by not doing so.

104. In these temts it is indicative that, r@tt after the
bandit-like raid on Gaborone, the commander of the
South African fotees who planned and carried out that
shameful action stated, with the d&mesa ofa mindless4y
okdient soldk
“We plan, if neeessa
further operations of this sort in Rots&
‘L “Ps
else”. Echoing him, the Minister for Fore&u Affaits ofthe
racist r@ne., Mr. Botba, made threats a@tst the United
Nations ri8ht after the Gaborone raid. He said that South
Africa “will not tolerate intematiortal interferertee in its
atfairs”.

97. France stands in solidarity with Botswana and its
people in the present difftltia.
We have no doubt whatsoever that the Seettrity Council will demonstrate the sup
port the international community should 8ive this worthy
nation, which simply wishes to live in peace.
98. My delegation will vote in favour of the draft .resolution submitted by the nonaligned
members of the
Council.
99. Mr. SAFRONCHUK
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (inretpretortm porn Russ&n): For the last two
weeks, the Council has, for all practical purposes, been
considering uninterruptedly various aspects of the dangerous situation in the southern part of ihe African continent
as a result of the aggressive actions of the racist South
Airican regime. Another victim of that aggressive poiicy,
and not for the first time, is the sovereign, independent
non-aligned State of Botswana.

105. In the opinion of the Soviet dele@on, it is the
Council’s duty to use its w&n and authority to demand
an immediate end to the aggnsdve actions of the racist
!South African &me and to protect the sovereignty and
independence of African countries. The Soviet Union sup
ports the draft rcroiution submiitai by the non-aiigned
countries, which contains a strong condemnation of Pretoria’s criminal action against Botswana.

100 The facts put forward in the statement made today
by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Botswana speak for

1%. Mr, GUlSSOU (Burkina Faso) (Interpretatt~
from
&en&)z The events are so self-explanatory that my deltgaIO

tion can only express its condolences and sympathy to the
fraternal Government and people of Dotswana.

live on this earth. Ikr the citizens of Botswana have the
right to liire in peace, as do the citizens of our countries?
We believe the answer to he “Yes”. That is why we hope
that the Council. after its last two meetings, will now
unanimously adopt a clear position in keeping with the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.

107. Sooner or later, with or without the blind support
that Pretoria continues to teceive from its friends, which
allows its increasing a~tessiveness, the people of tiuth
Africa are going to tear down the o~rktisystem
in their
beloved country. There is a choke to he made, and my
country has chosen the peoples over aparrlreld.

l7te meeting

108. Such actions put our conscience to the test and force
us to consider the question of whether a man is a man,
with the same rights and the same duties, wherever he may

me

at 1.10 p.m.

NOTES
1 United Nntionr.
* Ibid.. vol. 1001.

II

Tirtuy srrkr.
No. 14691.

vol.

189. No.

2S4S.
