178

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

status with the Economic and Social Council, to focus on
the co-ordination of international activities to combat racism and racial discrimination, and requests him to disseminate widely the results of that consultation;
14. Again requests the Economic and Social Council to
envisage the organization, within the framework of its
plan of activities for the period 1985-1989, of a seminar on
cultural dialogue between the countries of origin and the
host countries of migrant workers;
15. Emphasizes the importance of adequate recourse
procedures for victims of racism and racial discrimination
and therefore requests the Secretary-General, in the light
of the results of the seminars held on this topic, to prepare
and finalize, with the appropriate assistance of qualified
experts if possible, a handbook of recourse procedures;
16. Considers that all the parts of the Programme of
Action for the Second Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination should receive equal attention in order
to attain the objectives of the Second Decade;
17. Approves the plan of activities proposed for the
period 1990-1993 contained in the annex to the present
resolution;
18. Invites the Secretary-General to proceed with the
implementation of the activities for the period 1990-1993
listed in the annex to the present resolution;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to accord the highest priority, in executing the plan of activities, to measures
for combating apartheid;
20. Reaffirms the necessity of co-ordinating the full
range of programmes under implementation by the United
Nations system as they relate to the objectives of the Second Decade, and emphasizes the importance of an operational, viable and effective institutional machinery to this
end;

25. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session on the implementation of the present resolution;
26. Decides to keep the item entitled "Implementation
of the Programme of Action for the Second Decade to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination" on its agenda
throughout the Second Decade and to consider it as a matter of the highest priority at its forty-third session.

21. Invites all Governments, United Nations bodies,
the specialized agencies and other intergovernmental organizations, as well as interested non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council, to participate fully in the implementation of
the plans of activities for the periods 1985-1989 and
1990-1993 by intensifying and broadening their efforts to
bring about the speedy elimination of apartheid and all
forms of racism and racial discrimination;
22. Considers that voluntary contributions to the Trust
Fund for the Programme for the Decade for Action to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination are indispensable for the implementation of the above-mentioned programmes;

2. The following activities should be undertaken during the biennium 1992-1993 and reflected in the proposed programme budget for
that biennium:

23. Strongly appeals to all Governments, organizations
and individuals in a position to do so to contribute generously to the Trust Fund and, to this end, requests the Secretary-General to undertake appropriate contacts and
initiatives to encourage contributions;
24. Reiterates its request to the Economic and Social
Council, throughout the Second Decade, to submit annually to the General Assembly a report containing, inter a/ia:
(a) An enumeration of the activities undertaken or
contemplated to achieve the objectives of the Second
Decade, including the activities of Governments, United
Nations bodies, the specialized agencies and other international and regional organizations, as well as nongovernmental organizations;
(b) A review and appraisal of those activities;
(c) Its suggestions and recommendations;

85th plenary meeting
30 November 1987
ANNEX
Plan of activities to be implemented during the second half of the Second
Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, 1990-1993

I. The following activities should be undertaken during the biennium 1990-1991 and reflected in the proposed programme budget for
that biennium:
(a) Global study of the extent to which the children of migrant workers are enabled to receive education in their mother tongue;
(b) Meeting of experts to review the experience of countries in the
operation of schemes of internal self-government for indigenous populations;
(c) Technical study on the impact of article 27 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights13 in providing guarantees of
equality to persons belonging to minorities;
(d) Regional workshops on the adoption oflegislation to combat racism and racial discrimination;
(e) Seminar on community relations commissions and their functions;
(f) Seminar to assess experience gained in the implementation of the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination;3
(g) International campaign to contribute to the early mdependence
of Namibia, in conformity with Security Council resolution 435 (1978) of
29 September 1978.

(a) Round table of experts to discuss the preparation of teaching
materials to combat racism and racial discrimination;
( b) Issuance in three additional languages of the handbook of recourse procedures available to victims of racism and racial discrimination;
(c) Two regional workshops on the adoption of legislation to combat
racism and racial discrimination;
(d) International campaign on the main obstacles to the full eradication of racism, racial discrimination and apartheid, and on ways and
means of bringing about the early disappearance of these scourge~:
(e) Study on the treatment of political prisoners and detainees in
South Africa and Namibia, particularly women and children;
(f) Global study on the extent of dissemination of the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination.

42/48.

Twentieth anniversary of the Declaration on Social Progress and Development

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration on Social Progress and Development, based on the Charter of the United Nations and
solemnly proclaimed on 11 December 1969 in its resolution 2542 (XXIV) of the same date,
Recalling also its resolutions 2543 (XXIV) of 11 December 1969, 32/117 of 16 December 1977, 34/59 of

13 See resolution 2200 A (XXI). annex.

VI.

179

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

29 November 1979 and41/142of4 December 1986on the
implementation of the Declaration,
Convinced of the continuing need to achieve the full realization of the principles and objectives contained in the
Declaration, which will contribute to peaceful and
friendly relations between nations,
Noting that 1989 marks the twentieth anniversary of the
Declaration,
1. Reaffirms the lasting validity and importance of the
principles and objectives contained in the Declaration on
Social Progress and Development;
2. Decides to observe in 1989 the twentieth anniversary of the Declaration;
3. Invites all States, the specialized agencies, regional
intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental
organizations to take appropriate measures, such as those
set forth in the annex to the present resolution, which are
based on the measures recommended by the General Assembly in its resolution 41/150 of 4 December 1986 on the
fortieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and to support appropriate activities aimed at
encouraging the promotion of human rights and social justice;
4. Invites all States to inform the Secretary-General of
their views and comments concerning the impact of the
Declaration, since its adoption, on the formulation and
implementation of the national policies and measures of
their Governments, as well as the way in which the principles, objectives, means and methods set forth in the Declaration are taken into account in their policies, plans and
programmes and in their bilateral and multilateral relations in the field of development;
5. Invites all States to communicate to the SecretaryGeneral their views and comments on possible ways and
means of increasing the contribution of the appropriate organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system to achieving the full realization of the principles and
objectives contained in the Declaration;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to include the information received pursuant to paragraphs 4 and 5 above in
the report requested in paragraph 5 of General Assembly
resolution 41/142, to be submitted to the Assembly at its
forty-fourth session through the Commission for Social
Development and the Economic and Social Council;
7. Also requests the Secretary-General to take appropriate measures for the observance of the twentieth anniversary of the Declaration, bearing in mind the recommended possible measures contained in the annex to the
present resolution, in order to draw attention to and emphasize the importance of the Declaration, and the role
played and the work done by the United Nations to ensure
the effective fulfilment of the objectives of the Declaration;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fourth session an item entitled "Twentieth anniversary of the proclamation of the Declaration on Social Progress and Development";
9. Also decides to devote one plenary meeting during
its forty-fourth session to the observance of the twentieth
anniversary of the Declaration, which falls on 11 December 1989, and requests the Secretary-General to make the
necessary preparations for the programme of that meeting.
85th plenary meeting
30 November 1987

ANNEX
Recommended possible measures for the observance of the twentieth
anniversary of the Declaration on Social Progress and Development

I. The following measures are recommended for possible action at
the national level:
(a) Formal proclamation of 11 December 1989 as Social Progress
and Development Day;
(b) Issuance of special messages on 11 December 1989 by heads of
State or Government or other prominent civil personalities;
(c) Special meetings of parliamentary and other public and private
institutions on Social Progress and Development Day;
(d) Establishment or strengthening of national or local institutions
for the promotion of social progress and development and social justice,
and the encouragement of teaching programmes on social progress and
development at various educational levels;
(e) Dissemination of the text of the Declaration on Social Progress
and Development in national languages;
(j) Issuance during 1989 of social progress and development postage
stamps, first-day covers and special cancellations;
(g) Participation by non-governmental organizations in the observance of the anniversary, and the organization of activities by such organizations;
(h) Organization of activities within the framework and in support of
current United Nations decades and international years being prepared
on social development.
2. It is recommended that the following measures, among others,
should be taken by the Secretary-General at the United Nations level:
(a) Issuance by 11 December 1989 in all the official languages of the
United Nations of the Declaration on Social Progress and Development;
(b) Organization of commemorative events, according to standard
practice, at United Nations Headquarters and at the United Nations Offices at Geneva and Vienna, as well as at Nairobi and at United Nations
information centres, on or around 11 December 1989.

42/49.

Achievement of social justice

The General Assembly,
Mindful of the pledge of States Members of the United
Nations under the Charter of the United Nations to take
joint and separate action to promote higher standards of
living, full employment and conditions of economic and
social progress and development,
Bearing in mind that, in accordance with the Declaration on Social Progress and Development, 14 social progress and development shall be founded on respect for the
dignity and value of the human person and shall ensure
the promotion of human rights and social justice,
Taking into account recommendations made by the Secretary-General on some perspectives on the work of the
United Nations in the 1990s, contained in the annex to the
note on the preparation of the next medium-term plan, IS
1. Considers that the common purpose of the international community must be to forge from varied economic,
social and political conditions a global environment of sustained development, full enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms, social justice and peace;
2. Recognizes that social justice is one of the most important goals of social progress;
3. Reaffirms the importance of co-operation among
countries in promoting a climate conducive to the achievement by individual countries of the goals of development
and social justice and progress;

14 Resolution 2542 (XXIV).

15 See A/42/512.
