United Nations

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6216th meeting
Wednesday, 11 November 2009, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mayr-Harting/Mr. Ebner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Austria)

Members:

Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ms. Fofana
Ms. Li Xinyan
Mr. González
Ms. Kožar
Ms. Gasri
Mr. Kimura
Mr. Elshakshuki
Mr. Heller
Ms. Khvan
Mr. Ünal
Mr. Kafeero
Mr. Saltonstall
Mr. DeLaurentis
Mr. Dan Hoang Giang

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Letter dated 2 November 2009 from the Permanent Representative of Austria
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2009/567)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

09-60274 (E)

*0960274*

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Armenia, Benin, Cyprus, the Islamic
Republic of Iran and Rwanda, in which they request to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers, as
was indicated at this morning’s meeting, to limit their
statements to no more than five minutes, in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate their texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
I now call on the representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): Mr. President, I
thank your delegation for organizing and preparing in a
very thorough manner for this open debate on the
occasion of the tenth anniversary of the first thematic
resolution adopted by the Security Council on this
topic. On the one hand, we have reason to celebrate.
We have achieved significant conceptual and
institutional progress in recent years with the
establishment of an Expert Group, the updating of the
aide-mémoire (S/PRST/2009/1, annex) and the
inclusion of an annex on humanitarian access in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/277).
Furthermore, and most important, we have agreed on
our common responsibility to protect civilians both in
times of armed conflict and otherwise. On the other
hand, the glaring gap between the normative
framework and the realities on the ground remains;
compliance with the existing standards is still far from
satisfactory.

2

The protection of civilians is a complex area
covering a very wide range of topics, as reflected in the
resolution adopted this morning. Civilian protection
poses a central challenge to the Council. The manner in
which it responds to that challenge is an essential
yardstick by which its overall performance is
measured. The events in Rwanda and Srebrenica count
among those that have had the strongest and most
lasting impact on the public perception of the Council.
Thinking of new ways to enhance its role in the
protection of civilians is thus the most appropriate
contribution to a meaningful commemoration.
This year, we are also celebrating the sixtieth
anniversary of the adoption of the Geneva
Conventions, the centrepiece of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. However, instead of steady
progress over the decades towards full compliance with
the existing standards of international humanitarian
law, we are witnessing the continued erosion of respect
for international humanitarian law. The report of the
Secretary-General before us rightly identifies the need
for stronger engagement with non-State actors as an
essential element for better compliance. An additional
element is the consistency with which this agenda is
addressed. The Council must make it very clear that the
relevant standards are applicable in any armed conflict,
under any circumstances and irrespective of the
background of military action.
Furthermore, compliance with international
humanitarian law will be enhanced if the parties to the
conflict know that violations will entail consequences.
In particular, the Council should consider such
consequences in cases in which civilian populations are
directly targeted or humanitarian access is deliberately
denied. It is our understanding that the reference in
resolution 1894 (2009) to appropriate measures at the
disposal of the Council includes targeted sanctions.
Where violations of international humanitarian
law go routinely unpunished, a climate of impunity
will prevail and lead to further violations.
Accountability is therefore the other key element for
ensuring compliance. We have made great strides in the
area of international criminal justice through the
establishment of international mechanisms and, most
important, the International Criminal Court. We thus
have the tools to effectively ensure accountability on a
permanent basis. Those mechanisms should be put to
good and consistent use.

09-60274

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

The Council has already recognized its role in
ensuring accountability and has done so again in
adopting today’s resolution. That role is much broader
than considering the referral of situations to the
International Criminal Court. Much to the contrary, the
Council should demand accountability on a regular
basis where there are credible allegations that the most
serious crimes under international law have been
committed. And it should make clear that it is first and
foremost the responsibility of States to investigate and
prosecute, and should urge parties to conflicts to do so
where needed. There are numerous ways in which
United Nations bodies can assist States where there is a
need to build domestic capacities. But the Council
must also ensure accountability where there is no
willingness to investigate and prosecute on the part of
the States that have jurisdiction or other parties to the
conflict.
Today, there is largely clarity about the standards
applicable to the protection of civilians, thanks also to
the valuable work of the Secretariat. What we need for
the next ten years and beyond are concepts and
concrete measures to ensure implementation, as well as
a consistent approach to the protection agenda,
especially in cases in which that may seem difficult or
inconvenient.
We therefore welcome the joint study submitted
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, as well as the parts of the resolution
adopted today dealing with peacekeeping. We hope and
believe that they can lead to concrete improvements.
One of the key findings of the study is that the chain of
events required to support the protection of civilians
from the planning stages to practical implementation in
the field is broken — an alarming finding that we must
urgently address. Essential aspects for the future work
of the Council include clear guidance provided in
mandates and mission-wide protection strategies
involving the country team and the host State, as well
as, of course, the provision of the necessary resources.
In conclusion, we support the resolution as a
promise of better and more effective mandates
formulated by the Council, and we call for more
consistent consideration of protection issues as tangible
evidence of the Council’s commitment to the
protection of civilians.

09-60274

The President: I now call on the representative
of Norway.
Mrs. Juul (Norway): Women and children,
innocent bystanders — civilians — who are caught up
in armed conflict too often lack the effective protection
to which they are entitled under humanitarian law. We
can and must restore respect for and adherence to
international humanitarian law. While the core
principles of international humanitarian law are as
valid as ever, the complexity of modern armed
conflicts demands renewed reflection on the
application of these principles in order to ensure
adequate protection for civilians. Important lessons
should be learned from relevant United Nations
experience in the field and from States that have made
their rules of engagement available to the public.
Resolution 1894 (2009), just adopted by the
Council, makes clear that peacekeeping constitutes one
of the most important means at the disposal of the
United Nations to protect civilians in armed conflict.
Indeed, we would add that protecting civilians is the
core objective of peacekeeping.
In order to achieve this objective, the newly
published study of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) on
protecting civilians in the context of United Nations
peacekeeping operations points the way forward. It
uncovers many of the existing gaps and provides clear
recommendations on what needs to be done to achieve
results on the ground. Overall, it is evident that
protection of civilians mandates have yet to be
matched by political resolve and resources, doctrine
and clear operational guidance for peacekeeping
personnel. Troop- and police-contributing-countries
must internalize this issue in their national policies.
I would like to focus on three specific areas of
concern: the lack of operational guidance and tailored
training, the need for political will and leadership, and
ensuring accountability and fighting impunity.
Clear guidance to peacekeeping personnel is
needed on how to operationalize protection of civilians
mandates. One area of particular concern is the
protection of women and children from sexual
violence. To our knowledge, not one national army has
developed operational guidance to combat sexual
violence in conflict. DPKO and national Governments

3

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

need to put in place such operational tools as a matter
of urgency.
The overall lack of tailored training for troops
required to address sexual violence is worrisome. It is a
mistake to assume that women’s and children’s
protection against sexual violence will come intuitively
to soldiers trained in war-fighting. When peacekeepers
confront a highly sensitive security problem they have
never encountered in training, they are likely to make
mistakes.
The international community also needs to deploy
more uniformed female personnel. I take this
opportunity to commend the efforts of the all-women
Indian police contingent working in Liberia. They
should be an inspiration to us all. A police force plays a
leading role in a State’s ability to protect its citizens.
That is why Norway funds the development of a
strategic doctrinal framework for international police
peacekeeping, the purpose of which is to provide a
consistent model for policing. This will help United
Nations police as they seek to protect civilians and
assist in building local police capacity.
We need to see stronger political will and
leadership in demanding a response to sexual violence
in conflict — from the field commander to the special
representative of the Secretary-General and from the
Secretary-General to the Security Council. This must
be manifested in strong and specific mandates to
ensure timely delivery and the deployment of
resources. Some progress has been made. The
Comprehensive Strategy on Combating Sexual
Violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is a
case in point. But such strategies will remain futile
unless there is a mission-wide and, indeed, a societywide commitment to implement them.
Fostering greater political will is one of the tasks
of the soon to be appointed special representative of
the Secretary-General on sexual violence in armed
conflict. Norway calls on the Secretary-General to
expedite the appointment of the special representative
and urges all Member States to give strong political
support to the new representative’s work.
Where criminals in uniform are free to rape and
murder, civilian criminals are often free to do the same.
Impunity serves as an incentive for continued violence
to soldier and citizen alike. Members of parties to
conflict, from the lowest ranks to the commanding
officer, are accountable and must be held accountable

4

for their actions. The certainty of investigation,
prosecution and punishment is vital to preventing and
protecting civilians from abuse. Justice alone can show
would-be perpetrators that civilian lives matter.
In concluding, let me echo the DPKO/OCHA
report by adding a word of caution. Peacekeeping
operations cannot protect everyone from everything.
The protection of civilians requires not only a missionwide or a United Nations-wide strategy; it requires a
partnership between all those present in the field,
including the host Government. Ultimately, it requires
a culture of respect for human rights and the principles
of international humanitarian law.
The President: I call on the representative of
Brazil.
Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): I join other delegations in
thanking the Austrian Minister for Foreign Affairs and
other ministers for their presence in the Security
Council this morning. The high-level representation of
many delegations on the Council this morning reflected
the great importance of the theme we are here to
discuss. I thank the Austrian delegation for the concept
paper prepared for this debate (see S/2009/567). I also
thank the Secretary-General; Mr. John Holmes, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator; and Ms. Kyung-wha
Kang, Deputy High Commissioner for Human Rights
for their informative briefings.
Giving peacekeeping missions appropriate
protection mandates is important from both a moral
and a pragmatic viewpoint. The United Nations simply
cannot stand by as atrocities are committed against
innocents. The greatest crises of legitimacy in the
history of peacekeeping have arisen when the
Organization has failed to protect civilians in their hour
of direst need. Moreover, a mission’s success depends
to a large extent on its ability to earn the trust of the
local population. This will not be achieved if the
Organization is perceived as either unwilling or
unprepared to stop atrocities against civilians.
In the 10 years since the adoption of resolution
1265 (1999), we have succeeded in building a
consensus around the central aspects of the protection
of civilians. No one disputes the primary role and
responsibility of national Governments in protecting
their own civilians. At the same time, we recognize the
multifaceted role the United Nations may be called
upon to play in helping to protect non-combatants in

09-60274

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

accordance with international law and the Charter. The
considerable normative guidance we have already
developed in this area must now be further translated
into concrete improvements in the protection of
civilians on the ground, as indicated by the SecretaryGeneral in his May report (S/2009/277).
The independent study commissioned by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs seeks to
address many of the current gaps in implementation.
My delegation considers that it contains several ideas
and recommendations worth discussing in depth. Today
I wish to focus on one specific issue of particular
relevance, namely, mandate-setting.
Mandates must be clear enough so that
peacekeepers on the ground, especially commanders,
understand precisely what is expected of them, without
hampering the autonomy that leaders in the field
require to do their jobs properly. When it comes to the
protection of civilians, assigning vague tasks leads
either to underperformance and the loss of lives that
could have been saved or to excessive ambition and
inevitable disappointment.
Mandates must also be realistic. This requires the
Council to make often difficult choices and decide
what is feasible and what is not, especially from the
military and political viewpoints. It must also bear in
mind the question of resources, without prejudice to
the functions and powers of the General Assembly. In
this regard, two opposite and grave errors must be
avoided. The first is setting protection mandates the
fulfilment of which would require human, logistic and
financial resources unlikely to be made available to the
Organization. The second is to place budgetary
considerations above moral and political imperatives.
There must also be coherence and solidarity. On
the one hand, Member States that set mandates in the
Council must be ready to face the financial
consequences of their decisions in the General
Assembly; on the other, all Member States must
cooperate in the Assembly to secure the means that will
allow the Council to properly discharge its
responsibilities under the Charter.
Clear and realistic mandates are important to
managing expectations. We must be frank and
recognize that the United Nations cannot protect all
people from every danger all the time. To suggest that
it can, through the adoption of overambitious and

09-60274

imprecise mandates, is a recipe for disorientation
among Blue Helmets, deep disappointment among
victims and damaging criticism for the Organization.
Protection mandates must also address the
particularities of the situation in question. The nature
and the gravity of the challenges to protecting civilians
vary greatly from one mission to the other. The tools to
use and the manner in which they are handled must be
considered carefully in each case. One-size-fits-all
approaches must certainly be avoided.
The protection of civilians must be seen as a
cross-cutting preoccupation in mandates and not just as
a discrete set of military tasks. Protection concerns
should also be addressed through an appropriate
linkage between peacekeeping and peacebuilding, as
well as through preventive activities related to the root
causes of conflict.
In order to achieve our goals in a sustained
manner, we must move beyond protecting individuals.
We must help protect societies. Although the
immediate task will often be defending persons and
groups from actual aggression, peacekeepers must
contribute to laying the foundations for fostering
justice, security and opportunity for all. In the long
term, strong institutions, economic growth and social
inclusion are indispensable pillars of protection.
The President: I give
representative of Australia.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this very important debate today. Today, of
course, is Remembrance Day, when many of our
countries honour those who fought in the wars of the
twentieth and the twenty-first centuries, including
those who fought in United Nations and other
peacekeeping missions. On this date, 11 November, in
1918 the First World War ended. Almost 20 million
people died in that war, 7 million of them civilians.
The seeds of that war bred a second, far worse conflict.
At least 70 million people died in the Second World
War — the deadliest war ever — and at least 50 million
of those were civilians. It is right and responsible that
we should meet to debate the protection of civilians on
this particular day.
We commend the Council for its hard work on
resolution 1894 (2009), which has been adopted today,
and we are grateful for that work. The protection of
civilians is, of course, a broad topic, so I will focus my

5

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

statement today on improving the implementation of
protection mandates by peacekeeping missions.
As we know, it has been 10 years since the
Security Council first mandated the protection of
civilians in a peacekeeping operation, the United
Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone. We are
pleased to see that this imperative is being considered
systematically and routinely by the Security Council
when mandating peacekeeping missions today. However,
as acknowledged in the New Horizon non-paper and
elsewhere, there still exists a significant gap between
what the Security Council is mandating and what
peacekeepers are able to do and capable of doing.
To address this gap, military and police personnel
tasked to protect civilians clearly need appropriate
guidance in order to implement protection mandates
effectively. Appropriate guidelines that explain to
peacekeepers what is expected of them in the field will
obviously assist in identifying the resources and
training required by peacekeepers, aid the formulation
of and planning for a more effective and clearer
mission mandate, and provide a framework against
which mission success can be measured more
accurately in the field and learned from. Guidelines
will assist peacekeepers in the field by articulating a
range
of
possible
protection
of
civilians
operationalization strategies that can be utilized.
The development of guidelines is even more
critical for Member States that are in the process of
developing their capacity to support their own regional
peacekeeping operations. Australia is working with the
African Union (AU) to strengthen African
peacekeeping capacity through the development of
such guidelines. The AU Commission, together with
Australia, will host a symposium in Addis Ababa in
March next year to assist with the AU’s
groundbreaking work on this issue. We hope that the
symposium will not only be a valuable exercise for the
African Union itself and my own country in improving
understanding of how to implement these mandates,
but that it will also contribute to broader dialogue
amongst Member States.
Ensuring that peacekeepers in the field have the
resources they need to fulfil protection mandates is
critical. Without adequate resources, equipment and
training to implement a mandate through the life cycle
of a mission, the safety and security of the deployed
peacekeepers, as well as the civilians they are tasked to

6

protect, are obviously put at risk. The former force
commander of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, General Agwai, addressed
this issue here in August, and identified the critical
need for troops to have the right tools and to be well
trained. The development of guidelines on the
protection of civilians will provide a framework for
determining the resources and the level of training
required to implement that mandate successfully.
Finally, I would like to refer to the need to ensure
that the lessons being learned in the field are captured
and utilized to improve the implementation of
protection of civilians mandates. The study
independently commissioned and recently released by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs is
an important step towards drawing together lessons
being learned in the field. We hope that the study will
serve as the beginning of a serious conversation on the
protection of civilians that needs to be carried out
between the Secretariat, the Security Council, and
troop- and police-contributing countries.
To help further that dialogue, on 8 December
Australia and Uruguay will host here in New York a
second workshop — following a first held in January —
on the protection of civilians in peacekeeping
operations. The workshop, we hope, will provide an
opportunity for the stakeholders involved in
peacekeeping operations, particularly the troop- and
police-contributing countries, to provide their thoughts
on the recommendations in the independent study,
based, of course, on their practical experience in the
field.
In order for United Nations peacekeeping to
better protect civilians, clearly we must develop a
common and better understanding of what we expect
United Nations peacekeepers to do when they are
required to implement these difficult mandates.
Australia looks forward to participating in a much
more substantial and serious dialogue on this
imperative with other Member States.
The President: I
representative of Finland.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Viinanen (Finland): Finland attaches
particular importance to this debate. It marks not only
the tenth anniversary of the first consideration by the
Security Council of the issue of the protection of
civilians, but also a step forward with the adoption

09-60274

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

earlier today of resolution 1894 (2009). We
congratulate the Austrian presidency of the Security
Council for its leadership in steering the work of the
Council to ensure better protection for civilians in
armed conflict.
I would like to make a few additional remarks
apart from the statement already delivered by the
representative of Sweden on behalf of the European
Union, with which Finland fully associates itself. I
would like to concentrate on expressing our strong
commitment to the following three elements.
First, the fight against impunity is crucial in
preventing violations of humanitarian and human rights
law from happening in the first place. Secondly,
children and women deserve special protection in times
of conflict and the mechanisms established to that end
need to be made operational as soon as possible.
Thirdly, the New Horizon initiative is crucial in getting
wide support from Member States for an enhanced
protection role of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations, so badly needed in many parts of the world.
Today, 60 years after their adoption, the Geneva
Conventions have achieved universal recognition, but
we are painfully aware that that has not ensured
effective compliance with, or enforcement and
implementation of, humanitarian law. Instead, those
norms are all too frequently violated with impunity. We
must strive to achieve universal compliance with the
rules contained in the Conventions and their additional
protocols.
That
includes
establishing
strong
mechanisms of accountability in cases of violations.
The price paid by the perpetrators or those who allow
atrocities to occur should be as high as the price paid
every day, for the rest of their lives, by the innocent
victims of those violations. Effective and united action
against impunity for such crimes sends a clear
message: violations against civilians will not be
tolerated.
Such actions are needed when a conflict is still
going on but also when the parties come to the table to
discuss peace and the question of amnesty and
reconciliation. We need to be clear that there can be no
sustainable peace without the rule of law and justice.
Finland is a strong supporter of the International
Criminal Court and is satisfied to see its first trial fully
underway and a second one about to begin. We call
once again on all Member States to ratify the Rome
Statute in order to achieve its true universality.

09-60274

We urge the Security Council to use all means at
its disposal, including sanctions, to compel compliance
by all parties with their obligations. We also wish to
emphasize the role of the United Nations human rights
machinery. The Security Council should continue to
make even better use of the available information, in
order to receive comprehensive, accurate and detailed
reporting on those issues. We believe that that would
further enhance the Council’s ability to take timely and
informed action in specific situations.
Already in the Secretary-General’s very first
report on the protection of civilians (S/1999/957),
children and women were identified as requiring
special protection measures. Finland continues to fully
agree with that assessment, and we would like to
express our support for the work done by this Council
and by all parts of the United Nations system in the
thematic areas of women, peace and security and
children and armed conflict.
This year we commemorate the twentieth
anniversary of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child. Its principles should also guide us when it
comes to the protection of children in armed conflict.
Finland is highly concerned about the increasing
number of attacks against schools and violence
directed at children — especially girls — attending
schools in many parts of the world. Such violence is to
be universally condemned and countered as a
fundamental violation of the right of every child to life
and development.
With regard to violence against women in armed
conflict, Finland wishes to express its support for the
recent advances made by the Security Council with
resolutions 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009). We consider
extremely important the timely appointment of a
special representative of the Secretary-General to lead
the United Nations efforts in addressing sexual
violence in armed conflict. There is an urgent need for
coherent and strategic leadership, for enhanced data
gathering and reporting methods and for an operational
rapid response team. At the same time, active
participation of women at all levels of decision making —
in times of conflict and in times of peace — remains the
best tool for preventing violence from happening in the
first place.
Peacekeeping operations are one of the most
important tools available to the United Nations to
protect civilians in armed conflict. The Security

7

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

Council’s thematic resolutions, the aide-mémoire
(S/PRST/2009/1, annex) and the inclusion of
protection activities in the mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping missions have been important steps
forward. However, at the same time, the gap between
the words on the protection mandates and their actual
implementation seems to have grown. The New
Horizon initiative outlines the protection of civilians as
one of the cross-cutting peacekeeping tasks. We hope
that the ongoing efforts to reform United Nations
peacekeeping will help to tackle the gap between the
mandates and resources, expectations and available
capacity.
Also, a shared view of what protection of
civilians really means is needed. In our view, effective
protection requires a comprehensive approach that
includes troops and police units that can be called upon
in critical situations and have clear guidance on how to
tackle the situation. It includes long term monitoring
and protection of human rights, as well as activities
aimed at building the rule of law and in support of
security sector reform. It also means ensuring that
humanitarian actors can carry out their work based on
principles of neutrality and impartiality.
We find it encouraging that at its most recent
session, the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations addressed for the first time the issue of the
protection of civilians in its report (A/63/19). We find
the increased interaction between this Council and the
troop- and police-contributing countries, as well as the
work of the Special Committee, crucial in getting wide
support from Member States for an enhanced
protection role for the United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We hope that with the New Horizon and
other ongoing reform initiatives as a basis, Member
States will be able to make progress on this important
issue this year in order to give the women and men
serving in the United Nations missions the guidance
and tools they need to carry out their courageous task
of protecting civilians in the midst of a conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I have the honour to
address the Security Council on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) and to begin by
expressing appreciation to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and the delegation of Austria for organizing
this important debate under its presidency and to thank

8

the
Secretary-General,
Under-Secretary-General
Holmes and the Deputy High Commissioner for
Human Rights for their introductory remarks.
The year 2009 marks the tenth anniversary of the
Security Council’s first thematic debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts, as well as the
sixtieth anniversary of the 1949 Geneva Conventions,
which focus on minimizing the negative impacts of the
horrors of war and violence on the civilian population.
Nevertheless, with all the efforts exerted by the United
Nations, including the Security Council, civilians are
still suffering around the world in massive numbers
and the measures that have been adopted so far have
proved to fall short of addressing the wider
implications of attacks against civilians and their
impact on international peace and security.
In this regard, the Non-Aligned Movement
believes that due priority should continue to be given
to promoting knowledge of, respect for and observance
of States parties’ obligations assumed under
international humanitarian law, in particular those of
the four Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their 1977
Protocol. We call upon all parties to armed conflict to
redouble their efforts to comply with their obligations
under international humanitarian law by, inter alia,
prohibiting the targeting of civilian populations,
civilian property and certain special property during an
armed conflict, and obliging parties to any conflict to
ensure general protection against dangers arising from
military operations for civilian installations, hospitals
and relief materials, as well as the means of
transportation and distribution of such relief materials.
The Movement reiterates its condemnation of the
increasing attacks on the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel and urges the Governments of
United Nations Member States to ensure respect for
and the protection of the personnel of humanitarian
organizations, in conformity with the relevant
provisions of international law. In the meantime, we
reaffirm that humanitarian agencies and their personnel
should respect international humanitarian law and the
laws of the countries in which they operate, the guiding
principles of humanitarian assistance set forth in
General Assembly resolution 46/182 and its annex, and
non-interference in the cultural, religious and other
values of the population in the countries in which they
operate.

09-60274

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

As for using weapons which are of an
indiscriminate nature and that lead to massive
causalities among the civilian population, the
Non-Aligned Movement stresses its concern at the
threat to humanity posed by the continued existence of
weapons of mass destruction, especially nuclear
weapons, and of their possible use or the threat of their
use. We continue to believe that more remains to be
done with regard to disarmament and the
non-proliferation of these weapons. In that regard, the
Movement continues to deplore the use, in
contravention of international humanitarian law, of
anti-personnel landmines in conflict situations, aimed
at maiming, killing and terrorizing innocent civilians,
denying them access to farmland, causing famine and
forcing them to flee their homes, eventually leading to
depopulation, and preventing the return of civilians to
their places of original residence. The Movement calls
upon all States in a position to do so to provide the
necessary financial, technical and humanitarian
assistance to landmine clearance operations and the
social and economic rehabilitation of victims, as well
as to ensure full access by affected countries to
material, equipment, technology and financial
resources for mine clearance.
In the same vein, taking into account the
magnitude and persistence of the violations and
breaches of international law, including international
humanitarian law, being committed by Israel, the
occupying Power, in the occupied Palestinian territory,
the NAM calls upon the Council to take all necessary
measures to ensure respect for and compliance with the
Geneva Conventions in that situation.
Let me conclude by reiterating the importance of
the role of the General Assembly and the Security
Council, not only with regard to enhanced involvement
with respect to the protection of civilians in conflict
situations but also in order to focus on the need to
investigate violations of international humanitarian
law, without discrimination. The NAM believes that
the Council should alter its practice to attach priority to
the protection of civilian population in imminent
danger in conflict situations at an early stage and
separate this issue from the discussions that take place
in the Council with regard to the controversial political
dimensions of a conflict, in order to save as many lives
as possible among affected civilians trapped between
the combatants in conflict areas.

09-60274

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank you, Mr. President, for having organized this
open debate, as well as for the concept paper annexed
to your letter dated 2 November 2009 (S/2009/567).
This, without a doubt, will guide our deliberations on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. We wish
also to express our appreciation to Mr. John Holmes,
Under-Secretary General for Humanitarian Affairs, for
his informative briefing.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
just made on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. At
the same time, we would like to address from a
national perspective certain aspects of special interest
to Guatemala. This interest derives not only from our
commitment to the universal values of the United
Nations Charter but also from our more specific
perspective of a country contributing troops to
peacekeeping operations. Indeed, on 23 January 2006,
eight of our troops lost their lives and another five
were wounded in an operation whose indirect purpose
was precisely to protect innocent civilians in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo from the hostilities
of the Lord’s Resistance Army.
With that particular viewpoint, we, like many
other troop-contributing countries, struggle with the
dilemma of, on the one hand, limiting our presence in a
given country to keeping the peace, without exposing
our troops to offensive actions that place them in
harm’s way, and, on the other hand, involving
ourselves in humanitarian efforts to protect the civilian
population as part of a broader mandate to restore
stability and normality in the day-by-day routine of the
inhabitants on the ground.
From a wider standpoint, we welcome the
continued willingness of the Security Council to
address the protection needs of civilians in armed
conflict. We believe that this is a timely opportunity to
thoroughly review the progress made and the
challenges we face. The fact is that despite the
numerous reports and resolutions, the wealth of
experience and the best practices accumulated over the
past decade, civilians still account for the majority of
casualties — and the risks they bear have only
intensified.
It is increasingly difficult to distinguish between
civilians and combatants, due in part to the

9

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

proliferation and fragmentation of non-State armed
groups that resort to strategies that flagrantly
contravene international law and strike against
civilians in order to shield military objectives. This is
also due to new technology that has produced longrange artillery and missiles, thus expanding the conflict
zone and exposing larger numbers of civilians to
attacks. For that reason, conventional measures are not
sufficient to address these challenges and emerging
dangers. These circumstances go beyond the five core
challenges indicated in the Secretary-General’s most
recent report on this issue (S/2009/277) and in his
presentation this morning.
Most certainly, we acknowledge this year’s
update of the aide-mémoire on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (see S/PRST/2009/1,
annex), which identifies key protection concerns in this
area. Nevertheless, we still seem to fall short when it
comes to the observance of international humanitarian
law and accountability for violations. For this reason,
we believe that the time has come to adjust some
norms of international humanitarian law in order to
fully comply with the requirements of distinction and
proportionality set forth by international humanitarian
law for the protection of civilians. Moreover, we must
avoid selective approaches to violations of
international humanitarian law and abide strictly by the
legal norms concerning the protection of civilians.
With regard to how this item is handled in
Security Council mandates, we should like, very
briefly, to point out the following points. First, the
protection of civilians cannot be treated in the same
way in all peacekeeping operations. The situation will
vary depending on whether we are dealing with a
mandate under Chapter VI or Chapter VII of the
Charter, as well as on the particular details and context
of each peacekeeping operation.
Secondly, there are limits on the action of the
United Nations and we believe that measures should
only be aimed at the protection of those civilians that
are at imminent risk or in imminent danger. The
Organization cannot assume responsibility in every
situation, given that its capacity to respond depends on
the mandate and on the availability of precise
information, appropriate logistical support, adequate
resources and political will.
Thirdly, mandates are established by the Security
Council, and while this body has expressed its

10

intention to ensure that they include clear guidelines
concerning what missions may and must do to protect
civilians, they should be formulated on the basis of a
realistic assessment of what is taking place on the
ground and in close consultation with troopcontributing countries, as well as with the host country.
Subsequently, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations should draw up a concept of operations
based on accurate information, which will serve as a
legal and operational framework for the rules of
engagement.
Finally, we consider that in order to improve the
protection of civilians in the field we must respect and
observe existing international humanitarian law
without selectivity, take into account the need to
promote the development of secure environments and
the restoration of the rule of law, and provide troopcontributing countries with resources, equipment and
training prior to deployment.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Ney (Germany): Germany fully aligns itself
with the statement made by the representative of
Sweden on behalf of the European Union.
I wish to start by commending you,
Mr. President, for having convened this timely and
important meeting, marking not only the tenth
anniversary of the start of the Security Council’s work
on the protection of civilians but also the sixtieth
anniversary of the Geneva Conventions. Let me also
thank the Secretary-General, Under-Secretary-General
John Holmes and Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, Deputy High
Commissioner for Human Rights, for their succinct
briefings today.
In our view, the protection of civilians in armed
conflict is an issue that is fundamental to the mandate
of the United Nations. Although international law
specifically prohibits attacks directed against civilians,
as well as indiscriminate attacks in situations of armed
conflict, this phenomenon is still all too common
today. In its landmark resolution 1265 (1999) of 10
years ago, the Security Council, for the first time,
engaged in a thematic approach to the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. Since then,
the Council has adopted a number of resolutions and
presidential statements addressing questions which are
instrumental to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, such as compliance with international

09-60274

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

humanitarian law and human rights law, accountability,
the fight against a culture of impunity, the fight for
humanitarian access, and the role of United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
The Council also addressed the protection of
specific groups which are particularly vulnerable in
armed conflict. In that context, let me welcome the
Council’s and the Secretariat’s work on the protection
needs of children as well as on the issues of women
and girls and sexual violence in armed conflict.
Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820 (2008)
and 1889 (2009) — the latter adopted only a few weeks
ago — stress that the protection and empowerment of
women are key issues of international security policy.
In that regard, we are also looking forward to the
speedy creation of the new United Nations gender
entity and hope that actors in peacekeeping such as the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and troop
contributors will cooperate closely with it.
Despite the conceptual and institutional progress
of recent years, substantive challenges remain.
Civilians continue to bear the brunt of armed conflicts.
The growing number of conflicts of a non-international
character has increased the vulnerability of civilians.
Many parties to today’s armed conflicts, including
non-State armed groups, fail to comply with their
obligation under international humanitarian law to
distinguish at all times between civilians and
combatants and between civilian and military objects.
The utilization of the presence of civilians to render
certain points, areas or military forces immune from
military operations by adversary forces is a particular
area of concern. If such failures to abide by the rules of
international humanitarian law remain unanswered,
respect for the law of armed conflict will be further
eroded.
Here the fight against impunity is key. Bringing
perpetrators of serious violations to justice is a central
element of improving the protection of civilians in the
future. Ensuring accountability is key to enhancing
respect for international humanitarian law. To achieve
this, we should like to urge the Security Council to
consider making greater use of all the tools at its
disposal, including targeted sanctions against
perpetrators. We also call on the Security Council to
consider resorting to international judicial mechanisms,
including by referring a situation to the International
Criminal Court.

09-60274

The protection of civilians is also fundamental to
the credibility of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Gaps remain between Headquarters and the
field. In our view, more can and must be done. I should
like to highlight a few points to illustrate what I mean.
First, missions must have a clear mandate for the
protection of civilians and resources commensurate
with the mandated protection tasks. Troop commanders
on the ground must have a clear understanding of what
is expected of them. Guidelines regarding
interpretation of those mandates need to be developed.
Secondly, with regard to doctrine and
preparation, troops on the ground need unambiguous
rules of engagement as well as specific training —
ideally according to common standards for all troop- or
police-contributing countries — in order to avoid
misunderstandings within the peacekeeping operation.
Thirdly, in terms of planning and preparedness, in
addition to clearly defined tasks, the planning process
should consider the issue of the protection of civilians
in its preparations. United Nations personnel in the
field also need appropriate training and instruction.
Fourthly, there is a need for a comprehensive
approach. The protection of civilians is not just a
military task: it is a cross-cutting issue for the mission
as a whole. A comprehensive approach involving
humanitarian assistance, police, rule of law and gender
issues must be put in place.
Fifthly, with regard to mainstreaming, all new
multidimensional mandates comprising the protection
of civilians should ensure that the protection of
civilians is mainstreamed throughout the complex
mission.
My final point relates to enhanced reporting.
Comprehensive, detailed and timely information from
the field on the protection of civilians, including on
constraints on humanitarian actors, is a prerequisite for
the Security Council to take action, enhance oversight
and adjust mandates in a timely manner to reflect
changes on the ground.
In that regard, Germany was encouraged by the
creation of the informal Security Council Expert Group
on the Protection of Civilians early this year. In our
view, that is an important step forward. We also
welcome the prominent role that the issue of the
protection of civilians plays in the New Horizon

11

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

process on the reform of United Nations peacekeeping
operations.
The protection of civilians is an important issue
that concerns all States Members of the United
Nations. My delegation appreciates the effort that went
into drafting resolution 1894 (2009), adopted today,
which we were pleased to co-sponsor. Germany will
actively participate in future debates on this issue.
The President: I call on the representative of
Qatar.
Mr. Al-Shafi (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
open debate and for giving us the opportunity to
participate in the consideration of an issue arising from
the primary purpose of the United Nations Charter. I
also wish to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
John Holmes for the importance that they attach to the
issue.
Many colleagues have mentioned that the
Security Council has reached a milestone this year in
the process of addressing the issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, namely, the tenth
anniversary of the Council’s first consideration of this
topic through the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999).
This milestone may be an opportunity to
comprehensively review the efforts to strengthen the
protection of civilians. Those efforts include the
establishment of the Security Council Expert Group on
the Protection of Civilians and the development of
plans to address all forms of violence, including
murder, mutilation and sexual violence, and to include
protection activities in the mandates of peacekeeping
missions.
However, the substance of those Security Council
resolutions and presidential statements has not been
implemented as envisaged and desired. The main
problem is the ongoing reluctance of many parties to
armed conflict to fully comply with their legal
obligations to protect civilians. One reason is the
culture of impunity, which we must address through
zero tolerance as one of the main factors influencing
the policies of warring parties towards civilians.
A fundamental challenge to promoting the
protection of civilians is foreign occupation. One
cannot talk about the protection of civilians under
foreign military occupation without addressing the root

12

causes of their suffering and lack of security. Another
challenge that must be addressed is the exposure of
towns and villages in which military operations take
place to the effects of such operations. Yet another
challenge is that of civilians and international relief
workers being killed or abducted by rebel elements in
many conflicts.
Thus, enhancing the protection of civilians is not
solely a humanitarian mission, but one that requires
efforts
in several areas. First and foremost, the
necessary laws must be enacted to protect civilians in
armed conflict without discrimination and selectivity,
in accordance with international law, in particular
international humanitarian and international human
rights law.
Our region has witnessed and continues to
witness a number of conflicts in which civilian lives
are put at risk. The most significant of those is the
Palestinian issue, which has threatened the security and
safety of civilians for six decades. Despite
developments on the political track of the peace
process to resolve the crisis, civilians are increasingly
vulnerable as a result of the growing disregard by the
Israeli authorities for the protection of the Palestinian
population living under its military occupation.
That disregard has risen to the level at which
civilians were directly targeted during the military
aggression against the Gaza Strip last year and early
this year. The report of the United Nations FactFinding Mission on the Gaza Conflict (A/64/490,
annex), mandated by the Human Rights Council,
details serious and clear violations of international
humanitarian and international human rights law,
specifically the Geneva Conventions and in particular
the Fourth Geneva Convention, which includes
provisions on the protection of civilians under foreign
occupation.
What concerns us here is that those acts clearly
violate Security Council resolutions and presidential
statements on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. The report underscores that the Government
of Israel admitted to deliberately destroying Hamas
infrastructure, which in fact belongs to the 1.5 million
Gaza residents who are already suffering under the
protracted siege that has precipitated the worst and
harshest humanitarian situation. The welfare of
civilians in Gaza continues to be directly affected as a
result of the obstruction of humanitarian access to the

09-60274

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

Strip and of basic commodities and construction
materials to rebuild the infrastructure destroyed in the
attack.
The obstruction of humanitarian operations by the
occupying Power has hampered education in the Gaza
Strip. We call on the Security Council to duly prioritize
the issue of the right to education in areas affected by
armed conflict and foreign occupation and to include
that topic in future Council deliberations. We appeal to
the Council to pay due attention to the
recommendations of the Fact-Finding Mission and the
report of the Board of Inquiry established by the
Secretary-General to investigate the targeting of United
Nations premises in Gaza by the Israeli army
(S/2009/250). The targeting of civilians by a regular
army equipped with the most sophisticated precision
weapons in the world, in full view of the Security
Council and without any response from it, undermines
the basis of the Council’s credibility in addressing the
issue of the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
The State of Qatar attaches great importance to
the protection of civilians in armed conflict and
condemns all targeting of civilians in conflicts and
under foreign occupation and their exposure to death
and injury. It also condemns terrorist acts and reprisals
against civilians and civilian targets, including
hospitals and schools. During the attack on the Gaza
Strip, Qatar was one of the first nations to call for the
cessation of those practices and their investigation. It
was also one of the first countries to strive to mobilize
financial support to assist the civilian population
affected by the hostilities.
We reiterate our call on the Security Council to
shoulder its responsibilities and obligations to protect
civilians in armed conflict, including foreign
occupation, and to demand respect for its resolutions
and the instruments of international law that provide
the legal basis for the protection of civilians. We must
always keep in mind that respect for international law
is the true basis for a world of peace and stability.
The President: I call on the representative of
Israel.
Ms. Shalev (Israel): This year marks the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999)
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. Since
then there has been considerable progress in addressing
this vital issue. Israel welcomes the latest joint study
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the

09-60274

Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
particularly the case studies regarding United Nations
missions in the Sudan, Côte d’Ivoire, Darfur and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. As we move
forward, clarity of mandates, accurately understanding
the threat to civilians, and providing genuine guidance
and planning will allow the Council and the forces it
employs to serve in an even more effective capacity.
We understand that many unresolved issues
regarding the protection of civilians in armed conflict
remain before us. Asymmetric warfare, a new, complex
phenomenon that the international community has yet
to address effectively, takes a heavy toll on civilians on
both sides of any armed conflict. Today’s debate,
therefore, must not ignore the reality of terrorism. It is
a reality in which terrorists intentionally draw civilians
into armed conflict. It is a reality in which terrorists
use civilians as shields while they store weapons in and
launch attacks from densely populated areas, from
schools, mosques, civilian structures and homes. It is a
reality in which terrorists build military infrastructure
in civilian villages as they harass and threaten United
Nations peacekeeping forces.
It is a reality in which, only one week ago, the
terrorist Hamas entity that rules the Gaza Strip fired a
rocket with a 60-kilometre range, thus threatening
Israel’s major population centres. It is a reality in
which Iran, the region’s greatest sponsor of terrorism,
stands in manifest violation of this Council’s
resolutions. Only last week the cargo ship Francop was
found to be illegally carrying hundreds of tons of
Iranian weapons likely to be used against Israeli
civilians. In light of this threatening reality, Israel, as a
democratic State and in full conformity with its
international obligations, seeks to protect civilians
while it pursues terrorists who hide among them.
During Operation Cast Lead, while Hamas
intentionally launched attacks on civilians from within
civilian areas, Israel took extraordinary measures in its
response to protect all civilians. This included placing
more than 165,000 phone calls to warn civilians of
pending attacks so that they could find refuge
elsewhere. It included dropping nearly two and-a-half
million leaflets asking civilians to avoid particular
areas and buildings used by Hamas terrorists.
Those actions reflect only part of Israel’s
extensive efforts to protect civilians in armed conflict.
They, among other measures, are discussed in great

13

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

detail in a publication by the Israeli Government.
Published some months ago, this report addresses the
difficult realities that Israel faced during Operation
Cast Lead. It describes, in a comprehensive manner,
the context of the operation, Hamas actions and the
response of the Israeli Defence Force (IDF), as well as
subsequent investigations into the operation. As the
report shows, given the complex environment of urban
warfare, Israel’s actions during Operation Cast Lead
reflected those of an army committed to the principle
of the protection of civilians.
Colonel Richard Kemp, the former Commander
of British Forces in Afghanistan and a recognized
expert in the field of warfare in conditions similar to
those in Gaza, stated unequivocally that the IDF did
more to safeguard the rights of civilians in a combat
zone than any other army in the history of warfare.
As today’s debate discusses the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, the international
community must be aware of the grave reality of
modern warfare, namely, terrorism. Terrorism turns
civilians in armed conflict into targets, shields and
weapons. We must not let terrorism turn civilians into
victims.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mrs. Grau (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this open
debate on the protection of civilians. We commend
Austria for its commitment in regard to today’s
resolution 1894 (2009), of which Switzerland was a
sponsor. We would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral, Under-Secretary-General John Holmes and
the Deputy High Commissioner for Human Rights for
their statements.
The past 10 years have been marked by a
significant increase in the work of the Security Council
on the protection of civilians. Encouraging progress
has been made, particularly in establishing a general
normative framework and in considering the specific
protection needs of women and children. These
positive developments, however, will have little value
if they do not translate into tangible improvements in
the protection of civilians on the ground. I would like
to direct my remarks to four central aspects: respect for
international humanitarian law, including the fight
against impunity; humanitarian access; the importance

14

of reporting the reality
peacekeeping missions.

on

the

ground;

and

First, the concept of protecting civilians is based
on respect for the rules of international humanitarian
law, human rights and refugee law. The fight against
impunity plays a fundamental part in improving respect
for the law. The Security Council must ensure that
investigations are carried out in all situations where
there are allegations of serious violations of
international law. This can be done through ad hoc
machinery or by mandates from the International
Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission, established
under the First Additional Protocol to the Geneva
Conventions.
It is also of fundamental importance that the
Security Council evaluate and follow up such
investigations, and that appropriate measures be taken
to ensure that the alleged perpetrators of violations of
international law are brought to justice. We also expect
the Council to make sure that disregard for the law has
consequences and that targeted measures be imposed
on individuals or parties who do not respect its
resolutions. We are in full agreement with the
Secretary-General’s views with regard to the
importance of respect for international norms on the
part of non-State players. We also support his proposal
to convene a meeting under the Arias formula aimed at
identifying new measures to improve armed groups’
compliance with existing standards.
Secondly, humanitarian access is central to
protecting and assisting those affected by armed
conflict. We consider the annex to the SecretaryGeneral’s most recent report (S/2009/277) an important
contribution to this area that should be developed
further in the Secretary-General’s reports on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. Information
obtained in this way could become an important basis
for the Council’s decisions. The Council should also
support the efforts by the Secretary-General’s
representatives to negotiate access with all parties to a
conflict. Where humanitarian access is denied, targeted
sanctions should be more systematically imposed.
Thirdly, we encourage the Secretary-General to
include the subject of the protection of civilians more
systematically in his country-specific reports. It would
be equally desirable for the Council’s informal group
of experts to be kept informed systematically by those
Secretariat entities dealing with areas relevant to

09-60274

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

protection of civilians. Such information would give
the Council a better understanding of the situation of
civilians and enable it to verify whether its decisions
have been respected and its mandates implemented.
The informal Expert Group could also be used as an
early warning mechanism to draw the Council’s
attention to conflict situations that are not on its
agenda.

This ongoing suffering, which can be horrifying,
is brought about when parties to a conflict do not
respect their obligations to protect civilians in
accordance with international humanitarian and human
rights law. This shows that measures adopted on the
ground fall short of the progress touted in the
international statements and resolutions adopted thus
far on this topic.

Fourthly, over the past 10 years, the debate within
the Security Council on peacekeeping missions and the
protection of civilians has become increasingly
intensive. Many complex questions have arisen
concerning the mandates, roles and capacities of
peacekeeping missions with respect to the protection of
civilians.

The United Arab Emirates condemns all
deliberate attacks on civilians and the indiscriminate
and disproportionate use of force. We must therefore
reflect further on all aspects of this problem in order to
guarantee continued long-term protection for civilians,
taking into account the five challenges raised by the
Secretary-General in his most recent report
(S/2009/277) on this topic. That could help to promote
the rule of law, respect for human rights, stability and
sustainable peace in countries ravaged by conflict.

The independent study commissioned by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and
supported by, inter alia, my own country, has provided
the Council and other stakeholders with food for
thought and useful recommendations. Switzerland
hopes that this study will facilitate the development of
clearer guidelines for the protection of military and
civilian components of peacekeeping operations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mr. Al-Jarman (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): Allow me first of all to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important debate on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. I would
also like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
Mr. John Holmes, the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, for their briefings this morning
on this agenda item.
Over the past 10 years, the Security Council has
taken measures to improve the means to protect
civilians in armed conflict, including the adoption of
four historic resolutions and presidential statements
that lay out the main rules and norms that address our
concerns and cover all aspects related to this matter.
However, the international community unfortunately
continues to witness the suffering endured by
thousands of civilians in armed conflict around the
world, especially women and children, the victims of
increasingly complex forms of blind acts of violence
that lead to numerous deaths and disabilities and an
increasing number of wounded, as well as acute
humanitarian crises that are hard to contain.

09-60274

We support and welcome General Assembly
resolution 64/10 on the follow-up to the report of the
United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza
Conflict (A/64/490, annex) concerning war crimes and
crimes against humanity committed by Israel in the
Gaza Strip. We hope that proper measures will be taken
to implement that resolution, including the exertion of
pressure on the Israeli Government to organize proper,
independent and credible investigations within three
months on the serious violations of international law
and international humanitarian law mentioned in the
report of the Fact-Finding Mission in order to
guarantee greater accountability and justice.
We support the measures taken by the SecretaryGeneral to guarantee the safety of United Nations
personnel in Afghanistan. We hope that the
international community and, above all, the United
Nations agencies will adopt, pursuant to their
respective mandates, even more effective measures
along those lines, including through capacity-building
and the provision of technical aid to countries and
Governments. In this way, they will be able to
implement the necessary prosecutions and determine
the criminal responsibility of the perpetrators of violent
crimes against civilians, United Nations peacekeeping
personnel and other international humanitarian actors.
In response to the unstable security conditions
and dangers facing United Nations personnel in
Afghanistan, the United Arab Emirates recently took

15

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

part in regional efforts to guarantee their security in
that country.
We are convinced that States must assume the
primary responsibility for protecting civilians in armed
conflict. It is also crucial to promote regional and
international coordination and cooperation in that field.
We reaffirm the effective role that must be played by
the Security Council in responding swiftly, directly and
decisively to armed conflicts and emerging crises and
in addressing their deeper causes. We reaffirm the
importance of the role the Council must play in
prevailing upon parties to conflicts to create safe and
neutral zones and to guarantee humanitarian corridors,
the evacuation of victims, and safe, timely and
unhindered access for humanitarian aid. It is important
to bolster respect for those measures and to promote
accountability with respect to international law and
international humanitarian law in accordance with the
provisions of the United Nations Charter, in order to
mitigate the damage caused by armed conflicts and the
suffering they inflict on civilians and to prevent their
recurrence.
Lastly, we hope to swiftly reach an international
agreement on the role that must be played by United
Nations peacekeeping missions in protecting civilians
and humanitarian personnel in their area of operations,
within the framework of full respect for the
sovereignty of States and on the basis of their special
status.
In order to enhance the Organization’s credibility,
we call for negotiations between the Security Council,
the Secretariat and the troop- and police-contributing
countries, in particular with respect to monitoring
efforts, presenting reports and accurate information,
guaranteeing various capacities and adequate
resources, improving the operational guidelines of
mission mandates, and protecting civilians in a
coordinated and efficient fashion.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on the efforts of the Government of Austria over the
past year to reach agreement on how to improve the
situation of civilian populations affected by armed
conflict.

16

I would also like to welcome the presentation of
the independent study on the protection of civilians in
the context of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
This document was brought about through exhaustive
efforts that we commend. The fact that it is an
independent study allows us to consider it without
preconceived notions and draw from it valid lessons on
the basis of which all stakeholders involved in this
issue can build, in a coordinated fashion, the broadest
consensus possible on the protection of civilians in
peacekeeping operations.
After 10 years of discussion on this subject and
after the approval of mandates for the protection of
civilians by the Security Council, two facts are quite
evident. First, there is a clear evolution in the
awareness of the international community on the need
for the United Nations to play an important support
role in the protection of the lives of innocent persons
affected by conflict. Accordingly, peacekeeping
operations are probably the most tangible tool that the
Organization possesses to make this protection
effective. It is also true that a large part of the
credibility of the United Nations depends on this tool.
Secondly, while we are aware of the fact that the
protection of civilians is a task that is fundamentally
carried out on the ground, its effective implementation
is not easy if the actors do not have the necessary and
suitable planning, guidelines, coordination, training,
resources and political commitment. That is why it is
one thing to incorporate protection language in a
Security Council resolution and quite another to
implement this intention effectively on the ground. The
distance between the two extremes is very large and, as
the independent study has pointed out, the link that
should bind them together is completely broken.
Thus, to move forward in a sustainable fashion,
all the actors involved should have more or less the
same idea of what is expected when the protection of
civilians is mandated. What can we effectively do on
the ground, given the circumstances in which the
United Nations operates? What can we do to improve
this situation?
By way of example, it is very clear that we must
provide missions with some type of concept or
guidelines which would interpret in a fairly standard
way the mandates which are approved by the Security
Council. In order to take advantage of the experience
acquired and to bolster the legitimacy and the

09-60274

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

commitment to their implementation, these guidelines
must be developed with the participation of the actors
involved, especially the police and troop-contributing
countries which are responsible for the most sensitive
tasks involved in implementation.
It is also clear that we have to find a balance
between intentions and capabilities, between mandates
and resources. The complexity of the situations and the
lack of human and material resources, even if they do
not justify inaction, are real conditions that must be
borne in mind in order not to exaggerate expectations
and so that we do not fix parameters that we are not in
a position to fulfil.
All stakeholders — the Security Council, the
Secretariat, the police- and troop-contributing
countries — need to make a great deal of improvement
in this area so that this balance will get closer to what
innocent civilians expect of the United Nations.
Likewise, even though we do agree that protection —
in the light of evidence of physical violence — is an
essential matter in the protection of civilians, it should
be looked at from a comprehensive point of view,
including humanitarian assistance, police work and the
promotion of the rule of law, political stability,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
reconstruction and economic and social development.
No one questions the fact that the State has the
primary responsibility to assist victims in emergency
situations that could take place on their own territory.
However, when the scope and duration of these
emergencies exceed the response capacity of States,
international cooperation in terms of humanitarian
assistance is crucial. Accordingly, the involvement of
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
in the protection of civilians, in coordination with the
work of the peacekeeping missions, is of vital
importance.
In this regard, it is urgent to maintain and
strengthen the norms of international humanitarian law
with a view to fighting impunity, ensuring access for
humanitarian personnel and providing proper safety
and security conditions so that they may carry out their
tasks with the ultimate objective of avoiding and/or
alleviating the suffering of the civilian population in
emergency situations.
Uruguay reiterates its desire to continue working
proactively and constructively to move forward in this
matter in an inclusive and coordinated fashion, relying

09-60274

on lessons learned, particularly in the Special
Committee
on
Peacekeeping
Operations,
the
representative body for all Member States. In this
respect, I would like to take this opportunity to invite
participants to a new workshop which we will
organize, together with the permanent representative of
Australia, in the morning of 8 December. There, we
hope to repeat the open discussion and to start to seek a
common understanding with a view to the upcoming
session of the Special Committee.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Denmark.
Mr. Staur (Denmark): I thank you, Mr. President,
and I thank the delegation of Austria for organizing and
preparing this thorough discussion of this very
important subject. The protection of civilians in armed
conflict should be the centrepiece of any peace
agreement and conflict prevention effort. The need for
concrete action on the ground is more urgent than ever.
Civilians are increasingly being targeted during
conflict, which brings death, displacement, rape and
torture to populations affected by the conflict. Women
and children are subjected to sexual violence and
abuse, often as part of horrifying war strategies.
The Security Council has a responsibility to help
the thousands of people whose lives are threatened
because Governments are unable or unwilling to
protect civilian citizens living in conflict areas. It is
important to strengthen the enforcement of
international humanitarian law through the Security
Council. That implies that the Council is consistent in
its response to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and that it is receptive to information about
grave threats to civilians, as well as proactive in
seeking such information. The Council needs to be
ready to act using all available means at its disposal.
An important step to be taken in securing the
protection of civilians is to improve the mandates of
peacekeeping missions. Civilian protection is, of
course, at the very heart of peacekeeping. Still, we
have seen time and again that peacekeeping mandates
are incomplete, unrealistic and ineffective in
combating conflict and violence. Mission mandates
tend to have somewhat rigid parameters for analysing
and adapting to conflict settings, and they too often fail
to address the structural causes of conflicts.
Furthermore, they do not consistently ensure a wholeof-system approach, linking in a comprehensive

17

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

manner the efforts of the United Nations and others in
both peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Mandates often
tend to be vague, overambitious and unrealistic in
terms of what can be accomplished and without
sufficient personnel or proper exit strategies.
It must be the responsibility of the Security
Council to provide better targeted, comprehensive,
realistic and robust mission mandates and to have clear
protection objectives. Mandates must be flexibly
adapted to swiftly changing political situations and
circumstances in countries. Also, the gap between
mandated tasks and allocated resources and capabilities
must be bridged, if we are to make a difference on the
ground — and that we must.
We call for a more concerted action on the ground
for the United Nations and for Member States and urge
them to get together to strengthen cooperation and
coordination of all efforts, from peacekeeping missions
through humanitarian action and early recovery
activities to development assistance. We need more
focus on impact and joint operation approaches and to
be less caught up in bureaucratic constraints and
squabbles over turf.
I wish to make two final points. First, there is
also a need to protect humanitarian aid workers. When
basic security and safety are not provided,
humanitarian organizations are forced to leave and
cannot provide assistance and protection to the people
who desperately need it. It is alarming that the
humanitarian space seems to be shrinking, leaving
millions of people without basic assistance and
protection.
Finally, be reminded that Denmark is a strong
advocate for fighting impunity. Ensuring that
perpetrators are held accountable not only serves as a
deterrent of future crimes, but it also recognizes the
suffering and dignity of victims and can thereby help
societies to move forward and reconcile after conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of Ireland.
Ms. Anderson (Ireland): I should like to express
our thanks to Austria for organizing this timely debate.
Ireland associates itself with the intervention made
earlier by the representative of Sweden on behalf of the
European Union.
It is customary on these anniversary occasions to
note the progress made, as well as to map the distance

18

to be travelled. We would not wish to devalue the
efforts or achievements made over the past 10 years.
There have indeed been advances. For example, one
area in which my country has been particularly active
is in the adoption of the Convention on Cluster
Munitions. But the Secretary-General, in his report of
last May, tells it as it is:
“[F]or all the reports, resolutions and actions of
the last decade, the situation that confronts
civilians in current conflicts is depressingly
similar to that which prevailed in 1999.”
(S/2009/277, para. 23)
The frustration of those at the coalface is clear. In
the Security Council’s last debate on the issue, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs Holmes
reminded us that lip service to the principles of
international law is no substitute for real action. The
New Horizon document acknowledges the significant
credibility challenge for United Nations peacekeeping
that is created by the mismatch between expectations
and capacity. Those same sentiments and frustrations
were echoed in the opening interventions this morning.
We are not short of high quality analysis. We need now
to move from analysis to action. Today, I would wish
to concentrate on four points, the first on enhancing
accountability.
The principles of enhancing compliance and
accountability are ones that we believe need to be
applied rigorously and consistently. We note what the
Secretary-General’s report has to say in that regard,
both in general and in relation to the specific situations
he mentions: Sri Lanka, Gaza and Afghanistan. We
agree with his recommendations, including his stress
on the need for consistent condemnation of violations
of the law by all parties to conflict without exception.
All of us are challenged by that. In the week following
the General Assembly’s debate on the Goldstone report
(A/HRC/12/48), the challenge has been brought into
particularly sharp relief.
Issues of protection of civilians can typically
arise in a complex political context. We must be
mindful of the complexity of the context but, at the
same time, not be prepared to sacrifice or erode the
principles of protection and accountability. That entails
responsibilities both for those who frame resolutions
and those who vote on them. The temptation to distort
or to dilute the principles of protection must be
avoided. Nor can we succumb to selectivity. Our

09-60274

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

concerns about specific situations gain legitimacy and
respect insofar as we are prepared to insist that the
same standards be applied universally.
Secondly,
with
regard
to
safeguarding
humanitarian access, such access is the lifeline linking
humanitarian actors to civilians in conflict. The
increase in attacks on humanitarian workers — with
the recent targeted attack on United Nations aid
workers in Kabul being a further grim example — is
putting that lifeline at risk. The statistics are shocking.
The incidence of kidnapping of humanitarian workers
has increased by 350 per cent in the past three years.
Last year marked the greatest number of humanitarian
workers affected by violence in 12 years.
We in Ireland have experienced at first hand the
vulnerability of our international humanitarian
workers. We were relieved by the recent release of
Sharon Commins, a young Irish aid worker who was
held captive with a Ugandan colleague in Darfur for
some months. Efforts continue to secure the release of
Father Michael Sinnott, on which we are working with
the Philippine authorities.
The increased targeting of humanitarian workers
is an affront to the United Nations most basic
principles. More must be done, both to highlight and
prioritize the issue and to strategize so as to arrest and
reverse the trend. There is clearly no simple way to
eliminate the threat. The approach will have to be
multi-pronged, and any proposed steps must respect the
need for humanitarian actors to maintain their
neutrality and independence.
Where United Nations peacekeepers are on the
ground, their role in protecting humanitarian workers
can be critical. The Secretary-General’s report refers to
the role played by the European Union Force (EUFOR)
in Chad in preventing criminality against the
humanitarian community. Ireland provided the
leadership for EUFOR and we continue to have a
strong presence in the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad. As our personnel
on the ground in those operations are acutely aware, it
is only through the most thoroughly professional and
impartial approach that the peacekeeping force can win
the confidence of non-governmental organizations, and
thus their assent to having peacekeepers help to protect
them.
Thirdly, with regard to strengthening United
Nations peacekeeping, this issue has been addressed in

09-60274

almost every intervention today. As speaker after
speaker has recognized, our task now is to bridge the
gap between aspiration and reality. If we needed a
further wake-up call, the joint study recently issued by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
provides it. The study’s central finding is that the chain
of events to support the protection of civilians — from
the earliest planning to Security Council mandates to
the implementation of mandates in the field — is
broken.
Two of the key issues are clarity of mandate and
adequacy of resources. Mandates must be clear and
specific. Inevitably, field commanders will face
resource constraints and competing demands on the
resources available, and will need to use their judgment
on how best to deploy them to achieve maximum
civilian protection. But guidance is required. The
mandate of each peacekeeping operation should
elaborate, as fully as possible, who is to be protected
and what level of protection is to be provided. The
means to achieve that should be fully set out in the
operational plans and other directive material.
Peacekeeping missions seldom have sufficient
resources to accomplish the protection task as they
would wish. In almost all scenarios, but particularly
where there is a need to protect civilians over a large
area, air assets are critical. Their value is psychological
and pre-emptive, as well as reactive. Where civilians
are under threat, the belief that a force has the reach
and combat power to react swiftly and decisively will
be a considerable deterrent.
Fourthly and finally, with regard to the
responsibility to protect, Ireland has participated
actively in the evolution of the discussion on the
responsibility to protect. We view it as an extremely
important vehicle for advancing the work on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. Resolution
63/308, adopted by the General Assembly in
September, was very welcome. However, like many
others, we would have preferred a text that more
clearly mapped out the future development of the
work. The reference to the responsibility to protect in
resolution 1894 (2009), adopted today, undoubtedly
will help to reinvigorate efforts.
The test of success for today’s debate will be
whether it moves us beyond analysis and
consciousness-raising to more concrete outcomes. The

19

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

message from the coalface — that actions must match
words, that all of us must demonstrate a much greater
sense of urgency, and that Security Council members
must exercise the responsibilities that accompany the
privileges of membership — must be heeded.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Observer of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Let me begin by
thanking the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Austria for
presiding over today’s meeting. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his participation in this
thematic debate on a matter of immense importance to
Palestine. We would also like to commend the UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs for his
informative briefing and his tireless efforts to promote
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, as well as
the Deputy High Commissioner for Human Rights for
her principled statement.
Before proceeding, Palestine wishes to align
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Egypt in his capacity as Chair of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
This year marks the tenth anniversary since the
Security Council first considered the matter of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. Throughout
those 10 years, the Security Council has repeatedly
demanded that all parties to armed conflicts comply
with their obligations under international humanitarian
law to protect the civilian population. However, the
failure of States and parties to comply with and ensure
compliance with their legal obligations in that regard is
still rampant, and civilians continue to bear the brunt
of war and aggression and their cruel consequences.
Therefore, as we look ahead, we must continue — and
in fact redouble — our efforts to ensure that the
protection of civilians in armed conflict is addressed
and guaranteed for all civilians, without selectivity or
inaction based on political considerations.
Unfortunately for Palestine, the selectivity and
inaction of the international community, including the
Security Council, has only allowed Israel, the
occupying Power, to continue its violations of
international law, international humanitarian law and
human rights law against the Palestinian civilian
population in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem.
Regrettably, the international community’s
repeated failures to hold Israel accountable for its

20

violations and war crimes has reinforced Israel’s
impunity and lawlessness, permitting it to continue
using military force and collective punishment against
the defenceless Palestinian people under its occupation.
In essence, that has not only absolved Israel from
honouring its legal obligations as an occupying Power,
but has also emboldened it to continue its perpetration
of crimes without fear of punishment.
No one needs to be reminded of the tragic
consequences of Israel’s military aggression launched
on 27 December 2008 against the defenceless
Palestinian civilians in the Gaza Strip, of whom more
than 1,400 — including hundreds of innocent children
and women — were brutally killed and more than
5,500 injured. Undoubtedly, that was an appalling and
fatal illustration of Israel’s complete disregard for the
human rights and right to protection of the Palestinian
civilian population. At the same time, Israel has
continued its unlawful blockade in collective
punishment of the entire population of Gaza, which
continues to live in misery in the rubble of their homes
and communities. Humanitarian access, which is one of
the key components of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, also continues to be impeded, and
much-needed exports continue to be totally prohibited,
by the occupying Power.
In that regard, the investigation carried out by the
United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza
Conflict, which was headed by Justice Goldstone, led
to findings clearly confirming that Israel, the
occupying Power, had committed serious human rights
violations and grave breaches of international
humanitarian law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention, amounting to war crimes and even crimes
against humanity against the Palestinian people. Even
more shocking and deplorable, the report concluded
that the aggression on the Gaza Strip had been planned
in all its phases as “a deliberately disproportionate
attack designed to punish, humiliate and terrorize a
civilian population” (A/64/490, annex, para. 1893) and
included
“wilful killing, torture or inhuman treatment,
wilfully causing great suffering or serious injury to
body or health, and extensive destruction of
property, not justified by military necessity and
carried out unlawfully and wantonly” (ibid.
para. 1935)
— all of which give rise to Israeli criminal
responsibility.

09-60274

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

The fact that Israel proceeded to unrelentingly
pound the Gaza Strip with its entire lethal arsenal for
22 days enforces the statement made by the Goldstone
Mission that the absence of accountability and —
worse still — the lack, in many instances, of any
expectation thereof are what allow violations to thrive
to a large extent. It is exactly that culture of impunity,
which Israel has enjoyed for more than four decades,
that has not only deepened the injustice and suffering
endured by the Palestinian people, but has also
undermined the credibility of international law and of
the international system as a whole.
In that regard, resolution 64/10 adopted by the
General Assembly last week, on 5 November, is an
important step towards beginning the process of
ensuring accountability and justice. In addition to the
efforts made to address this serious issue in the General
Assembly, we will continue to call on all relevant
United Nations entities, including the members of the
Security Council, to shoulder their responsibility and
on the high contracting parties to the Fourth Geneva
Convention to shoulder their individual and collective
legal obligations and responsibilities in order to
embark on a new era for our peoples based on respect
for international law, the true guarantor of peace,
freedom, security and human dignity. We must bring an
end to this cycle of impunity on the part of Israel and
pave the way for the pursuit of accountability for the
war crimes and crimes against humanity committed
against the Palestinian people in the besieged Gaza
Strip by Israel, the occupying Power.
Regrettably, the situation in the rest of the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, also remains volatile. In that regard, Israel
continues its raids and arrest operations in the West
Bank, as well as its settlement colonization campaign
and wall construction throughout the territory, in grave
breach of the Fourth Geneva Convention and its
Additional Protocol I and in total disregard of United
Nations resolutions, the Advisory Opinion of the
International Court of Justice and Road Map
obligations. Settler violence has also intensified, with
violent, extremist Israeli settlers continuing to harass,
intimidate and terrorize Palestinian civilians, violating
their rights to life, liberty and security of person, and to
destroy Palestinian property and crops. Moreover, in
occupied East Jerusalem, Israel’s evictions of
Palestinian families — some of whom we brought to
the United Nations, including the Fourth Committee, a

09-60274

few days ago — and its demolition of Palestinian
homes have rendered hundreds of civilians homeless,
forcing us to ask the Council: When will the rights of
those civilians, including their right to protection, be
ensured?
As long as Israel continues to flout its legal
obligations towards the Palestinian civilian population
under its occupation, the international community, in
particular the Security Council, must act to uphold its
responsibilities and ensure compliance by Israel with
international law and United Nations resolutions. A
clear and firm message must be sent to the occupying
Power that the international community will no longer
tolerate its illegal actions, violations and crimes
because commitment to the principles of international
law must be above any other consideration that may
make a mockery of our international system. Such firm
intolerance and a principled commitment to the law
will help us break this cycle of impunity and bring an
end to the crimes that have caused so much suffering
and prolonged this tragic conflict, as well as truly
ensure the protection of the Palestinian civilian
population.
In closing, having reviewed the seven pages of
resolution 1894 (2009) on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, just adopted by the Council, we took
careful note of the applicability of the overwhelming
majority of the provisions of the resolution to the
situation being faced by the Palestinian people in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem
and, in particular, the Gaza Strip. We wish to
emphasize, in that regard, the extreme importance of
operative paragraph 4 of the resolution, which
reiterates the Council’s willingness
“to respond to situations of armed conflict where
civilians are being targeted or humanitarian
assistance to civilians is being deliberately
obstructed, including through the consideration of
appropriate measures”.
We hope that that provision and others will be borne in
mind when the Security Council next deals with the
question of Palestine.
The President: I give the floor to the Permanent
Representative of Argentina.
Mr. Argüello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me to commend the Austrian
delegation for its work in the presidency of the

21

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

Security Council for the month of November and to
thank it for convening this open debate, to which my
country attaches special importance. I also reiterate the
importance of the Council’s holding public meetings to
allow all Members of the Organization to express their
opinions and interact with members of the Council.

With regard to non-State armed groups in armed
conflicts that are not of an international nature, it is
clear that common article 3 of the four 1949 Geneva
Conventions sets out specific obligations that must be
respected by the parties involved, including non-State
parties.

This year, the Security Council is considering for
the tenth consecutive year the issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict within the legal framework
of resolutions 1265 (1999), 1296 (2000) and 1674
(2006) and the aide-mémoire on the protection of
civilians (S/PRST/2002/6) adopted by the Security
Council in 2002. This year also marks the sixtieth
anniversary of the adoption of the Geneva Conventions
of 1949, the keystones of international humanitarian
law.

With respect to peacekeeping operations and the
protection of civilians — the focus of this debate —
my country is convinced of the need to include
protection activities in the mandates of United Nations
missions. However, the Secretary-General’s report and
the conclusions of the workshop on the subject
organized in January by Australia and Uruguay, stress
the need to develop clearer mandates and to provide
the necessary resources in an efficient and timely
manner. In this respect, interaction with components on
the ground is essential to ensuring that the mandates
are not only clear but also and, most importantly,
appropriate to the circumstances the mission will face.

In accordance with international humanitarian
law, the protection of civilians in armed conflicts is a
legal obligation under international law. It is
regrettable that the Council must continue to deal with
the matter because civilians continue to this day to
suffer the grave consequences of armed conflicts. We
are therefore convinced that the Security Council must
remain committed to the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts by promoting respect for international
humanitarian and human rights law and fighting
impunity.
At the open debate held by the Council on
26 June (S/PV.6151), my delegation referred to the
Secretary-General’s report on the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts (S/2009/277) and
expressed its regret that the situation was just as
discouraging as it had been 10 years earlier.
The 1949 Geneva Conventions were a step
forward for the international community, given the
dehumanizing situation it had recently experienced.
Sixty years later, conflicts continue to arise and,
regrettably, there remain numerous situations in which
civilians are the targets of attacks and, as others have
noted, the number of victims among the civilian
population is unacceptably high; in which children are
recruited as soldiers or are subject to abuse; in which
sexual violence is a daily occurrence; and in which
thousands and even millions of people are displaced
and humanitarian access is severely hindered.
Parties to armed conflict are required by the basic
rules of international humanitarian law to guarantee
protection of civilians from the effects of the conflict.

22

As to the integration of the components, it is
important to ensure the necessary structure to
guarantee the protection of women, especially from
sexual violence. At the same time, we must also take
into account the need to protect children, and in
particular to prevent the recruitment of girls and boys
and to rehabilitate child soldiers.
Another important aspect of the protection of
civilians is to guarantee civilian access to humanitarian
assistance. If, due to inability or to a lack of political
will, the parties to a conflict do not fulfil their
obligations under international humanitarian law, they
must at least do their best to guarantee civilian access
to shipments, materials and emergency care. Likewise,
persons fleeing combat zones must be allowed to travel
safely to areas where they will not be harmed.
My country believes that justice plays a
fundamental role. Individuals who have committed war
crimes, genocide or crimes against humanity are
responsible for very serious violations of the law and
must therefore be held criminally accountable before
the law.
This Council established two ad hoc international
tribunals, one for the former Yugoslavia and one for
Rwanda, and the International Criminal Court is now
fully functional. I recall that the International Criminal
Court does not replace national justice systems, but
operates to complement such systems when they are
not functioning.

09-60274

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

Ensuring accountability for such serious crimes is
more than an obligation for States. It is also in the
interest of the international community, represented at
this Organization, since justice contributes to
mitigating the harm caused by armed conflict and sets
the stage for reconstruction and peace.
I reiterate once more that, pursuant to
international humanitarian law and the Council’s
resolutions, any attack on civilians or other protected
persons in situations of armed conflict, including the
restriction of access to humanitarian assistance and the
recruitment of child soldiers, is a violation of
international law. I therefore conclude by calling for
strict compliance with the obligations arising from the
1899 and 1907 Hague Conventions, the four 1949
Geneva Conventions and their 1977 Protocols, and the
decisions of the Security Council.
The President: I give the floor to the Permanent
Representative of Colombia.
Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, and the
Austrian delegation for your work in the Council
presidency for the month of November. The presence
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the initiative to
convene this debate highlight the importance of the
subject matter of this meeting. I also thank the
Secretary-General, the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and the Deputy High
Commissioner for Human Rights for their valuable
presentations.
Ten years after the Security Council began to
address the issue of the protection of civilians in
conflict, the contributions of this organ have been
significant. The adoption of four resolutions and
several presidential statements, as well as the aidemémoire agreed upon as a guide for the protection of
civilians, are noteworthy advances. This meeting of the
Council therefore represents a useful opportunity to
evaluate such progress and explore other alternatives
that contribute to the protection of the civilian
population in situations of conflict or violence.
Through its democratic security policy, the
Government of Colombia has consolidated its activities
to strengthen and guarantee the rule of law throughout
the national territory. The implementation of this
policy has allowed us to establish more stable
conditions for the protection of Colombians and their
enjoyment of their rights.

09-60274

Through this effort, the criminality and violence
indicators have fallen to levels not experienced in
many years. In 2002, the country had no police
protection in vast areas of its territory. The presence of
the national police and the military forces has resulted
in a dramatic drop in the violence indicators. Since that
year, homicides have fallen by 44 per cent, extortive
kidnappings by 88 per cent, the number of massacre
victims by 96 per cent, and terrorist attacks by 79 per
cent. Today, the homicide figures are the lowest they
have been in 22 years. Extortive kidnappings have
reached their lowest level in the last decades.
The demobilization of more than 52,000 armed
men also reflects the effectiveness of the policy. More
people are demobilized every day than are captured,
and more are captured than killed. The State seeks
above all to defend life and has the fundamental
objective of ensuring better conditions for the entire
civilian population.
Colombia is guided by the basic premise that the
primary responsibility for the protection of civilians
falls to the State. And each State may turn to the
appropriate international cooperation mechanisms,
depending to its priorities. In this context, the role of
the United Nations and the international community is
to support national protection efforts.
That primary responsibility and the role of the
States are particularly relevant with respect to
humanitarian assistance in their territories. My country
recognizes in that regard the importance of cooperation
and the facilitation of access to humanitarian
organizations,
in
accordance
with
applicable
international law. If humanitarian assistance is to be
reliable and predictable, it must be delivered in
conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and
the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
independence.
As pointed out in the concept paper circulated to
the Council, the compliance of armed non-State actors
with their obligations towards civilians is of particular
relevance. In this regard, an approach that encompasses
the particular issues and specific circumstances of each
situation is indispensable. Any initiative in this field
must take into account the central role of Governments
and applicable national legislation. In a context of
cooperation, action should seek first to require armed
non-State actors to cease their violent actions against
civilians.

23

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

Every year, hundreds of civilian victims
throughout the world — men, women and children —
see their rights and violated and their lives disrupted by
the use of anti-personnel mines. Colombia will have
the honour to host the Second Review Conference of
the Parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of
Anti-personnel Mines and on Their Destruction, which
will take place in the city of Cartagena from
29 November to 4 December.
The action plan to be adopted in Cartagena will
be an opportunity to make the strengthening and
development of the Convention a shared aim of
Governments, international organizations and civil
society. The goals achieved and the remaining
challenges to the implementation of the Ottawa
Convention should encourage the international
community to continue pursuing the higher goal of
achieving a world free of anti-personnel mines. The
fight against this scourge is a direct contribution to
actions in favour of the civilian population and should
hence be supported with a high level of commitment
and political will.
The implementation of effective controls to the
illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons is also
indispensable. My country will continue to promote
this issue in the General Assembly, and expects the
Security Council to promote the adoption of effective
controls in this area. The illicit traffic in small arms
and light weapons threatens civilian security, increases
crime and causes the death or permanent disability of
thousands of people. Without decisive action against
this illicit trade, initiatives to protect civilians may be
incomplete and ineffective.
The Government of Colombia reaffirms its
condemnation of any action aimed against civilians.
Their protection and strict compliance with
international humanitarian law and other relevant
international norms are matters of absolute priority that
will continue to guide my country’s policies.
The President: I
representative of Ghana.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Christian (Ghana): Allow me to congratulate
the Austrian delegation on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. Ghana welcomes
the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/277),
as well as his statement this morning demonstrating his

24

commitment to addressing the issue of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and with the
statement to be delivered by the Permanent
Representative of Zambia on behalf of the African
Group.
The timing and theme for today’s open debate
could not have been more appropriate, considering that
this year marks the tenth anniversary of the Security
Council’s initial consideration of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict as a thematic issue under its
resolution 1265 (1999). In the course of the past
decade, Ghana has remained among the 10 top troopcontributing countries in peacekeeping, and many
Ghanaians peacekeepers are among those who have
made the ultimate sacrifice. Ghana will continue to
cooperate with other Member States in the
implementation of the relevant resolutions adopted by
the United Nations aimed at enhancing the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. As acknowledged in the
valuable concept paper (see S/2009/567) prepared for
this debate, though some modest progress has been
made, more work remains to be done.
As we speak today, millions of innocent people
are suffering in various theatres of conflict and are
denied humanitarian assistance. Many are deliberately
targeted by armed groups and regular forces, in the
face of the inability or unwillingness of their own
Governments to come to their rescue. Children are
being forcefully recruited as child soldiers or sex
slaves; the raping of women and girls as a weapon of
warfare persists; many victims have no access to food,
water or schools, while others have been compelled to
flee their homes, while humanitarian workers and
peacekeeping personnel are deliberately killed or
injured. Such atrocities are being committed in flagrant
violation of the principles of international humanitarian
and human rights law.
The phenomenon of internally displaced persons,
a category of civilians in need of protection in armed
conflict, is of particular concern in Africa, where
millions of people are at present displaced by violent
conflicts. In order to address the gaps and weaknesses
in the existing international legal framework on the
protection of internally displaced persons, in October
African States adopted in Kampala, Uganda, the

09-60274

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

African Union (AU) Convention for the Protection and
Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in Africa
with the purpose and objective “to promote and
strengthen regional and national measures to prevent or
mitigate, prohibit and eliminate the root causes of
internal displacement”.
The States parties to the Kampala Convention are
not only obligated to respect the right, which the
African Union Constitutive Act confers on the Union
and its member States, to intervene or request
intervention in circumstances of genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes, but they also
undertake to prevent other violations of international
humanitarian
law
against
displaced
persons.
Furthermore, States parties to the Kampala Convention
are under a general obligation to ensure the
accountability of individuals and non-State actors for
acts of arbitrary displacement, in accordance with
national and international criminal law. It is hoped that
the Council and other United Nations entities with the
mandate to protect internally displaced persons will
cooperate with African States in advancing the
objectives of the Kampala Convention.
In the long run, the protection of civilians must
begin with a culture of prevention encompassing all the
phases of armed conflict. This should include the
strengthening of early warning mechanisms, immediate
or rapid response in the early stages of a conflict to
avert escalation and establishing mechanisms for postconflict peacebuilding in order that countries emerging
from conflict do not experience a relapse. Effective
sanctions regimes must be put in place to ensure that
armed groups and their sponsors do not profit from
natural resources they illegally exploit in conflict
zones. Peacekeepers and humanitarian agencies must
be adequately resourced to fulfil their mandate in order
that they can focus on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, and not on their own protection and
survival. Therefore, steps being taken to ensure costeffectiveness in peacekeeping must not sacrifice the
effectiveness of peacekeeping, peacebuilding and other
peace operations.
There is the need for the international community
to work closely with regional organizations such as the
African Union to strengthen regional mechanisms
designed to enhance the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, to facilitate prevention of violent
conflicts and intervention in them and to avert postconflict relapse. To that end, Ghana would reiterate the

09-60274

need for the United Nations to heed the request by the
African Union for logistical and material support
towards the implementation of the African Standby
Force arrangement. This will enable the AU to give
practical meaning to the relevant articles of its
founding treaty and the Protocol on the establishment
of the African Peace and Security Council, providing
for the right of the Union and its member States to
intervene in circumstances of genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity.
In closing, Ghana wishes to urge that measures to
ensure the protection of civilians in armed conflict
include the prosecution and punishment of
perpetrators, with a view to deterring attacks on
innocent civilians. Indeed, if we are to succeed in
fighting impunity, then it is imperative to promote
universal participation in the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court and to strengthen other
international criminal justice mechanisms, bearing in
mind the link between justice and the maintenance of
international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Mr. Lambert (Belgium) (spoke in French): My
delegation fully associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of Sweden on behalf of the
European Union. We wish to offer a few additional
comments to highlight Belgium’s support with respect
to this matter, which is one of great importance to us.
Belgium welcomes the Security Council’s recent
adoption of resolutions 1882 (2009), 1888 (2009) and
1889 (2009), which in our view reflect increased
political will to reduce the devastating impact of armed
conflict on civilians. In that connection, Belgium
thanks the Human Rights Council for its adoption in
October of its resolution 12/5, on protecting the human
rights of civilians in armed conflict.
Belgium believes that Security Council resolution
1894 (2009), adopted today, marks a significant step
forward in a process the Council began 10 years ago
when it added protection of civilians in armed conflict
to its agenda.
Although over the past 10 years the United
Nations has undeniably made real progress on the
protection of civilians, civilians remain the principal
victims of conflict. Hence, a great deal remains to be
done. We therefore hope that today’s resolution will

25

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

make it possible to genuinely strengthen the protectionof-civilians portion of the mandates of peacekeeping
operations and to implement those mandates on the
ground. The study recently prepared by the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations is a useful
tool for helping us reach that goal.
Belgium attaches great importance also to the
safety, security and freedom of movement of
humanitarian personnel. We were particularly pleased
that that aspect of the protection of civilians was more
fully reflected in today’s resolution.
Another requirement in the sphere of the
protection of civilians is the fight against impunity.
That challenge must be taken up at both the national
and the international levels. Here, Belgium stresses the
fundamental role of the International Criminal Court.
Finally, I recall that Belgium attaches great
importance to the principle of the responsibility to
protect, for which the General Assembly has just
reaffirmed its support and which is intended to protect
civilians from the most serious crimes: genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al Nafisee (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me first to thank His Excellency the SecretaryGeneral for his report on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict (S/2009/277). My thanks go also to
Mr. John Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, for his statement. I also take this
opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, as your friendly
country, Austria, presides over the work of the Security
Council this month.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict has
become an important item on the Security Council
agenda. The issue has the political dimension of
encompassing threats to international peace and
security and also has a legal dimension because of
violations of international law and international
humanitarian law during armed conflict. It also has
humanitarian and economic dimensions, reflected in
the forced displacement of civilians and the consequent
misery and humiliation that can overnight turn civilians
into refugees or persons who have been displaced,
either internally or externally.

26

Participation in the discussion of this issue, in my
view, is not solely a matter of rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure of the Security Council. It does not
only mean being invited to sit at the Council table, to
make a statement, to listen to dozens of other
statements and to exchange compliments. It also means
that Security Council members must take into
consideration the opinions offered by countries during
discussion of the resolutions and documents adopted
by the Council. That would enhance the credibility,
efficiency, openness and transparency of the Council’s
work and would make it possible for the Council to
take into consideration other views as a means of
achieving respect and appreciation.
There is no way for the Security Council to
enhance its respectability and consideration other than
by the demonstration of political will, strong
determination and sincere desire on the part of its
members, particularly the permanent members, which
bear the primary responsibility for achieving the
aspirations of Member States and all peoples without
exception, preference or discrimination among the
States.
While we welcome General Assembly resolution
64/10 on the follow-up to the report of the United
Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict
(A/64/490, annex), we are somewhat frustrated by the
positions of some countries, including certain members
of this Council. How can we understand that those
countries emphasize in their statements the importance
of protecting civilians in armed conflicts while they
vote against a resolution that seeks to protect those
civilians? Are we to conclude that civilians differ from
one county to another, or that moral and legal
responsibilities differ according to ethnic groups and
nations? Some claim that they seek to protect civilians
through a variety of ways and means but do not want to
discuss such issues in the Security Council. That is a
living example of double standards in addressing
similar issues within and outside the Security Council.
The international arena is dominated today by
many crises and sources of conflict of varying form
and characteristics. Furthermore, the goals of those
conflicts vary from one region of tension and conflict
to another. Those and other elements create for all of us
a tense reality that demands a different approach by the
United Nations and its bodies, particularly the Security
Council. Thus, the United Nations policy of response
must be replaced by a policy of initiative. Such

09-60274

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

initiative should respect the principles of justice and
promote a culture of responsibility and intolerance for
impunity. It must also defend the principle of the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of States and non-interference in their
internal affairs, which constitutes a strong guarantee
for the protection of civilians, the principal casualties
in conflicts.
The discussion of the protection of civilians must
not be restricted to the Security Council, but should be
extended to the policy and strategy sessions of many
other departments and agencies of the United Nations,
such as the Department of Field Support, the
Peacebuilding
Commission,
United
Nations
peacekeeping missions, the Department of Public
Information and other divisions. Furthermore, civilian
protection and its improvement must be priorities of
those agencies and departments.
There are numerous instruments for civilian
protection. The Security Council, fulfilling its duties in
full transparency, is an important tool for preserving
and maintaining the dignity and lives of civilians. The
dispatch of fact-finding missions is a powerful
instrument to prevent the recurrence of such violations.
Moreover, the assignment of commissions to
investigate violations of international law and human
rights and to identify and prosecute those who are
responsible for such violations at the national and
international levels sends a strong message to parties to
conflicts that the protection of civilians is a high
priority of the United Nations.
The Fact-Finding Mission led by Justice
Goldstone had a specific mandate and objective. The
Mission’s report (A/64/490, annex) finds that flagrant
violations of international humanitarian law led to the
killing of 1,420 Palestinians, 1,170 of whom were
civilians. How would the situation look if the Special
Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the
Human Rights of the Palestinian People and other
Arabs of the Occupied Territories, established more
than 40 years ago, were enabled to carry out its duties
in the investigation of Israeli practices? If that
Committee were to execute its mandate, what would its
report include? What would be included in that
Committee’s report about over 40 years of atrocities
and horrors? There is no doubt that the report of that
Committee would be painful and sad for us and
embarrassing for Israel.

09-60274

The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of the United Republic of
Tanzania.
Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): The
delegation of the United Republic of Tanzania wishes
to thank you, Mr. President, and to congratulate you
and your country, Austria, for organizing this debate on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict during
your presidency of the Security Council. This is an
important event, as it highlights one of the major
current challenges to United Nations peacekeeping
missions. It is also a milestone event, as it coincides
with the tenth anniversary of the first Security Council
resolution on this subject, resolution 1265 (1999), and
the sixtieth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
After 60 years, the legal framework of the
Conventions remains valid and useful, but the reality of
warfare on the ground has evolved and become more
complex. Civilians have increasingly become the
targets and victims of combatants and have suffered
intensely from the collateral consequences of
sophisticated weapons of warfare and ideologies of
hatred against innocent civilian populations.
Beginning in 1999, in the midst of the gruesome
civil war in Sierra Leone, the Security Council has
strived to issue mandates for peacekeeping missions to
protect civilians from such atrocities. That comes in the
wake of earlier instances of genocide, crimes against
humanity, crimes of war and ethnic cleansing in
Rwanda, Bosnia and Herzegovina in the mid-1990s.
Ten years later, notwithstanding the continuing
attention and response of the Security Council, the
Secretariat and peacekeepers, the protection of
civilians in conflict situations remains a daunting and a
recurring challenge.
We should remind ourselves that the protection of
civilians is the primary responsibility of States and that
parties to armed conflicts also bear primary
responsibility to ensure the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. However, experience in situations of
armed conflict or immediately after the cessation of
hostilities shows that those primary responsibilities are
not fully met and observed because of the exigencies
and disruption imposed by violent conflicts on law,
order
and
judicial
mechanisms.
Therefore,
peacekeepers are obliged to offer the needed protection
to civilians in such situations.

27

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

My country, Tanzania, has been at the forefront of
protecting refugees from neighbouring countries, but
that is only one aspect of protecting civilian victims of
armed conflicts. The challenge in situ of protecting
civilians where conflict is taking place remains
enormous.
It was against that background that the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
commissioned an independent study to look into ways
of enhancing the protection of civilians in United
Nations peacekeeping missions. I was requested last
year to chair that study, whose report has just been
released. I would like to share some of the highlights
of the findings and recommendations of the study.
The study shows that the entire protection of
civilians chain, from the Security Council to the
peacekeeper on the ground, needs to be addressed.
There are significant gaps at all levels, requiring a
major and concerted effort form the Council, troop and
police contributors, the Secretariat and peacekeeping
operations to fill them in order to strengthen the
protection of civilians.
Some of the gaps will need to be addressed by
other Member States. The measures to be undertaken
will require political strategy and unwavering support
from the Security Council. The operation measures
include ensuring that critical equipment fundamental to
fulfilling the mandate is made available to the
missions, that contingents on the ground are properly
trained and equipped before arriving at the mission
area, and that they are led by commanders with the
necessary resolve. Equally important is the need for
troop- and police-contributors to be aware of and
prepared for the difficult and dangerous environment in
which they will be working. Systemic changes will
have to be made, and all actors will have to meet the
challenges that this entails. This will be a difficult and
challenging endeavour, but a worthwhile one, as the
beneficiaries of our efforts will be those who need our
attention most.
I should now like to highlight for the Council
some key points with regard to some parameters on the
specific recommendations of the report. With regard to
the language of Security Council resolutions and
protection of civilian mandates, the study looked at the
first usage of the “imminent threat of physical
violence” language, in resolution 1270 (1999) of

28

October 1999 relating to the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone, and at the evolution of that language to
date. The study found that this physical protection
language, with its three caveats, has now become
standard. This seems, in part, to be due to the fact that
Security Council members continue to value
precedents in writing mandates. The team assessed that
the physical protection language remains confusing for
those in the field while it also raises expectations. The
intent of the Security Council with regard to a
mission’s efforts to protect civilians is often not fully
understood by the Secretariat or by peacekeeping
missions on the ground. It is important that members of
the Security Council not only focus on getting the
language of mission mandates right, but also back up
peacekeeping operations with the necessary political
and material support.
In addition, it has become evident that the
planning that informs Security Council deliberations
does not consider consistently the nature of threats to
civilians. As a result, the spectrum of threats to
civilians does not help to shape mission mandates,
strategies, structures or resources. It may also be useful
for troop- and police-contributing countries and other
relevant stakeholders to provide input to the Council
on a regular basis in order to inform its crafting of
mandates.
I now turn to peacekeeping mission planning and
Secretariat policies. The study looked at the planning
process that links Council resolutions to peacekeeping
deployment. In particular, it examined the guidance,
preparation and planning mechanisms used to build
peacekeeping operations. The study concluded that the
lack of an operational concept of what the protection of
civilians means for United Nations peacekeepers has
hampered the implementation of this mandated task.
The study also found that troop and police
contributors often have difficulty understanding how to
train and equip their contingents to carry out their
protection role. Even nations with well developed
peacekeeping doctrines and which train others in
peacekeeping often do not address the question of the
protection of civilians beyond respect for international
humanitarian law, support to the rule of law and human
rights. As such, the Secretariat cannot rely on deriving
guidance on the protection of civilians from the
existing doctrine of Member States, but will have to
base it on the lessons derived from the field. I believe
the engagement of the Secretariat with troop- and

09-60274

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

police-contributing
importance.

countries

will

be

of

vital

With regard to field implementation, the findings
from the field were based on mission visits in 2008 and
2009. Mission-specific cases reveal that, without the
basic prerequisites in place, such as a peace to keep,
sufficient political backing from the Security Council
and adequate resources, the Security Council cannot
expect a mission to successfully implement a
protection of civilians mandate. We also found that the
role of both uniformed and civilian United Nations
police units is a key area where new thinking is needed
when it comes to considering their role in the
protection of civilians. In general, there seems to be
confusion regarding appropriate roles for uniformed
police units.
Furthermore, we found that the protection of
civilians has to be a holistic and multidimensional
endeavour that goes beyond physical protection to
include aspects such as humanitarian access, protection
from gender-based violence, protection of refugees and
returnees, as well as the protection of human rights.
In conclusion, I wish to thank all the Council
members and the other Member States that have
mentioned the report of the study in this debate today
and expressed interest in reflecting upon it further. I
invite all Member States, especially members of the
Council, troop- and police-contributing countries and
the Secretariat to give the report extended
consideration. I look forward to continuing dialogue on
this subject with a view to implementing the
recommendations contained in the report. Finally, we
welcome the draft resolution prepared by the mission
of Austria. It is comprehensive and balanced and it sets
out a clear path by which the international community
can continue to respond to the challenge of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Canada.
Mr. Normandin (Canada): Canada welcomes the
resolution adopted today, which we had the honour of
sponsoring. We congratulate Austria for its leadership
in bringing this initiative forward. And we also
congratulate other Council members on their work to
take further steps to better protect civilians in armed
conflict.

09-60274

Ten years ago this fall, the Security Council
marked an important turning point in enhancing the
protection of civilians. Resolution 1265 (1999), as we
know, was a fundamental turning point. It was the
moment when the Council acknowledged that the
protection of civilians was an issue central, not
tangential, to its responsibilities for maintaining
international peace and security. Canada argued then,
as an elected member of the Council, and still does
today, that if this body is to maintain its legitimacy, it
must face up to today’s tragedies. The Council must, of
course, take the necessary political action, backed up
by the range of tested non-coercive and coercive tools
that can be utilized by the international community.
The Secretariat and United Nations missions in the
field must provide the Council with what it needs to
take effective decisions. And those deploying to such
missions must have the training and resources to
deliver on the mandates.
On balance, important progress has been made.
We have a normative framework in place, which has
been buttressed by practical strategies, including on
questions related to humanitarian access, child
protection, sexual and gender-based violence and
issues of accountability. These are all encouraging
developments. And yet, it is clear that important
challenges remain.
When the Council’s progress was reviewed five
years ago, Canada noted that, while resolutions
contemplated action that was early, systematic and
bold, Council responses were too often ad hoc, seldom
timely and rarely pro-active. While we recognize the
complexity of the issues to be dealt with, this remains a
valid critique today. Implementation, capacity and the
political will needed to deliver on this agenda are
uneven. Peacekeeping operations, whose mandates
include the protection of civilians, often lack the means
and capabilities to fulfil their tasks. Mission planning
and training have been weak, and civilian-military
cooperation has fallen short.
We must, of course, build on good practice. In
that context, we very much welcome the release of the
independent study prepared for the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations. Canada was
pleased to support that initiative. Its findings and
recommendations can provide useful guidance in the
development of new strategies, tools and techniques.
We urge all Member States to consider it seriously.

29

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

(spoke in French)
I would now like to mention three main areas of
action critical to strengthening the protection of
civilians. First is the need for better planning and the
mobilization of appropriate resources in the context of
peacekeeping mandates. Thus, the protection of
civilians must be taken into account from the start of
the planning. If, from the beginning, a mission is not
well designed, it will ultimately fail. Throughout the
process, all challenges to protection, in particular for
specific sectors of the population, including women
and children, must moreover be clearly identified.
Secondly, systematic training is essential in order
to fulfil that protection role effectively. Ideally,
personnel should receive that training prior to their
deployment, not on their arrival in the theatre of
operations. Systematic protection training would help
to clarify the protection mandates of missions. It would
also be a good way to provide operational orientation.
Civilian mission staff must also receive the necessary
training, and that training must strengthen the need for
accountability. Canada is pursuing that approach in
various contexts, including in Afghanistan.
Thirdly, we need to enhance dialogue and
cooperation on overlapping issues, such as children in
armed conflict and women and peace and security. We
cannot operate in silos. We can learn a great deal from
our practices in each sphere of activity. For its part,
Canada is helping to organize a series of conferences to
promote dialogue among Member States on the future
of peacekeeping operations. We hope that that will also
contribute to breaking down the silos in those various
fields.
Before concluding, I wish to take this opportunity
to emphasize the importance that Canada attaches to
safe and unhindered access by humanitarian workers to
populations in need, as well as to the safety and
security of all humanitarian actors. In that regard, I
wish to pay tribute to United Nations staff and
associated personnel, who are increasingly the target of
belligerents, as we have recently seen in Pakistan and
Afghanistan. We must be sure to set up strategies and
measures that make it possible to reduce the number of
those attacks and to hold the perpetrators accountable
for such crimes, where necessary.
This tenth anniversary is clearly the opportunity
to review both our achievements and what remains to
be done in order to protect civilians in armed conflict.

30

To that end, I urge the Council to resolutely continue
its action towards achieving concrete results in the
field. As always, the success of our efforts is measured
by the number of lives saved and the population
displacements prevented.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation is pleased to take part in this debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, in which
Austria and you, yourself, Mr. President, have invested
a great deal. As the Secretary-General pointed out this
morning, this debate, enriched by the learned briefings
of Mr. John Holmes and the Deputy High
Commissioner for Human Rights, shows that this topic,
which has been on the Security Council’s agenda for
10 years, rightly continues to be among its priorities.
However, we must point out that, despite all the
efforts at the international level, civilian populations
continue to be the victims and the primary targets in
situations of armed conflict. Their rights are scorned
and violated in breach of international humanitarian
law and the main human rights instruments. That
disconnect
between
the
norms
and
their
implementation on the ground arises, inter alia, from
the fact that the concept of the protection of civilians
brings into conflict fundamental principles of the
Charter, which are at the basis of international
relations, and puts at stake the primary responsibility
of States whose citizens need protection and the
responsibility of the international community, which
involves the obligation to assist and support the efforts
of the State, including in implementing the
demobilization and reconstruction process.
While the protection of civilians includes and
involves a number of national and international
governmental and non-governmental actors, the role of
the Security Council takes on particular importance,
given the Council’s responsibilities recognized by the
Charter as the principal organ entrusted with the
maintenance of international peace and security. Thus,
the Council’s consideration of the protection of
civilians should, in our view, be part of a
comprehensive approach to the integrated settlement of
conflict situations, taking into account their
characteristics, their environment and their underlying
causes.

09-60274

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

Indeed, in most cases, intra-State armed conflicts
and armed insurgencies are the result of frustration
brought about by poverty, the poor distribution of
wealth and rivalries of all kinds. Such conflicts, fuelled
by trafficking in persons, arms and drugs, affect above
all women, the elderly and children, in addition to the
threats that they pose to regional and international
security.
The undeniable importance and urgency of
providing an appropriate response to serious attacks on
the physical integrity and security of civilian
populations should not allow us to forget the dual need
for the Council not only to make progress in the
political settlement of conflicts and disputes, but also
to act in advance and to take appropriate preventive
action to defuse potentially dangerous situations. For
that, a fundamental and essential condition must be met:
the positive cooperation of neighbouring States and the
entire region in order to, on the one hand, ease the plight
of civilian populations taken hostage by the dispute or the
conflict and, on the other, to shoulder the responsibility
arising from being a neighbour and from international
obligations under international humanitarian law and
refugee law.
Enhancing efforts to prevent and resolve conflicts
by peaceful means, as well as in peacebuilding, in
countries emerging from conflict are ultimately the
best way to prevent conflicts from worsening or
recurring and thus putting innocent civilians at risk.
Against that background, no one can deny that one
factor leading to the escalation of armed conflicts and
physical and psychological harm to civilian
populations, in particular their most vulnerable sectors,
is the proliferation of and illicit trade in light weapons.
The harmful effects of those arms require resolute
action by the international community to put them
beyond the law and to bring about their elimination.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): I would like to thank
the delegation of Austria for convening and chairing
this meeting, and to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of November. Today in particular I would like to
thank the Foreign Minister, Mr. Spindelegger, for
making the issue under discussion such a priority, and
for his presence here today. I would also like to thank

09-60274

the Secretary-General and Under-Secretary-General
John Holmes for their statements.
This week Europe and America commemorate the
ends of two world wars, international conflicts
conducted between States and empires. Since then, the
nature of conflict has evolved. Where 60 years ago
State actors were the central players in international
war, today asymmetric warfare with non-State actors is
increasingly common. Now, children walk into markets
with bombs strapped to their chests. Girls become
targets just for trying to go to school. Aid workers are
threatened specifically because they do so much good.
The protection of civilians is an issue of growing
importance for us all.
The Geneva Conventions, signed 60 years ago,
remain central to our understanding of our
responsibilities in conflicts. But in Afghanistan, our
enemies do not respect even these most basic rules of
war. The Taliban, Al-Qaida and other terrorist groups
show complete disregard for human life; even more,
they deliberately target anyone, civilian or military,
who does not embrace their extremist philosophy. They
target those with no conceivable military connections:
teachers, health care workers, students on their way to
school. It is estimated that as a result of terrorist
activities more than 5,000 people were killed, injured
or kidnapped in Afghanistan in 2008 alone. These
groups cannot hope to defeat the world’s greatest
armies with their military strength. Their strength lies
rather in their brutality and viciousness, which they use
to lend an atmosphere of control and inevitability to
their fight. The Taliban will never be able to provide
security, governance or development. Their goal is not
to build an alternative State; their goal is to prevent
any State from being built.
Civilian casualties in this fight are both a human
and a political tragedy. The human tragedy is obvious:
from January to August this year, the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) recorded
the deaths of 1,500 civilians in the country, an increase
of 24 per cent over the same period in 2008. Sixtyeight per cent of these attacks can be attributed to the
Taliban, Al-Qaida and other terrorist organizations.
This percentage has grown steadily as the terrorists
rely increasingly on bombs and indiscriminate attacks.
The political costs are more subtle but equally
damaging. The Taliban’s main tactic is to encourage
the alienation of the international community from the

31

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

Afghan people. The people of Afghanistan know from
past experience exactly how brutal and repressive the
Taliban are, and they show consistent resistance to
them. However, they have higher expectations of the
international community. Afghans want to see their
Government and our international partners acting as
their protectors. When we fail to protect and respect
the Afghans, the Taliban and their allies use the
people’s disappointed expectations to strain the
partnership that is so central to this fight and damage
our ability to earn the trust and engagement we need to
succeed.
We should adopt a strategy that values the
protection of people, respects their lives, rights and
property, and enables positive and constructive
interaction with local communities. We fully support
the new NATO strategy, which emphasizes the
protection of civilians and introduces important followup mechanisms to ensure accountability. We appreciate
the increased sensitivity that has been shown in
response to concerns about the conduct of searches and
arrests, and we support other strategic changes that
have been proposed to improve protection of civilians.
Moreover, we stress the need for an increased emphasis
on training the Afghan National Security Forces.
Afghans are eager to take increased responsibility for
the security of their country and the protection of their
people. Unfortunately, a lack of capacity and resources
continues to hobble our progress; we hope to address
this with the international community in the coming
years.
We appreciate the steadfast condemnation voiced
by the Security Council in response to terrorist attacks
around the world, and in particular the Council’s strong
and unwavering support for UNAMA following the
appalling attacks in Kabul on 28 October. Groups that
deliberately target civilian populations should continue
to be strongly condemned in this Organization, and
their unwillingness to obey even the most basic rules of
combat should strip them of any legitimacy in our
eyes.
The blood of Afghans has been continuously
spilled amid 30 years of local, regional and global
power struggles. In 2001 we undertook to rebuild this
shattered country and ensure that it could never again
be used as a launching pad for regional or international
terror. As I mentioned on Monday at the 40th plenary
meeting of the General Assembly, eight years ago we
were debating how to build what did not exist. Today

32

we are debating how to take what we have built and
make it better. That is a substantial achievement.
Nevertheless, violence still threatens the lives of
Afghan civilians. International military forces should
take all necessary measures to ensure the protection of
civilians, and we have a shared responsibility to
condemn with the utmost severity any attack by the
Taliban, Al-Qaida or their allies that targets civilians or
results in civilian deaths. We must enforce the rules of
war that bind us all and make it clear to our enemies
that targeting civilians will only alienate them further
from the international community and from the
population they seek to control.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on behalf of my
delegation, on having organized this debate on a
subject of such pertinence.
The Government of Colombia, according to
official statements broadly published in the press, has
brought to the Security Council accusations against the
Government of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
under President Hugo Chávez Frías. This was
confirmed to the EFE news agency by the President of
the Council, Ambassador Thomas Mayr-Harting,
Permanent Representative of Austria to the United
Nations.
Since today we are discussing the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, the Bolivarian Government
would like to take this opportunity not only to refer to
the subject at hand, but also to the installation of seven
foreign military bases in Colombia and its implications
for the protection of civilians and peace and security in
our region.
Venezuela, fortunately, has no armed conflict
requiring the protection of civilians. Our country,
however, has a progressive policy of protection for
civilians from other countries: displaced persons and
refugees alike. Venezuela has received the greatest
number of displaced persons and refugees as a direct
result of the uninterrupted internal armed conflict that
has plagued Colombia for more than 60 years. A
significant number of the 4 million Colombian men,
women and children in Venezuela have fled violence in
their country. According to the “2008 Global Trends”

09-60274

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

report of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), Colombia has
more than 3 million internally displaced persons and
“continues to have one of the largest IDP populations
in the world”.
The Government of Venezuela therefore signed,
on 18 January 2008, an agreement with UNHCR to
provide microcredit to Colombian refugees who are in
our country, benefiting more than 200,000 people.
Colombians coming to Venezuela are offered all of
these Government social programmes free of charge.
The establishment of United States military bases
in Colombia threatens peace in the region and extends
the Colombian diaspora into many countries, in
particular neighbouring countries. The establishment of
these military bases cannot be separated from the
impact that they will have in terms of increasing the
number of refugees and displaced persons.
The countries of our region, despite our
differences, live in peace, a peace that has only been
interrupted in recent years, when Colombian military
forces invaded Ecuador. That invasion was
categorically condemned by the twentieth Summit of
Heads of State and Government of the Rio Group, held
in Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic, on 6 and
7 March 2008. The President of Colombia, Álvaro
Uribe, in an alleged act of repentance, pledged that his
Government would never again engage in belligerent
action against any country on the continent. The
leaders of the Rio Group therefore stated:
“We note, with satisfaction, the full apology
that President Álvaro Uribe offered to the
Government and people of Ecuador, for the
violation on March 1, 2008, of the territory and
sovereignty of this sister nation by Colombian
security forces.”
I would like to inform you, Sir, and all the other
members of the Council that the establishment of the
United States military bases in Colombia is disrupting
the peaceful coexistence of nations by creating a
dangerous geo-strategic reality that may provoke
conflict on a massive, continent-wide scale. These
military bases will turn Colombia, as stated by
Commander Fidel Castro, into an overseas territory. An
official document of the United States Air Force from
May 2009 states that the Palenquero base, one of the
seven military bases that will be installed in Colombia,
will help with the task of mobility by ensuring access

09-60274

to the entire continent of South America, with the
exception of Cape Horn, if fuel is available, and over
half of the continent without having to refuel.
Venezuela would like to state here the danger that
this expansionist plan of the United States Government
represents, which aims to transform Colombia into an
enclave for political, economic, cultural and military
domination over the entire continent. The United States
military presence in Colombia claims to be justified by
the fight against drug trafficking and terrorism.
However, the former President of Colombia,
Mr. Ernesto Samper Pizarro, claims that “these bases
are not to combat terrorism and drug trafficking in
Colombia”. With regard to the C-17, P-3 Orion and
AWAT aircraft that the United States Government will
transport to its military bases in Colombia, President
Samper said,
“My God! This is a carrier for electronic
surveillance for the hemisphere. That is what not
only Venezuela but also Brazil and the countries
of the Union of South American Nations
(UNASUR) fear, with reason.”
The South American Governments have
expressed concern about the establishment of United
States bases in Colombia. At the UNASUR summit
held in Bariloche, Argentina, on 28 August 2009, heads
of State stated that,
“The presence of foreign military forces
cannot, with the means and resources dedicated to
their stated objectives, threaten the sovereignty
and integrity of any South American nation and
therefore peace and security in the region.”
This is also cause for concern in the United
States, as evidenced by the letter dated 28 July 2009
that Senators Patrick Leahy and Christopher Dodd sent
to Secretary of State Hillary Clinton.
Venezuela and Colombia were born at the same
moment in the history of the Americas, after the battles
of Boyacá and Carabobo, under the leadership of our
liberator, Simón Bolívar. The Bolivarian Government
yearns for peace in Colombia and throughout the
region. That is why President Hugo Chávez Frías has
always offered his assistance to achieve peace in this
neighbouring country.
Plan Colombia has failed. Drug trafficking has
increased its influence in Colombia and has cornered
major levels of the Colombian State and its institutions.

33

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

If our Central American brothers, who lived through
bloody armed conflicts, were able to achieve peace,
how is it that the people of Colombia continue to suffer
under this painful military confrontation?
The answer is very simple. Central Americans
opted for dialogue and political negotiations as a
means of reaching peace. The Colombian Government,
however, persists in waging war. That Government
would rather give up its sovereignty than accept that
there is an internal armed conflict in their country that
is causing horrific displacements of human beings. The
armed conflict in Colombia has left over 100,000 dead.
Allow me to conclude by stating that the
Bolivarian Government is a Government of peace.
Only once in our history has our army gone beyond the
borders of our country, and it was to contribute to the
struggle for independence and freedom of our
neighbouring countries.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Let me begin by joining
previous speakers in extending our appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate on such
an important subject. We thank the Secretary-General
for his statement, and we are also grateful to the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
the Deputy High Commissioner for Human Rights for
their respective briefings.
My delegation also wishes to associate itself with
the statement delivered by the representative of Egypt
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Every year, thousands of civilians fall victim to
armed conflict. Their plight should always be our
concern. It is our shared responsibility to alleviate their
suffering wherever it occurs. The United Nations
Charter unmistakably highlights this obligation.
This year marks the tenth anniversary of the
Security Council’s initial consideration of this issue
and the sixtieth anniversary of the Geneva
Conventions. The nature of armed conflict has evolved
since then, as have its causes and consequences. The
wisdom that inspired the old Geneva Conventions
should be renewed as the path to be taken to address
the current circumstances. Likewise, it is a time to
reflect on the achievements and on improvements that
can bring about tangible results.

34

The past 10 years of the Council’s consideration
of this issue has set out a robust international
normative framework and provided a wealth of
experience and best practices. In spite of that,
tremendous challenges still lie before us.
One of the most difficult tasks in the protection
of civilians is the increasingly blurred line between
armed groups, combatants and civilians. The lack of
clarity has cost civilian lives. There is also the
proliferation and fragmentation of non-State armed
groups. Another key issue is the increasingly
asymmetric nature of armed conflict, where the
principles of distinction and proportionality are being
violated. These challenges serve to highlight the need
for reinvigorated commitment and determined
comprehensive action.
In this connection, we wish to highlight two of
the three thematic areas in the President’s concept
paper (S/2009/567, annex), related to the five core
challenges described in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2009/277).
On strengthening the rule of law, enhancing
compliance and ensuring accountability, Indonesia is
cognizant of the fact that the key cause of failure in the
protection of civilians in armed conflict stems from the
lack of compliance and accountability by parties to
conflict with respect to their moral and legal obligation
to protect civilians. Indonesia stresses that when it
comes to the protection of civilians, all parties to the
conflict have equal responsibility. There are no
distinctions in responsibility. There is one single
responsibility. Everyone must adhere to that
fundamental principle.
Indonesia values the constructive developments
we have seen towards strengthening compliance and
ensuring accountability through building national
capacity. Only through this avenue can we, the
international community, prevent the emergence of
atrocities committed against civilians. Should local
institutions fail to discharge their duty in the first
instance, no amount of international assistance and
effort can bring long-term results. Our focus and our
dedication should be on strengthening local
institutions.
The role of Member States in promoting
compliance and accountability through domestic
legislation and legal means is a vital building block in
the prevention of violations against civilians; it merits

09-60274

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

increased support. We look forward to further
developing other means and tools to strengthen
national capacity. Due regard should continue to be
paid to the special needs of women and children.

this opportunity to address an issue that, unfortunately,
reflects problems in many parts of the world. I would
also like to take this opportunity to welcome the
statement by the Secretary-General on this subject.

On improving the implementation of protection
mandates by peacekeeping missions, Indonesia
recognizes the role of peacekeeping missions in
improving protection of civilians on the ground. We
note that much more needs to be done in responding to
situations where conflict may potentially re-emerge or
has already re-emerged. Thus, we note with interest the
detailed analysis conducted by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations. That study’s
key findings and recommendations should be
thoroughly discussed by the troop-contributing
countries, the Secretariat and the Council working
together.

While Georgia has aligned itself with the
statement made by the Swedish representative on
behalf of the presidency of the European Union, I
would like to take this opportunity to stress some
additional points.

We also value the effort to ensure that the
protection of civilians is given high priority in
decisions concerning the use of available capacity and
resources in the implementation of mission mandates.
We believe that these are vital steps for bridging the
disconnect between mandates, intentions, expectations
and capacity challenges to real implementation, as
highlighted by the Secretary-General’s report.
My delegation is fully convinced that a more
effective measure for the protection of civilians is the
prevention of conflict itself. This approach entails
addressing the root causes of conflict. Resolution 1265
(1999) explicitly expressed the need to address the
causes of armed conflict in order to enhance the
protection of civilians on a long-term basis.
Finally, let me reiterate that the protection of
civilians is a universal and timeless issue. Generation
after generation has sought to find effective measures
for protecting civilians from the looming danger of
armed conflict. Our current discussion is part of that
long and unbroken chain of efforts. Today’s discussion
is a way to reinvigorate us and encourage the quest for
new solutions to address the issue and to strengthen
existing mechanisms.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
Mr. Tsiskarashvili (Georgia): At the outset, on
behalf of my delegation, I wish to express my gratitude
to the Austrian presidency of the Security Council for

09-60274

The recent developments in my country confirm
that when a State is in constant breach of norms of
international humanitarian law and voluntarily
accepted international commitments, the result is
human suffering and ethnic cleansing.
Five months ago, we all had an opportunity to
address this matter at an open debate here in this
Chamber (see S/PV.6151 (Resumption 1)). At that
time, my delegation provided the Council with detailed
information on civilians living under foreign
occupation in two regions of my country, Abkhazia and
the Tskhinvali region of South Ossetia. We also offered
a rationale for the actions of one permanent member of
Council, which consecutively vetoed the presence of
two international monitoring missions in Georgia.
Unbiased and qualified international monitors would
have provided a clear assessment of the situation on the
ground. Once again, the veto of one permanent member
led to the failure to create an objective source of
information for the international community.
Since our statement five months ago, nothing has
changed. Ethnicity-based violations and other gross
and massive violations of human rights law and
humanitarian law happen on a daily basis. During the
past several days alone, four Georgian teenagers, aged
14 to 16, were kidnapped from a village located near
the occupation line and charged with terrorist activity.
Earlier today, in addition, five citizens who happened
to be fishing in Georgian territorial waters controlled
by the central Government were kidnapped on charges
of so-called illegal fishing and are being held in
custody. Only a couple of days ago, 16 men were
released after being arrested for simply cutting down
trees in a forest that is, again, close to the occupation
line.
These deplorable provocations coincided with the
eighth round of talks in Geneva, where the European
Union, the United Nations and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe are trying to

35

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

facilitate a dialogue between the parties to achieve a
peaceful solution of the problem. The previous rounds
in Geneva showed nothing but the unwillingness of our
northern neighbour to engage itself in a substantive
dialogue.
I would like to draw the Council’s attention to the
problem of humanitarian access to civilians in need of
assistance. In the Tskhinvali region of South Ossetia,
the occupying forces continue to block access for
humanitarian aid and international humanitarian actors,
which obliges missions to enter the Tskhinvali region
exclusively from the territory of the Russian
Federation. This policy represents yet another breach
of the principles of international humanitarian law, as
well as of paragraph 3 of the European Union-brokered
ceasefire agreement of 12 August 2008.
Notwithstanding the protests of numerous
international organizations against this discriminatory
policy, the policy persists. The blockade turns the
territory into a black hole, where people are deprived
of their basic rights and where humanitarian aid is
simply not allowed. The continuation of the current
state of affairs cannot be tolerated by the international
community.
In conclusion, let me assure the Council that my
country stands ready to work with the international
community in order to ensure that real progress in
protection of civilians becomes a reality.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): Mr. President, I join
previous speakers in expressing appreciation to you for
convening today’s open debate and for the useful
concept paper highlighting the thematic issues under
focus (S/2009/567, annex). We also thank the
Secretary-General, Under-Secretary-General Sir John
Holmes and the Deputy High Commissioner for
Human Rights for their briefings.
During the debate last June (see S/PV.6151), we
focused on the report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2009/277).
My delegation is of the view that the protection task
cannot be understood and addressed solely in
humanitarian terms, as it requires us to examine a
multiplicity of different areas ranging from politics to
human rights to disarmament. As we mark the tenth
anniversary of the Security Council’s initial

36

consideration of this issue, we can acknowledge that
progress has been achieved in establishing a normative
framework. Unfortunately, however, the politicization
and selectivity that characterize the debate have
affected credibility. That has called into question the
humanitarian concerns expressed by some for the
plight of civilians affected by armed conflict. Even the
Secretary-General’s report does not manifest a
consistent approach to protection issues.
At the outset, let me state categorically that Sri
Lanka is deeply committed to the protection of human
rights and the implementation of international
humanitarian law. During almost three decades of
combating terrorism in our country, we have taken the
utmost care to draw a close distinction between
civilians and terrorists. We are engaged closely with
the international community and related human rights
and humanitarian mechanisms, United Nations
agencies, the International Committee of the Red Cross
and local and international non-governmental
organizations (NGOs). That close cooperation has
extended to the aftermath of the conflict, in providing
for the needs of the displaced population. We also
welcome the progressive strengthening of this concept
by the international community over the past decade,
including through focusing on vulnerable categories
such as women and children.
The normative framework on civilian protection
cannot be applied in a theoretical manner regardless of
circumstances. The nature of contemporary conflict has
posed new challenges to the commitment of the
international community to the protection of civilians.
Many of today’s conflicts take place within States, and
involve non-State armed groups. Sri Lanka’s
observations relate in particular to the challenges we
have faced in protecting civilians in the context of an
internal conflict involving a ruthless terrorist group,
namely, the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE).
In Sri Lanka, the LTTE terrorist group made the
Tamil civilian population a part of its military strategy.
That posed extraordinary operational challenges to our
security forces in engaging and combating that terrorist
group while ensuring civilian protection. The terrorists’
inhuman strategy was to create a situation conducive to
large-scale civilian casualties by herding civilians to
form a human shield and by placing heavy guns in their
midst.

09-60274

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

This terrorist group continued to forcibly
conscript civilians — including children, some of
whom were under 12 years of age — and used them as
combatants and forced labour. They even withheld food
supplies sent to civilians by the Government and
diverted those supplies for use by their armed cadres.
That challenged our Government in many ways.
Civilians being held hostage by the terrorist group
were our own people, towards whom we had
consistently applied a zero-casualty policy.
Our troops were trained to distinguish between
combatants and civilians. The protection and liberation
of civilians from the clutches of the terrorist group was
the highest priority. Our security forces, consistent
with their orders, had no choice but to intervene to
rescue civilians by creating a safe passage for them.
That operation was done at tremendous cost to the lives
of our own service personnel, as only infantry action
was used in order to ensure the rescue of civilians. Our
security forces at all times did not use disproportionate
force. The eagerness with which civilians fled to
Government-controlled areas bears testimony to the
reputation they had established for themselves. At the
same time, we established facilities to host internally
displaced persons (IDPs) well ahead of their rescue. In
that way, we averted the humanitarian catastrophe that
some had predicted.
In that context, the challenges posed by terrorism
in many parts of the world today may necessitate a
re-evaluation of the rules of military engagement.
Many of the rules of war are based on the presumption
that the parties to a conflict are conventional armies of
responsible States engaging other States. But terrorists
totally disregard those laws and principles as they
wage asymmetric warfare. They mingle with and use
civilians to achieve their goals. Once again, the
practical realities based on the experiences of Member
States must be seriously looked at, instead of
undertaking a theoretical application of humanitarian
norms to all situations.
It is also necessary to examine the causes for the
escalation of armed conflict. The proliferation of illicit
arms has contributed significantly to the spread of
violence and terrorism everywhere. Unless we are able
to stop the proliferation of arms, as agreed by Council
resolution 1612 (2005), civilian safety will remain at
stake and our best efforts to deal with the humanitarian
consequences of conflicts will soon exceed existing
capacities and available resources. Many States in our

09-60274

region are affected by internal armed conflicts. While
control measures can be imposed, albeit selectively, on
States legitimately engaged in protecting their civilian
populations from terrorists, non-State actors such as
terrorist groups have relatively easy access to illicit
weapons. That is because there is no dedicated
international regime to monitor and conduct
surveillance, let alone interdict, such illicit arms
supplies.
On the other hand, external actors such as
diaspora communities openly fund arms purchases
aimed at destabilizing States, while they receive
support and protection in their host countries and their
criminal agents cross international boundaries at will.
The legal frameworks of democracies designed to
safeguard the rights of law-abiding citizens are
exploited to carry out their illicit activities. The
smuggling of arms across international waters and
across boundaries continues to render regimes such as
those established in resolution 1373 (2001) rather
ineffective in this area.
In his report, the Secretary-General refers to
enhancing compliance by non-State armed groups as
one of the challenges in strengthening the protection of
civilians. In our experience, that expectation has
proved to be unrealistic when dealing with a ruthless
organization that, in its perverted logic, advances its
political objectives by causing large-scale civilian
casualties. While the report encourages engagement
with non-State armed groups, terrorist groups pay lip
service to humanitarian principles, and often ruthlessly
misuse such principles as cover for further violence.
There is also a need to recognize the legitimate
role of the military in civilian protection. It is
noteworthy that protective responsibilities are part of
the mandate of United Nations peacekeeping forces, as
per resolution 1674 (2006). The role of Governments in
the protection of civilians should be respected, as it is
their primary responsibility to protect their own
citizens. The United Nations and humanitarian
agencies must support and assist Governments. In
doing so they should be sensitive to realities on the
ground, including by respecting the sovereignty of
States. Access for humanitarian personnel must also be
respected, but one cannot disregard the State’s
responsibility to ensure the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel.

37

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

Terrorists do not distinguish between military and
humanitarian personnel. The assumption that civilians
can best be protected and cared for only by civilian
humanitarian workers from overseas and specific
NGOs that originate in particular regions of the world
contradicts the training provided to our armed forces to
respect humanitarian law at all times and to handle
peacekeeping responsibilities. Often, local NGOs and
their local staff who render yeoman service do not get
the recognition that they deserve.
An inevitable consequence of armed conflict is
internal displacement. The Secretary-General’s report
brings out the concern that internal displacement
worldwide is on the rise. According to United Nations
reports, there are some 26 million IDPs throughout the
world. Internal displacement poses several challenges,
key among them is that armed groups use displacement
to exploit civilian populations, sometimes by hiding
among them and by seeking to regroup and recruit. The
State has the primary responsibility not only to provide
for the welfare of displaced civilians in terms of food,
clothing, medical care and shelter, but also to ensure
their safety, in keeping with the provisions of the
Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement. The
Guiding Principles fully recognize the right of national
authorities to screen IDPs and, where their safety and
security is at stake, to restrict their movement for a
temporary period.
The resettlement issue is also politicized. In my
country, we have resettled nearly 156,000 IDPs out of a
total number of 294,000. We did so within five months
of concluding a 27-year-long conflict. Further
resettlement necessitates clearance of uncharted
minefields laid by the terrorist group in civilian areas,
farmlands and roads. It is estimated that the terrorist
group laid around 1.5 million landmines. We also have
to remove unexploded ordnance and booby traps, quite
apart from the reconstruction activities that would
create favourable conditions for resettlement in secure
surroundings and meet the resettlement criteria of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees.
Later this week, Under-Secretary-General
Holmes will travel to Colombo at the invitation of our
Government to witness and assess the resettlement of
internally displaced persons. We are confident that
most of the internally displaced persons will go back to
their homes by the end of January, making it one of the
fastest resettlement operations in recent history. We

38

hope this could soon be cited as an example of best
practice.
My delegation hopes that the Council discussion
on protection of civilians will facilitate practical
decisions based on realities on the ground and inspire
all of us to invest greater efforts in preventing conflicts
and their recurrence and to respond practically and
proportionately to situations affecting civilian
populations. For that reason my delegation has sought
to share our experience from the early part of this year.
In conclusion, we would like to acknowledge the
valuable contribution of the United Nations agencies,
particularly the Office of the Emergency Relief
Coordinator and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, and other national and
international partners in providing support and
assistance to Governments, including Sri Lanka, and
the Austrian presidency for convening this discussion
today.
The President: I give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Dhruva Narayana Rangaswamy, Member of
Parliament and member of the Indian delegation.
Mr. Rangaswamy (India): India would like to
thank the Austrian Presidency for organizing this
thematic debate on the protection of civilians. I am
making a short statement in the interest of the
economic use of time and a more detailed statement is
being circulated.
The operational reasons behind the inability of
the United Nations to fully translate the Security
Council’s intent to protect civilians on the ground have
been spelled out with clarity and precision by the
independent study commissioned by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO). My delegation
believes that the primary gap concerns resources. For
example, 17,000 peacekeepers are simply inadequate
for the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC). There is
no way that this number of troops can provide
meaningful support to national authorities in an area of
responsibility the size of Western Europe.
We have learned that the presence and activities
of high-quality troops acts as a significant and effective
deterrent to those who wish to harm civilians. It stands
to reason that an increase in the number of troops is the
first requirement. It also stands to reason that troops
require proper equipment and enablers. India is one of

09-60274

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

the leading providers of air assets to MONUC and can
attest to the efficacy of air assets as enablers. It is
somewhat surprising that the United Nations and the
Security Council are unable to generate the required air
assets.
I refer to the need for accountability mentioned in
the concept paper circulated by the Austrian presidency
(S/2009/567). My delegation believes that there should
be accountability of those who mandate. Their
responsibility does not end with the generation of
mandates. They should be held accountable if
unachievable mandates are generated for political
expediency or if adequate resources are not made
available.
The development of normative frameworks must
also take into account the question of accountability.
These frameworks must be accompanied by
mechanisms to enforce those norms. The deficit in the
willingness and ability to enforce will inevitably lead
to an erosion of credibility. There must also be
accountability for this.
The Security Council must make up its mind
about what it means by protection of civilians. It must
have clarity about who is to be protected and what
constitutes a threat. It must also clarify what kind of
response it expects and who is to respond. It must, for
example, be able to differentiate between threats that
require a military response and those that require a rule
of law response. It should not ask force commanders or
their soldiers to assume policing responsibilities. The
Security Council must also be clear that its
responsibility for protecting civilians does not end with
a military or police response. Civilians require
humanitarian wherewithal for survival. Protection of
civilians requires a more integrated view. Multiple
stakeholders are involved, not just the military.
The concept to be developed should be one that
can be translated into targets on the ground. It must be
able to quantify the problem and articulate actions that
need to be taken. Only then will we be able to measure
progress or the lack of it.
My delegation suspects that the Council will find
it difficult to address this issue. Development of
indicators and norms requires uniform application of
the law. The Security Council cannot do justice to its
role if it discusses protection of civilians in some
operations and not in others.

09-60274

The Council needs to develop a clearer idea of
operational realities. This information gap cannot be
addressed without meaningful and substantive
consultations with troop- and police-contributing
countries. Even though there is a relative lack of
appreciation — on the part of the Council and many
so-called humanitarian actors — of the troops’
initiative and dedication to humanitarian principles, it
is a fact that there is progress on the ground. Many
contingents have ideas and concepts that can be
effective. An effort by MONUC’s Indian Brigade to
distribute cell phone hotline numbers within their area
of operation has led to a significant increase in
reported incidents of violence and the consequent
deployment of troops to pre-empt or deter attacks. This
has also lead to creation of databases of malefactors
and their movement patterns. That is an example of the
kind of intelligence capabilities that are key
requirements for increased effectiveness.
National capacities need to be strengthened.
Peacekeepers cannot and should not protect everyone
from everything. The protection of civilians is a
national responsibility, and peacekeepers are there to
aid in the development of these national capacities.
Capacities and institutions must be relevant to the
realities of the area in which United Nations operations
are deployed. The experiences and capabilities of
developing countries, particularly those that have gone
through successful nation-building exercises, are of
great significance in this regard. The Security Council
must find ways and means to harness those capacities.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of South Africa.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): Allow me to
congratulate the Austrian delegation on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of November. We also express our thanks for the
convening of this open debate on this important matter.
We wish to welcome the personal participation of the
Austrian Minister for Foreign Affairs and also thank
Mr. Holmes for his briefing.
The primary responsibility for the protection of
civilians lies with sovereign States. But in situations of
conflict, the protection of civilians lies at the heart of
United Nations activities and operations, including its
peacekeeping missions. The ability of the United
Nations to protect civilians is widely seen as a test of
the Organization’s relevance and legitimacy in the eyes

39

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

of ordinary people in times of crisis. While the United
Nations cannot be an absolute guarantor for the safety
and security of civilians within its areas of operations,
all Member States have the responsibility to ensure that
civilians are protected during armed conflict.
The deliberate targeting of civilians in armed
conflicts, together with the indiscriminate use of force,
gender-based violence, forced displacement, lack of
safety and access to humanitarian personnel, all have a
devastating effect on civilians and wide ramifications
for their societies.
As we mark the tenth anniversary of the
consideration of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict by the Security Council, we should seize this
important opportunity to take stock of the progress
made on the efforts to enhance protection, help those in
need and address the major challenges that lie ahead.
In resolution 1265 (1999) on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict, the Council expressed its willingness
to consider how peacekeeping mandates might better
address the harmful impact of conflicts on civilians.
We are therefore pleased to note that United Nations
peacekeeping mandates not only address the protection
of civilian in conflict situations, but are also specific in
addressing the protection needs of the most vulnerable
groups, such as women and children.
This year, South Africa celebrated its ten years of
participation in peacekeeping within the Southern
Africa region, on the continent and in the world at
large. This afforded us the rare opportunity to assess
our contribution, take stock and plan for the future. In
all, we are proud of the opportunity given our country’s
men and women in uniform to contribute to the
achievement of peace in other parts of the world. We
pledge to continue to make our contribution, within
available resources, for we know peace is indivisible.
Our own peace, security, stability and prosperity are
inextricably linked to peace and security all around the
globe.
However, we have also drawn critical lessons
from our participation in missions such as those in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi and
elsewhere, especially with regard to the principal task
of protecting civilian during conflicts. Our direct
experience informs us that the failure to protect
civilians derives from a number of factors, the most
important of which is the question of the limited
resources available to United Nations peace missions

40

deployed in specific circumstances. By resources we
also mean sufficient and clear mandates equal to the
posed threat, capacity and capabilities provided to
peacekeepers to deal with any eventualities that will
give rise to the need to protect civilians. We believe
that a lot remains to be done to match the constant and
evolving threats that civilians face in conflict situations
with the capacity and resources provided to United
Nations peacekeeping missions.
This situation is compounded by the vague
mandates that this Council issues, the lack of a clear
political framework within which those missions are
expected to deploy, the lack of clear identification of
civilians needing protection and their specific needs,
and the lack of coordination and cooperation — and at
times even competition — among members of the
international community in the areas of operation. We
therefore subscribe to the view that improving the
protection of civilians is not purely a matter of physical
threats alone; it should be approached from a holistic
point of view that should include humanitarian, human
rights, rule of law, political, security, development and
other threats facing civilians as a result of conflicts.
The United Nations must do more to achieve a
coordinated and coherent response to this challenge.
We therefore concur with the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2009/277) that protection of civilians is not a
military task alone. Rather, it is a complex effort
requiring coordinated efforts from all parts of the
United Nations system and the wider international
community.
We are also of the firm view that the protection of
civilians should be addressed in partnership with
regional organizations, through regional mechanisms
and enhanced dialogue and cooperation between the
Security Council and regional organizations. As the
responsibility of peacekeeping in Africa is increasingly
being shouldered by the African Union, the ongoing
capacity and resource limitations pose a great
challenge to effective protection of civilians at all
levels. It is with that consideration in mind that South
Africa renews Africa’s call to the United Nations and
international community to provide the African Union
with flexible, predictable and sustainable financial
assistance when deployed to keep peace.
We will conclude by adding that civilians in
conflict situations need and expect the same attention
and assistance from the United Nations and the

09-60274

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

international community, wherever they may be in the
world. The Security Council should not allow the
hopes of others to be extinguished as it bears witness to
their demise from hunger and disease, whilst others
receive the utmost attention. Our approach to the
protection of civilians should be holistic and
indiscriminate. The people and civilians in conflict
situations such as Somalia and the occupied Palestinian
territory also look up to this Council for assistance and
protection. We call on the Council to shoulder its
Charter responsibilities in this regard.
South Africa, as a signatory to the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and its Additional Protocols,
wishes to underline the importance of adhering to the
principles contained therein, and we call for the full
implementation of the commitments made by all States
parties to those basic texts of international law. We
therefore hope that the process of addressing the
challenges of protecting civilians in armed conflict will
be undertaken in ways that contribute to increased
respect for the principles of international humanitarian
and human rights law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of the Republic of the
Sudan.
Mr. Mohamad (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation associates itself with the statement
presented by the Permanent Representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, and we would
also like to associate ourselves with the statement that
will be presented by the Permanent Representative of
Zambia on behalf of the African Group.
I would like at the outset of my statement to
congratulate the Permanent Representative of Austria
on presiding over the Security Council for this month,
while expressing my appreciation for his concern in
dedicating today’s deliberations to the theme of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. My thanks are
also due for the concept paper that was circulated to
enrich the deliberations on this item, bearing in mind
the fact that ten years have passed since the SecretaryGeneral delivered his first report on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (S/1999/957) to your
Council. We are still hopeful that the current
deliberations of the Security Council on this subject
will lead to the crystallization of a comprehensive
approach and a distinct, objective vision of the optimal
means of protecting civilians, foremost among which

09-60274

must be uprooting the causes of armed conflicts.
Avoiding the causes of conflicts and supporting
integrated
comprehensive
political
settlements
constitute the best safeguard of the protection of
civilians. As we say, prevention is better than cure.
Needless to say, atrocities and threats against
civilians are no longer merely a matter of violence and
displacement but have now escalated, in the blatant
aggression against Gaza, into more devastating and
destructive acts in a manner that has alarmed humanity
at large. Indeed that assault represents an
unprecedented transformation in the targeting civilians
using the most modern of lethal technologies that the
death-and-destruction machine has come up with,
including cluster and phosphorus bombs, in addition to
all other internationally prohibited weapons, producing
scenes that have upset the conscience of the world in a
manner that has put the credibility of this Council at
risk as regards the seriousness with which it deals with
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. Today’s
deliberations may help us to find a way out of this
complex maze of prejudice and double standards in
tackling this matter.
The recommendations of the Secretary-General
and all his relevant reports have focused on the
importance of activating and increasing the capabilities
of United Nations peacekeeping missions in the field
of the protection of civilians. However, the reality of
practical experiences in a number of countries has
evidently shown that, when peace on the ground does
not exist to be maintained, peacekeeping missions, no
matter how they enhance their capacities in the field of
protection, will never achieve the desired goals in this
regard because what protects civilians fundamentally is
peace. I repeat, what protects civilians is the peace that
everyone is seeking, as well as the ensuing speedy
implementation of development, rehabilitation, revival,
rebuilding, disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and the quick return of social services, so as to
facilitate a speedy settlement of returnees and to ensure
that civilians leave their camps and shelters to go back
to their countries of origin and to the resumption of
their everyday activities. The United Nations must
therefore make peacemaking its priority and not be
distracted by secondary, incidental matters that
accompany conflicts. We must stress the proven
capabilities of regional organizations in peacemaking
and peacekeeping owing to their direct relation and full
familiarity with the nature and causes of the conflict at

41

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

hand. Here we should like to recall the decisions of the
meeting organized by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs in Dakar in April 2007 on the
role of regional organizations in the protection of
civilians and in peacemaking.
The principle of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict is a sublime principle to which we all
aspire. Yet we are concerned by the attempts by some
States to use that principled goal to serve specific
political objectives, such as the current propagation of
the so-called responsibility to protect. And we should
like to emphasize in this forum that the principle of the
responsibility to protect, though contained in the 2005
World Summit Outcome Document, is, as you know,
still subject to varied interpretation by various Member
States. We must also bear in mind the principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations with
regard to each State’s sovereignty, legitimacy and
complete and full responsibility for the protection of
the civilian population of that State. We must recall
that the right to protect civilians in armed conflict is
part and parcel of an integrated, interrelated system of
rights and obligations that was confirmed by that same
Outcome Document. The main pivot of that Summit
was to follow up on the implementation of the
Millennium Development Goals, in particular
development, poverty reduction and conflict prevention
by tackling its root causes, as I mentioned. Hence the
protection of civilians has to take place within a
comprehensive integrated framework. I repeat: the
protection of civilians has to be done within an
integrated, comprehensive framework that focuses
principally on tackling the root causes of conflict at an
early stage, with effective support from the Security
Council in guiding processes of reconciliation and
political settlement. This should be complemented by
the parallel roles of the Secretariat and the specialized
agencies of the United Nations, with regard to
humanitarian aspects and in support of sustainable
economic development, and of donors, in honouring
their development commitments.
The protection of civilians is, at the end of the
day, the responsibility of the State. Thus, States
concerned have to be equipped with better capabilities
to shoulder their responsibilities appropriately and
must not be weakened by means of sanctions and other
measures that those who impose them sometimes call
smart sanctions, sometimes targeted sanctions, or other

42

twisted interpretations that have never changed the fact
that the population is inevitably hurt by them.
In conclusion, we should like to reaffirm the
importance of adopting a comprehensive approach to
addressing the matter of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, without selectivity or discrimination.
We also hope that the Security Council will prove, in a
practical manner, its commitment to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict by dealing decisively with
what was done to the civilians in Gaza. It is a
fortuitous coincidence that our discussion of this topic
follows the General Assembly’s examination of the
Goldstone report (A/64/490), which proved where
peace-loving nations stand. There are those who claim
to support peace and fight against impunity, but with
great hypocrisy. That is the main lesson we have
learned.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Like colleagues who have taken the floor
before me, I wish to extend our warm thanks to you,
Mr. President, for having organized this debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. I should also
like to thank your friendly country for having
organized this debate, as well as the distinguished
Permanent Representative of Viet Nam and other
members of his delegation for their committed work in
the Security Council last month. I should also like to
thank the Secretary-General for having personally
attended this meeting, as well as Under-SecretaryGeneral Holmes, the Deputy High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the representative of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees for being
present here today.
My delegation endorses the statement made by
the Permanent Representative of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
It must be said that civilians continue to pay the
highest price in armed conflicts, despite the legal
developments and international conventions relating to
the protection of civilians in armed conflicts, beginning
with the Geneva Conventions relating to the protection
of civilians in times of war and including numerous
resolutions of the Security Council. The irony of
destiny means that the gap between the texts and their
implementation keeps getting wider — that is the gap
between what constitutes law, on one hand, and what

09-60274

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

we actually see happening on the ground, on the other
hand, with regard to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.
Approximately a decade has elapsed since the
Council began deliberating this important subject. The
delegations that have participated in the debate, the
Security Council, the Secretary-General, Deputy
Secretary-General and Special Rapporteurs continue to
call on all parties to show greater respect for
international law and to guarantee the rights of
civilians in armed conflicts. Here we should like to
recall the deliberations that we had the last time when
the Security Council debated this issue on 25 June
2009. During that debate, a number of countries
stressed the odious and flagrant aggression perpetrated
by Israel against Palestinian civilians in the Gaza Strip.
During that debate, the majority of delegations called
upon Israel, the occupying Power, to comply with
international law as it pertains to the protection of the
Palestinian civilians in Gaza with regard to the need to
facilitate humanitarian aid access. They also stressed
the importance of a commission of inquiry to
investigate the war crimes committed by Israel during
its aggression. Despite the resolutions and reiterated
calls by the Security Council and the international
community for Israel to put an immediate end to its
illegal practices and policies, Israel has not only
ignored those appeals but is still pursuing its
aggressive policy against Palestinian civilians — a
policy which, as the whole world knows, includes a
state of siege, the closing of border crossings, arrests,
restrictions on the movements of students and the
medically ill, the obstruction of the delivery of
donations of goods such as medicines to the area,
collective punishment, the confiscation of homes and
land, the building of settlements and the burning of
farms. That is in addition to the arbitrary repressive
practices against the civilian population in the
occupied Syrian Golan Heights, which run counter to
international law and international humanitarian law.
The report of the United Nations Fact-Finding
Mission on the Gaza Conflict (A/HRC/12/48), which
was led by Judge Goldstone, provides irrefutable
evidence of serious Israeli violations of international
humanitarian law and the Charter in the course of its
heinous attack against Gaza. Those violations
constitute war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Palestinian civilians were deliberately targeted,
including through the systematic destruction of

09-60274

infrastructure, oppression and persecution aimed at
collectively punishing a people under siege.
The evidence set out in the Goldstone report is
not the only grounds for condemning Israel for its
aggression in 2008. A number of commissions and
international envoys have submitted reports to the
United Nations on Israeli aggression, including the Ian
Martin report on attacks against United Nations
facilities. Israel’s actions constitute a singular example
of systematic aggression as a method of collective
punishment. As such, they violate all the rules and
principles stipulated in international law, international
humanitarian law and the Geneva Conventions of 1949,
as well as the additional protocols thereto.
I wish to ask the Security Council whether Israel
has halted any of its practices. In paragraph 2 of a
recently adopted resolution, the Secretary-General is
called upon to request the Council to consider the
Goldstone
report,
which
includes
objective
recommendations addressed both to the Human Rights
Council and the Security Council. It also calls upon the
Council to fulfil its responsibilities under the Charter
and to take every measure necessary to ensure that
those guilty of those crimes are brought to justice, so
as to put an end to the Israeli authorities’ mentality of
impunity. I would also like to ask the Council whether
Israel has honoured any commitments to date since the
Council placed on its agenda at the end of the 1990s
the issue of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.
With regard to the situation of the Syrian
population in the occupied Syrian Golan, there is really
little difference from that of the Palestinian people.
Israel’s occupation continues. Land is still being
confiscated. Water resources are still being stolen.
Mines are still being planted. Settlements continue to
expand. Israel is continuing its repressive policies
against Syrian civilians in the Syrian Golan by
imprisoning them or placing them illegally into
detention camps, thereby jeopardizing their lives.
Israeli practices in the occupied Syrian Golan have
really gone beyond all legal and ethical bounds. In a
recent episode, a two-year-old child was separated
from his mother under the pretext that he was born
inside of Israel and that his parents were still studying
in Syria.
In order that this debate may have credibility,
Syria calls on this body to compel Israel to authorize

43

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

family visits for Syrian citizens in the occupied Syrian
Golan by opening the Quneitra border crossing. In that
regard, my delegation has sent letters to the SecretaryGeneral and the Presidents of the Security Council and
the General Assembly. We have also addressed letters
to
intergovernmental
and
non-governmental
organizations requesting that they intervene to resolve
this issue. We hope that the statements that have been
made in today’s debate, as well as on other occasions,
will not remain mere words.
Also with regard to international law, Israel’s
occupation of the Syrian Golan is a dual situation that
requires that the Council to level a dual charge. For not
only has Israel occupied the Syrian Golan since 1967,
it has also taken the illegal and provocative decision to
annex the Syrian Golan. The Council rejected that
decision unanimously in a resolution calling it null and
void.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Hungary.
Mr. Brόdi (Hungary): First, let me thank the
Austrian presidency for organizing this debate to mark
the tenth anniversary of the Security Council’s work on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
The Republic of Hungary fully aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the representative of
Sweden on behalf of the European Union, and strongly
welcomes the resolution on the subject that was
adopted today (resolution 1894 (2009)).
The fact that today’s armed conflicts still
continue to have a severe impact on civilians, as
highlighted in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/277), indicates the enduring need for the
Security Council and United Nations Member States to
further strengthen the protection of civilians, enhance
compliance with international humanitarian law and
human rights law and promote accountability for
violations thereof.
The primary responsibility to take all feasible
steps to ensure the protection of civilians is
undoubtedly that of the parties to an armed conflict.
Nevertheless, peacekeeping operations also can, and
must, make significant contributions to the safety and
security of civilians in all circumstances. Ensuring the
coherent, coordinated and effective implementation of
mandated protection activities is a major challenge for

44

United Nations peacekeeping that has to be addressed
as a priority by all of us.
As part of the next steps in the New Horizon
process, mission-specific protection strategies need to
be developed, and peacekeepers need clear operational
guidance based on reliable information gained through
an effective reporting system. The protection and
assistance needs of women, children and persons living
with disabilities — including refugees and internally
displaced persons, who constitute an especially
vulnerable group in situations of armed conflict —
have to be strengthened and specifically defined in
protection mandates.
This year, we have witnessed an alarming rise in
the frequency and gravity of attacks against
humanitarian personnel which have had significant
implications on humanitarian operations. It is
extremely important for the success of those operations
that all parties to armed conflict engage in the
facilitation of safe, timely and unimpeded humanitarian
access to those in need.
The Republic of Hungary supports the
comprehensive approach to preventing violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law,
avoiding their recurrence and seeking sustainable peace
and justice.
As regards possible preventive action in the case
of serious violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law such as genocide and mass
atrocities, recent research shows that the progression of
events towards the actual commission of an
international crime is gradual, and that the period from
the initial threat to full genocide offers ample warning
time for the international community to take preventive
action. Hungary believes that the planned Budapest
Centre for the International Prevention of Genocide
and Mass Atrocities, as a catalyst for information and
early warnings from various sources, will serve as an
indispensable research mechanism to process and
transform this information into relevant policy
recommendations for the international community, thus
obviating further threats to the security of civilians in
armed conflicts.
Let me assure the Council once again of the
engagement of the Republic of Hungary and its
commitment to enhancing the protection of civilians.

09-60274

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Choi Su-young (Republic of Korea): Let me
begin, Mr. President, by joining previous speakers in
thanking you for organizing today’s open debate on
protection of civilians in armed conflict and giving us
this opportunity to address the Security Council. My
delegation also welcomes and supports Security
Council resolution 1894 (2009), on protection of
civilians in armed conflict, which was adopted this
morning.
During the open debate on this subject in June
(see S/PV.6151), my delegation emphasized two
factors in enhancing and promoting civilian protection:
first, the demonstration of strong political will by the
Security Council and the parties concerned; and
secondly, the translation of the results of 10 years of
discussion on civilian protection into concrete
implementation and operationalization in the field. We
believe that today’s resolution clearly expresses the
strong political will of the Security Council on this
issue, and we hope that the resolution will serve as a
solid foundation to further our efforts to convert our
discussions into real action on the ground.
While the primary responsibility for civilian
protection rests on the nations and parties involved in
conflicts, peacekeepers also have the responsibility to
support and provide security to people at risk. Failure
to address large-scale violence against civilians will
seriously hurt the legitimacy and credibility of
peacekeeping missions. Civilian protection should be a
vital priority and an integral part of United Nations
peacekeeping missions. My delegation is pleased to
recognize that today’s resolution adequately addresses
this priority. Echoing the voices of those in the field, I
would also like to emphasize, inter alia, the importance
of clear, credible and achievable mandates with
operational definition as a condition for ensuring the
successful execution of civilian protection mandates.
My delegation stands firmly with the Security
Council in affirming its strong opposition to impunity
for serious violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law. When it is clearly established
that there is no escape for a violator, compliance with
international humanitarian law will be enhanced. In
addition to what the resolution stipulates, my
delegation would like to underline that the role of the
International Criminal Court should also be respected

09-60274

in upholding the principle of no impunity when there is
a clear and evident failure of States to prosecute
criminals.
Women and girls deserve special attention, since
they are the most vulnerable group in conflict
situations, and since sexual violence has a devastating
and corrosive effect on society as a whole. My
delegation has been strongly articulating our
determination to put a stop to this most cowardly form
of violence, and we welcomed the landmark Security
Council resolution 1888 (2009) in this regard. Today’s
resolution adequately reflects the spirit of resolution
1888 (2009) and will add important political
momentum to our efforts to eradicate sexual violence
and exploitation.
Preventing humanitarian access to civilians
affected by armed conflict constitutes a crime against
humanity. Unfortunately, however, there are still cases
where humanitarian personnel and relief supplies,
although a few miles away, ready to be delivered,
cannot reach those who desperately need them because
of the deliberate interference of certain parties
involved in armed conflict. My delegation values
today’s resolution as an important step towards
addressing this issue, and we look forward to further
developments on the issue in the Security Council.
The protection of civilians is an ongoing task that
needs to be continued not only in the peacekeeping
process but also in the peacebuilding process. My
delegation believes that providing basic safety and
security for civilians is crucial to stabilize countries
emerging from conflicts. Assisting those countries to
set up transitional justice mechanisms and the rule of
law is fundamental in securing safety and security for
civilians. Successful peacebuilding is also an integral
element of protecting civilians in armed conflict, and,
in that regard, we hope that the Security Council will
incorporate this element in future discussion on the
issue.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kenya.
Mr. Andanje (Kenya): I would like to express my
sincere appreciation to you, Mr. President, for organizing
this important debate. I thank the Secretary-General, the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
the Deputy High Commissioner for Human Rights for
their presentations.

45

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

My delegation welcomes the adoption this
morning of resolution 1894 (2009), on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. It is testimony to the
Security Council’s continued commitment to enhancing
the protection of civilians.
Today is indeed a special occasion. It marks the
tenth anniversary of the Council’s first consideration of
the protection of civilians in armed conflict as a
thematic issue. This occasion provides us with the
opportunity to reflect on the progress made, the
challenges we face and the steps we must take to
address this problem. It also provides us with the
opportunity to renew our political will and resolve, and
to rally support for the protection of civilians.
We welcome the Security Council’s engagement
since February 1999 in enhancing the protection of
civilians. The adoption by the Council of additional
resolutions, the aide-mémoire (see S/PRST/2009/1,
annex) and the establishment of the Security Council
Expert Group have given impetus to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. Equally important are the
measures the Council has taken in addressing the
impact of war on women and children in armed
conflict.
My delegation believes that, despite those
positive achievements, the question of protection
deserves deeper reflection due to its complex and
multifaceted nature. It touches on issues involving the
conduct of peacekeeping operations, compliance with
human rights, the rule of law, political security,
development and disarmament. It is therefore
important that we address the matter taking into
account those underlying issues.
In view of the foregoing, there are still a number
of challenges. They include gaps in Security Council
mandates, the lack of pre-mandate planning, protection
guidance and assessments, failure by parties to conflict
to honour their obligations under international
humanitarian law and the failure to provide unfettered
access for humanitarian agencies and organizations to
people in dire need.
All parties to a conflict must respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law. We
note that this is a particular problem with many
non-State armed groups. The Security Council needs to
enhance compliance by consistently calling on all
parties to a conflict to adhere to their obligations,
especially in exercise of the principles of

46

proportionality and distinction. The Council should
further ensure that investigations of alleged violations
on civilians in armed conflict are carried out in a
timely manner, with commensurate consequences for
violators. This will not only promote accountability
among the various actors but will demonstrate the
Council’s opposition to impunity as part of a
comprehensive approach to ensuring that perpetrators
are brought to justice through national or international
legislation and that victims are granted redress.
Providing unhindered humanitarian access during
conflicts is a fundamental prerequisite for ensuring
life-saving assistance. It is therefore important for
peacekeeping missions to provide a secure
environment to facilitate humanitarian access to
enhance the capacity of peacekeeping missions to
provide protection to humanitarian agencies. While
current efforts are commendable, significant challenges
still remain at the operational level. Peacekeepers lack
capacity to reach populations at risk. The Council
should address and streamline that aspect during the
adoption of mandates. That would certainly guarantee
the safety and security of humanitarian personnel.
My delegation appreciates the fact that the
protection of civilians is currently mandated in a
number of United Nations peacekeeping missions. We
note that the first such mandate was authorized to
afford protection to civilians a decade ago in Sierra
Leone. At present, the majority of United Nations
peacekeeping missions operate under such mandates.
Nevertheless, there are real challenges in their
implementation because the mandates remain largely
undefined in both their military and mission-wide
aspects.
The Council should provide clear protection
guidelines and underline the importance of a
comprehensive approach involving all components of a
mission in delivering on the task. There is also a need
to ensure that available capacity and resources are
deployed for the task at hand and made available. It is
also necessary to emphasize that peacekeeping
missions should conduct their tasks without prejudice
to the primary responsibility of the host nations for the
protection of civilians.
In this connection, we welcome the independent
study jointly commissioned by the United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. It is

09-60274

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

insightful. We are convinced that it can strengthen the
implementation of civilian protection mandates. We
trust that the findings and recommendations will be
given consideration by all actors.
My delegation recognizes that sexual violence is
no longer considered to be a simple by-product of
armed conflict. It is being used as a tool of warfare. It
dehumanizes and instils fear in civilians during armed
conflict in order to achieve political and military
objectives. The adoption by the Council of resolution
1820 (2008) against sexual and other forms of violence
against civilians in armed conflict situations, in
particular women and children, was a significant
development.
However, there is a lot that needs to be done to
enhance its implementation. We must move from words
to deeds to ensure protection of sexually vulnerable
populations in armed conflict situations. The recent
creation of a post of a special representative of the
Secretary-General to address sexual violence in armed
conflict will, we believe, complement those efforts.
Finally, I reaffirm Kenya’s commitment to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict and to
guaranteeing their rights in conformity with
international humanitarian law. Considering the fact
that civilians continue to be subjected to indiscriminate
attacks and other violations by parties to conflict, and
taking into account the fact that they comprise the vast
majority of casualties, we need to work consistently
towards enhancing their protection. We urge the
Security Council to act in a swift and decisive manner
wherever such violations occur.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Zambia.
Mr. Kapambwe (Zambia): I am speaking in my
capacity as chairperson of the African Group for the
month of November. We thank the Austrian presidency
for convening this important debate.
Due to the lateness of the hour, my statement is
abridged. The full version has been circulated.
Africa welcomes the work of the Security
Council to protect civilians in armed conflict, in
particular the measures outlined in resolution 1674
(2006) adopted on 28 April 2006.
As most conflicts occur on our continent, Africa
calls upon the Security Council to be proactive in early

09-60274

warning and response to conflict. In this regard, the
Security Council should strengthen its early warning
mechanisms to detect, assess and discuss potential
conflict situations before they happen. In addition,
there is a need for the adoption of clear mandates for
peacekeeping missions that would make the protection
of civilian populations, of which women and children
constitute the majority in every conflict situation, their
top priority.
The prevention of conflicts is the best way of
protecting civilians from the suffering inherent in
armed conflicts. It is for this reason that the African
Group supports the implementation of the measures
recommended and contained in resolution 1265 (1999)
and the report of the Secretary-General in document
S/2009/277.
It should, however, be understood that durable
conflict prevention can be successful only if the root
causes of conflict are addressed. As long as we
continue to have oceans of poverty and
underdevelopment surrounding the few islands of
wealth around the world; as long as we hold sections of
humanity under the bondage of colonialism and foreign
occupation; as long as we continue to treat women,
who comprise half of humanity, as second class
citizens; as long as we continue with trade practices
that disadvantage developing countries; as long as we
continue to deny human rights and due process to
sections of world citizens; and indeed, as long as we do
not address governance challenges around the world,
the scourge of conflict will be a constant, ever-present
menace.
From the comfort of distance and in the shelter of
the edifices of wealth, a false sense of security has
arisen in developed countries. Conflict is seen as
remote and a phenomenon of the third world. We must
awaken to the fact that, in a globalized world, there are
no borders. The consequences of desperation, poverty
and underdevelopment in the third world —
uncontrolled migration, transnational crime, drug
trafficking and even some acts of terrorism — manifest
themselves all over the world. These issues affect all of
us. They must be resolved by all of us, acting together
as the United Nations.
The Austrian delegation’s concept paper
(S/2009/567) refers to the need to strengthen the rule of
law, enhance compliance and ensure accountability. It
also addresses the need to improve the implementation of

47

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

protection mandates by peacekeeping missions and to
enhance the provision of information and reporting to
the Council on issues pertaining to the protection of
civilians. We agree with those objectives. All of them
are important and necessary. The Security Council
must engage and come up with relevant
recommendations.
It is just that on the ground, when an illiterate
armed warlord or child soldier takes up arms against
society, the rule of law and accountability are
oftentimes not sufficient deterrents. Only by providing
at least a minimum of social, economic and political
opportunities to the citizens of the Third World shall
we create conditions for lasting peace and stability and,
thereby, durable protection for the civilians of these
societies.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I wish
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
important open debate on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. Azerbaijan’s interest in the issue under
consideration is obvious and results from the practical
experience of addressing the impact of armed conflict
on civilians and engaging in international efforts to
ensure respect by the parties concerned for their
obligations under international law.
The occupation of a considerable part of
Azerbaijan’s territory, resulting from the aggression of
neighbouring Armenia, has had a significant influence
on the humanitarian aspect of the problem and affects
primarily the most vulnerable groups of the population.
Azerbaijan continues to suffer from one of the highest
proportions of refugees and displaced persons in the
world. Most serious international offences were
committed in the course of the conflict. Suffice it to
say that, on one night alone in February 1992, when
the town of Khojaly, in the Nagorny Karabakh region
of Azerbaijan, was captured by invading Armenian
troops, 613 civilians were killed, including 106
women, 63 children and 70 elderly persons. Following
Armenia’s military occupation of Azerbaijan’s
territories, the Security Council, in its relevant
resolutions, condemned, inter alia, attacks on civilians
and the bombardment of inhabited areas and expressed
grave concern at the displacement of large numbers of
civilians in my country.

48

Concern about the extent to which the rules of
international humanitarian and human rights law are
being observed in Azerbaijan’s occupied territories was
heightened when the General Assembly decided to
address the matter and adopted two resolutions, first at
its sixtieth session and again at the sixty-second
session. Against the background of the lack of progress
in overcoming the consequences of the conflict and
their adverse implications for civilians, we look
forward to further concrete measures aimed at ensuring
compliance with international law and the effective
protection of civilians.
The year 2009 marks the tenth anniversary of the
Security Council’s consideration of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict as a thematic issue. This
year also marks the sixtieth anniversary of the Geneva
Conventions of 1949, which constitute an essential
legal framework for the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. However, we should recognize with
deep regret that a defining feature of most, if not all,
conflicts has been the failure of the parties to respect
and ensure respect for their legal obligations to protect
civilians and spare them the effects of hostilities.
As pointed out in the recent report of the
Secretary-General on the issue (S/2009/277), the
significant development of international norms and
standards for the protection of civilians and other
important steps taken by the Council to enhance
protection have not been matched by requisite actions
on the ground, and numerous challenges remain. As a
consequence, civilians, including women and children,
continue to suffer from inadequate protection in
situations of armed conflict.
Further efforts to strengthen the protection of
civilians, in particular through measures insisting on
strict compliance by parties to armed conflict with their
obligations under international humanitarian, human
rights and refugee law, remain crucial, and must be an
absolute priority for the United Nations, the Security
Council and, above all, Member States.
Particular consideration must be given to
implications for the protection of civilians in situations
of armed conflict aggravated by population
displacements, foreign military occupation and
attempts to change the demographic balance in
occupied territories. The impact of conflict on housing,
land and property in such situations requires a more

09-60274

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

consistent approach in order to ensure the safe and
dignified return of those forced to leave their homes.
It is important that the recognition of the right to
return, along with increased attention to its practical
implementation and concrete measures aimed at
overcoming obstacles preventing return, be applied by
the Security Council, the General Assembly and other
relevant United Nations bodies with more systematic
regularity. Ensuring the right to return constitutes a
categorical rejection of ethnic cleansing and provides a
significant measure of justice to those displaced from
their homes and land, thereby removing a source of
possible future tension and conflict.
As highlighted in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, integral to these challenges is the need to
ensure accountability for violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law, on the part of
both individual perpetrators and parties to conflict.
There must be consistent commitment on the part of
States to their obligation to prosecute those responsible
for breaches of international humanitarian law or
international human rights law. In cases in which such
breaches constitute war crimes, crimes against
humanity or even genocide — for which universal
jurisdiction is provided with regard to alleged
offenders — it is important that the prosecution of
individuals be undertaken through the domestic legal
systems of involved States and third-party States, while
State responsibility is enforced through relevant
inter-State mechanisms.
In that regard, it is important to emphasize that
ending impunity is essential in order to ensure not only
individual criminal responsibility for serious crimes,
but also sustainable peace, justice, truth, reconciliation
and the rights of victims.
The President (spoke in French): I now invite
His Excellency Mr. Pamphile Goutondji, SecretaryGeneral of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs, African
Integration, Francophonie and Beninese Diaspora of
Benin, to take the floor.
Mr. Goutondji (Benin) (spoke in French): As
this is the first time that we have taken the floor this
month in the Security Council, my delegation warmly
congratulates you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council.

09-60274

We associate ourselves with the statement made
by the representative of Zambia on behalf of the Group
of African States.
Benin served as a sponsor of resolution 1894
(2009), adopted by the Security Council this morning.
We did so to demonstrate our commitment to the
efforts made by the United Nations over the past 10
years to ensure the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. Since the Council began to consider that issue,
it has been able to correct the discrepancies that had
made the United Nations a powerless observer in the
face of grave violations of vital principles whose
preservation is one of its fundamental goals. In that
regard, we should commend the progress made by the
Security Council by, inter alia, adopting a series of
general and specific resolutions providing for the
gradual establishment of a system for implementing
protection measures on the ground.
Here, we should highlight the growing
effectiveness of the mechanisms put in place by
resolution 1612 (2005), initiated by Benin, to provide
for monitoring and reporting on children in situations
of armed conflict, and resolution 1882 (2009),
negotiated by Mexico, to broaden the scope of that
mechanism. We should also note the resolutions
recently adopted at the initiative of the United States of
America to combat sexual violence against women and
children in conflict situations.
Another step forward is the systematic inclusion
of civilian protection in the mandates of peacekeeping
operations. Unfortunately, this has not always been
accompanied by the provision of the capacity needed to
ensure that this protection is effectively provided.
Populations in conflict zones continue to pay the high
price of this gap, as we have seen in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Darfur, Afghanistan and many
other theatres of operation.
Benin welcomes the discussion on the subject
initiated by the Secretariat in its document entitled “A
New Partnership Agenda: Charting a New Horizon for
United Nations Peacekeeping”. The robust concept of
operations it proposes is logical, because we must
ensure that a mission receives adequate resources in
keeping with the situation on the ground and the nature
of the risks to populations under threat. In that regard,
the existence on the ground of a credible intervention
capacity can itself be a deterrent, making it possible to
keep a population safe from acts of violence to which

49

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

they could be
vulnerability.

exposed

in

situations

of

high

We agree on the need for an in-depth discussion
to identify all the implications of deploying robust
missions, taking into consideration criteria for the use
of force in the light of the basic principles for the
deployment of peacekeeping operations and the need to
make adjustments to rules of engagement.
Peacekeeping operations mandated to protect civilians
must have determined and effective political backing in
accordance with the principle of civilian control of
armed forces, in order to maintain the legitimacy of
United Nations action.
In recent years we have also seen progress in
deterring massive violations of the human rights of
civilian populations, with the strengthening of the
international community’s political will to step up
efforts to combat impunity for serious crimes
perpetrated in conflict situations. The International
Criminal Court and the ad hoc United Nations tribunals
play a crucial role in that regard. We urge United
Nations Member States to provide the cooperation
needed to enhance the authority of judicial bodies, both
nationally and internationally, with strict respect for
the principle of complementarity.
In addition to those measures, which focus on
coercion, my delegation welcomes the importance
attached to the dissemination of information about
international humanitarian law among stakeholders in
armed conflict and to training stakeholders in human
rights and refugee law, as a way of ensuring the
protection of civilian populations affected by conflict.
The criminal nature of massive displacements, the
deliberate targeting of civilians, attacks against
humanitarian personnel and the denial of humanitarian
access to vulnerable populations should receive special
attention through campaigns to raise awareness and
through training on international humanitarian law, in
the light of the increased use of those tactics in
conflicts that are on the agenda of the Security
Council.
Nevertheless, my delegation remains convinced
that the best way to protect civilians from armed
conflict is to engage in effective preventive diplomacy,
which can prevent the outbreak of conflicts, with their
unforeseeable consequences for human dignity.
Finally, my delegation associates itself with this
morning’s appeal by the Deputy High Commissioner

50

for Human Rights for the provision of effective
assistance to the victims of human rights violations
linked to armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.
Mr.
Nazarian
(Armenia):
Thank
you,
Mr. President, for organizing this essential debate. We
join previous speakers in thanking the SecretaryGeneral and Under-Secretary-General Holmes for their
briefings and their active involvement in addressing
this important subject.
Armenia aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of Sweden on behalf of the European
Union. We would also like to make some remarks in
our national capacity.
The frequency with which the Security Council
addresses this issue signifies the urgency of the matter
and the need for the international community to fulfil
its commitment to protect civilians, through the
implementation of the provisions of international
humanitarian law. Therefore, we share the views
expressed by Council members and other speakers,
which call for more systematic attention to protection.
We believe that this issue should be frequently
reflected in the deliberations of the Security Council.
We are also convinced that increased efforts to
fight impunity at the national and international levels
are essential. Armenia therefore welcomes the Austrian
initiative to hold this open debate. It provides an
opportunity to recap and reflect on the Council’s past
experience in dealing with the issue of the protection
of civilians and to highlight priority aspects for united
practical action. In a lessons-learned process, this
debate should also enable the Council to more
effectively address specific concerns related to the
protection of civilian populations.
The Council has to send a clear message to all
parties to armed conflicts, reminding them of their
obligations and condemning violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law.
It is unfortunate that, despite the existence of
international legal instruments and normative
mechanisms, innocent civilians, including women,
children and older persons, as well as international
humanitarian personnel, continue to suffer in conflict
situations.

09-60274

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

Armenia
believes
that
the
international
community must effectively seek thorough compliance
by all parties with the norms of international
humanitarian law. The relevance of that need was
underscored by the tragic events in the early 1990s in
Nagorny Karabakh, when only Armenia’s involvement
prevented ethnic cleansing, which had been subtly
conducted by Azerbaijan during the 70 years of Soviet
rule and was aimed at wiping out Armenians from their
ancestral homes.
The position held by Azerbaijan, with its longestablished distortion of facts, came as no surprise to
us. In 1992, the Azerbaijani President told the
European media that responsibility for the slaughter of
the civilian population of the Azeri city of Khojalu,
which was referred to in this Chamber, near
Stepanakert, the capital of Nagorny Karabakh,
completely lay with the Azeri opposition group, the
Azerbaijani National Front. In the days following the
event, President Mutalibov, in an interview with Czech
journalist Dana Mazalova, said that the militia of the
Azerbaijani National Front had actively obstructed and
actually prevented the exodus of the local population
through the mountain passages which had been
especially left open by Karabakh Armenians to
facilitate the flight of the civilian population.
The hope and the intention of the Azerbaijani side
was to utilize civilian losses of such a magnitude to
instigate a popular uprising against the Baku regime
and seize the reins of power. The attempts of the
Azerbaijani authorities to resolve the dispute militarily
brought about unexpected consequences for them.
What had promised to be a quick campaign to rid
Nagorny Karabakh of its native Armenian population
turned out to be an exhausting military conflict with a
loss of territory, numerous casualties and hundreds of
thousands of refugees and internally displaced persons
on both sides.
In that conflict, as in any other conflict, it is
civilians living on both sides of the border who
continue to suffer the consequences of the unresolved
dispute.
The peaceful resolution of any conflict is not an
easy enterprise and requires strong political will and
painful compromises from both sides. We believe that
the time has come to replace the unchanged rhetoric of
warmongering and hollow allegations with constructive

09-60274

steps aimed at making the environment
conducive to a peaceful settlement.

more

Armenia remains committed to the peaceful
resolution of the Nagorny Karabakh conflict and
strongly believes that a fundamental resolution of the
problem can be achieved only by peaceful means based
on the principles of international law.
We believe that the Security Council should
further contribute to the strengthening of the rule of
law and to upholding international law by supporting
criminal justice mechanisms.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): It is
getting very late, Mr. President, and I am afraid that
you will have to buy dinner for everybody. So, I shall
try to summarize my written statement, copies of
which will be circulated.
Let me first thank you, Sir, and the Government
of Austria for convening this open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. I also thank
Under-Secretary-General John Holmes for his
objective briefing today.
In the 10 years since the adoption of resolution
1265 (1999), the protection of civilians in armed
conflict has assumed a prominent place on the
Council’s agenda. Incidents of violence and crimes
against civilian populations in wartime have allowed us
to identify measures to protect civilians in armed
conflict. Yet, the reality on the ground has not changed
as one might have expected given the affirmations and
relevant resolutions adopted by the Security Council.
Despite the fact that there has been some progress
over the past decade, there have been many failures. A
large part of the reason for that distressing state of
affairs lies in the fundamental failure of some parties to
honour their obligations to protect civilians. The
number of casualties in armed conflict, including under
foreign occupation, has not declined, and no one can
doubt the suffering of the victims of armed conflict.
A vivid example of this is the situation is
Palestine, in particular the Gaza Strip, where for years
more than 1.5 million Palestinians have been deprived
of all their basic needs of life and humanitarian
assistance. Gaza has continued to be the largest prison
kept by the Israeli occupying authorities. There have

51

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

also been numerous reports of violations of
international humanitarian law and gross violations of
human rights during the military aggression by the
regime occupying Palestine. The killing of women and
children is among these violations and is well
documented in the Goldstone report (A/64/490, annex).
The same cruelty was applied by the Israeli regime
against civilians during its aggression against Lebanon
in 2006.
Based on the facts ascertained in all the
aforementioned cases, the conduct of the Israeli armed
forces, including deliberate killings and the causing of
great suffering to civilians, constitutes a grave breach
of international law, in particular the Fourth Geneva
Convention. Those who commit such violations, be it
in Palestine, Lebanon or in any other part of the world,
should be held accountable for their crimes against
innocent civilians. Only guaranteed accountability for
serious violations of international humanitarian law
and justice for victims will ensure that our efforts for
the protection of civilians are translated into
meaningful and practical action. Therefore, much
greater efforts are required to enhance compliance and,
for that matter, accountability.
We believe that there is no justification for the
Security Council’s remaining silent and taking no
action vis-à-vis the perpetrators of war crimes in the
Israeli regime. The international community, as it
manifests itself in this Council, has not only the right
to take measures but the responsibility to act
accordingly. We are waiting to see the reaction of the
Security Council to the Goldstone report and the
crimes committed in Gaza.
On a separate note, I would like to refer to an
unpalatable yet brutal reality of the indiscriminate
targeting of civilians in Afghanistan during air strikes.
Afghan officials, including President Karzai, have
repeatedly criticized the high level of civilian
casualties in such bombings. This fact has also been
noted in resolution 64/10, adopted three days ago by
the General Assembly.
We hope that the international community will
take all the measures necessary for the protection of
civilians on the basis of respect for the lives of
innocent people. The Security Council shall understand
that this is extremely important to its credibility. If we
want our debate on the protection of civilians to be
meaningful and effective, we should have a balanced

52

and comprehensive approach, and determine its causes
and effects. We hope that these discussions will be
successful and that we will take the necessary
measures.
Since the representative of the Israeli regime
referred to the issue of the ship that was recently
hijacked by that regime during an apparent terrorist
action, I would like to bring to the Council’s kind
attention the fact that this is yet another fabricated and
manipulated story concocted by that hypocritical entity,
and we categorically reject it. Bearing in mind
previous, similarly fake stories, we believe that it is
now clear to all that such manipulation and
fabrication — precisely at a time when several United
Nations bodies and a large majority of Member States
are busy with the consideration of the criminal acts of
the Israeli regime against the innocent civilian
population of Palestine, most importantly war crimes
and crimes against humanity — represent yet another
useless and desperate attempt to distract the attention
of the international community from the regime’s
criminal acts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Bugingo Rugema (Rwanda): My delegation
welcomes the opportunity to participate in this open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
and wishes to express our gratitude to the delegation of
Austria for convening this debate on an issue of critical
importance to the maintenance of international peace
and security.
We welcome the adoption this morning of
resolution 1894 (2009) on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and view it as an important step forward
in our consideration of this issue. I also wish to thank
the Secretary-General and the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs for their most insightful
statements and for their efforts in this respect.
My delegation aligns itself with the statements
delivered by the representatives of Egypt and Zambia
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and the
African Group, respectively.
It has been 10 years since the Security Council
first discussed the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, yet civilians still bear the brunt of the
suffering in situations of armed conflict. It is
increasingly clear that resolutions do not automatically

09-60274

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

translate into clear mandates and operations on the
ground. In our region particularly, we experience daily
the consequences of a failure to tackle the underlying
causes of conflict and to fully implement protection
mandates, due to either their ambiguous nature or a
lack of capacity.
We therefore welcome the study recently
published by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs on protecting civilians in the
context of United Nations peacekeeping operations. As
a troop-contributing country, we hope that it will lead
the way in bringing clarity to protection mandates, in
bridging existing gaps and in the implementation of its
recommendations.
The genocide in Rwanda and the consequent
conflict in the Great Lakes region have been
characterized by a culture of impunity that has allowed
the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda
(FDLR) and other genocidal forces to fester and
commit heinous crimes against civilians in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We would
encourage Operation Kimia II, supported by the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, to maintain its efforts aimed at
eliminating the threat to civilians posed mainly by the
FDLR and other negative forces in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is imperative
that we end the culture of impunity and ensure that all
who commit such crimes are held accountable for their
actions.
In conclusion, we view the responsibility to
protect as being integral to the protection of civilians,
and welcome the reference to the responsibility to
protect in the resolution adopted this morning. The
General Assembly debate and resolution 63/308 on the
responsibility to protect make it necessary for this
concept to be operationalized as an additional element
in the protection of populations from genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Minister
for
International
Cooperation
and
Humanitarian Affairs of the Sovereign Military Order
of Malta.
Mr. Von Boeselager: The Sovereign Order of
Malta appreciates this opportunity to address the
Security Council on the vital subject of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. This is a subject of

09-60274

special concern to my Order, and I extend our thanks to
the President for convening this important debate.
During the twentieth century, civilians became
disproportionately both the targets and the victims of
warfare. One hundred years ago, 90 per cent of war
victims were military; today, 90 per cent of casualties
are civilians. Until now, all the efforts of the
international community under the international
conventions for the protection of civilians have failed
to mitigate this unacceptable tragedy. Current efforts to
protect civilians against the various atrocities of
contemporary armed conflict must be intensified. As an
international sovereign order with a 900-year mission
to help, in particular, the victims of natural and manmade disasters and conflicts, the Order of Malta is
deeply concerned about this ever-increasing challenge.
The use of human shields to provide shelter for
combatants exposes civilians to lethal danger. This has
come to be the case in asymmetric struggles between
Governments and insurgent or terrorist groups. The
misuse of protected civilian or religious facilities
endangers even the principle of protection of those in
situations of armed conflict. We have seen this in Iraq,
Afghanistan and Gaza. The systematic use of rape and
mutilation of civilians has become a tactic of choice of
militia groups and armed forces in several regions,
especially in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, where sexual violence and rape are part of the
military strategy of disruption.
Terror is an epidemic. Militiamen and rebels
perpetrate many of these outrages, often directed at
young women or even little girls and sometimes little
boys. The Order is working with victims in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to prevent or treat
sexually transmitted diseases and to provide
psychological counselling to them. We have treated and
counselled more than 30,000 women in the past four
years, and we have also successfully worked with
soldiers and rebels in order to try to prevent such
crimes in the future.
Civilians and humanitarian aid workers, including
Order of Malta personnel, have become victims of
military raids, most recently in Darfur. Cluster bombs
in southern Lebanon are a serious threat to the civilians
we treat in our clinics. Our maternity hospital in
Bethlehem, Palestine, the birthplace of 44,000 babies
since 1990, has been shelled twice in recent years.
More than 60 per cent of the attacks on humanitarian

53

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

workers have occurred in Afghanistan, Somalia and the
Sudan. In Afghanistan, the Order of Malta has lost
several local staff members in ambushes and shootings.
The Order has observed at least four types of
violence perpetrated against civilians in the course of
armed conflict, and the Council should address each
one. They are, first, direct attacks on civilians,
including by use of sexual violence, suicide bombings
or assaults on facilities for refugees and displaced
persons for the purpose of destabilizing society or
generating terror for military or political objectives;
secondly, the taking of civilian hostages to serve as
human shields or the misuse of protected facilities,
such as hospitals or aid stations, for the purpose of
protecting combatants or combatant facilities or
operations; thirdly, the inflicting of incidental or
collateral damage upon civilians, including aid workers
and medical personnel, as part of military operations
that create a high degree of probability that innocent
civilians will be killed or injured in pursuing what
would otherwise be legitimate military objectives; and
fourthly, the targeting of humanitarian facilities or aid
workers, such a medical personnel and volunteers, for
the purpose of denying civilians refuge, food, shelter or
medical care.
There can be no question that these kinds of
actions violate basic principles of international
humanitarian law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention, whether or not a particular conflict
technically constitutes an international conflict and
whether or not the combatant groups or militias are
formally parties to the Convention. International
humanitarian law has evolved to the point that all
combatants must recognize and obey those
fundamental precepts of human decency and
civilization. In short, these principles and values must
be regarded as part of customary international law and,
as such, they are universally binding.
Equally important, those persons who violate
these precepts must be held accountable for their
actions. That accountability must include those who
personally violate the basic rules of international
humanitarian law, as well as those who are responsible
for those violations in accordance with settled
principles of the international law of command
responsibility.
The Council should clearly and unambiguously
endorse those principles, insist that all combatants

54

observe them, condemn violations of those principles,
urge all Member States to take appropriate action to
investigate and punish violations, and consider
referring to the International Criminal Court any gross
violations that Member States are unable to pursue
through the ordinary course of their domestic law and
procedure.
I commend the Council for unanimously adopting
this morning resolution 1894 (2009), which deals with
some of those issues.
The international community must mitigate the
danger to civilians stemming from armed conflict by
taking additional steps. One is to limit or outlaw the
production, distribution and use of weapons that are
inherently indiscriminate and that history has shown to
pose a massive danger to civilians, especially children.
I refer specifically to land mines and cluster munitions.
In addition, while the Order of Malta expresses
its support for international efforts to prevent the
spread of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass
destruction, the vast majority of civilians killed and
injured in the course of armed conflict are the victims
of low-level conflicts. The proliferation of small arms,
including automatic weapons, is a major source of
those deaths and injuries in such conflicts. The Order
urges the Council and the international community to
take responsible and effective steps to stem the trade in
small arms.
The Order of Malta pledges to work with other
members of the international community to re-establish
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, with the
goal of ensuring, to the extent possible, that civilians
do not become the innocent victims of these struggles.
The President: I would now ask UnderSecretary-General John Holmes to respond to
comments made or questions posed during today’s
debate.
Mr. Holmes: I will be brief. Let me begin by
welcoming the support expressed for resolution 1894
(2009) by many speakers. I hope that it will translate
into a serious effort to implement the resolution and, of
course, previous resolutions, too.
I also welcome the participation of the more than
60 delegations that have spoken today. Again, I hope
that this is an indication not only of the seriousness
with which States view this tenth anniversary, but also
and more importantly a sign of their commitment to

09-60274

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

action. Otherwise, the gap between rhetoric and reality
will yawn further and the credibility of the Council
itself will also be further impaired.
It is too easy to talk of the issue at hand, as the
Permanent Representative of Zambia put it this
afternoon, “from the comfort of distance and in the
shelter of the edifices of wealth” without fully
appreciating the genuine horror for individuals and
families of what we are actually talking about.
It is very late, so let me make one or two rapid
concluding comments.
Many speakers have expressed support for those
parts of the resolution dealing with the role of
peacekeeping missions in the protection of civilians
and for the findings of the joint study commissioned by
the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) on this subject. Let
me just repeat that OCHA and DPKO look forward to
working with many Council members in the months
ahead to take those recommendations forward.
Several speakers mentioned the important role of
regional and subregional actors in peacekeeping. We
certainly intend to share the findings of the study with
those regional organizations that have a role in
peacekeeping, for example, the African Union, the
European Union and NATO.
Many speakers have underlined, correctly, the
importance of ensuring accountability for those who
violate the law, and some have referred to the
importance in this context of fact-finding mechanisms.
I would certainly urge the Council and Member States
to give greater consideration to how to employ such
mechanisms on a more frequent, consistent and less
politically influenced basis.
On the issue of the value of engagement with
non-State armed groups for compliance and access,
mentioned by a number of speakers, the SecretaryGeneral has called on the Council to convene an Arria
formula meeting to discuss the experience of United
Nations and non-governmental actors in engaging such
groups. I hope the Council will convene such a meeting
ahead of the first protection of civilians open debate in
2010.
Let me also reiterate the point, made by the
Secretary-General and several others, that when it
comes to protecting civilians in armed conflict, the

09-60274

Council cannot afford only to address protection
concerns in those situations on its political agenda. We
need to find ways to address other alarming situations
better and to make better use of the unique protection
tools at the disposal of the Council.
Finally, a few speakers noted that the nature of
contemporary conflict, marked by the struggle against
non-State armed groups in what is known as
asymmetric warfare, poses new challenges for the
protection of civilians. I acknowledge the complexity
of these challenges, but the suggestion seems to be that
fighting an enemy who is difficult, if not impossible to
identify or distinguish from civilians, and one that at
times commits flagrant violations of international
humanitarian law, somehow makes the application of
the law to States parties to conflict less relevant.
The law itself is quite clear. All parties to conflict
must at all times take the necessary steps to spare the
civilian population and distinguish at all times between
civilians and combatants.
Moreover, violations by one party, including
non-State parties, do not permit or justify violations by
any other party to that same conflict. Indeed, the nature
of contemporary armed conflicts and the increasing
prevalence of conflict in urban and densely populated
settings means that all parties must be ever more
vigilant and determined to respect and ensure respect
for their obligations under the law, even if there is
room for experts to look at how that can be best done
in such challenging circumstances.
One issue here is the choice of weapons. As noted
in the last report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/277), there are increasing concerns about the
humanitarian impact of explosive weapons when used
in densely populated areas in terms of the risk to
civilians caught in the blast or killed or injured by
damaged buildings, and in terms of damaged
infrastructure vital to the well-being of the civilian
population such as water and sanitation systems.
Again, there is scope for a new look at this crucial
issue, and I hope the Council will take it up at some
point.
The President: The representative of the United
States has asked for the floor, and I call on him now.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
regret having to take the floor at this late hour. I thank
you again, Sir, for organizing this meeting on this

55

S/PV.6216 (Resumption 1)

critical issue. Unfortunately, the contribution of the
delegation of the Venezuela to our debate today was to
focus its statement on irrelevant and extraneous issues
that had little to do with the subject at hand. It is
regrettable that Venezuela has sought to use this
opportunity to promote other objectives. In our view, it
was a disservice to this Council and to your efforts
today, Sir.

56

The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 8.35 p.m.

09-60274
