S/PV.8682

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8682nd meeting

Wednesday, 11 December 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Craft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Adom
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Popolizio Bardales
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Mabhongo
Ms. Pierce

Agenda
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-40374 (E)
*1940374*

S/PV.8682

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Japan and the Republic of Korea to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Mohamed
Khaled Khiari, Assistant Secretary-General for the
Middle East, Asia and the Pacific, Departments
of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Khiari.
Mr. Khiari: There have been troubling
developments in recent months related to the nuclearweapon and ballistic-missile programmes of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
The first relates to resumed missile testing by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The launch of
two missiles on 28 November marked the thirteenth time
this year that the country has launched ballistic missiles
or other projectiles. More recently, on 7 December, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea announced
what it referred to as an “important test” at the Sohae
Satellite Launching Ground, located on its west coast,
that would help to change the “strategic position of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea once again in
the near future”. Some experts believe that the word
“strategic” refers to the country’s nuclear-weapon
capability. Analysts have reported signs that a rocket
engine test had been conducted at the site within the
past few days.
Through its State media, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has announced the testing of various
new missile systems this year, including systems it has
referred to as “multiple-launch rocket systems” and
a new land-based short-range ballistic missile and a
submarine-launched ballistic missile.
2/17

11/12/2019

As is well known, Security Council resolutions,
most recently resolution 2397 (2017) of 22 December
2017, prohibit the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea from, inter alia, conducting any further launches
that use ballistic missile technology. Furthermore,
according to the information available to the United
Nations, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea did
not issue any airspace or maritime safety notifications.
The second development relates to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s ongoing suspension of
diplomatic engagements. The country has yet to resume
working-level talks with the United States, intra-Korean
contacts have stalled and the country is forgoing some
of its other international engagements.
The third development relates to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s warning of a new path.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has set a
new policy — that it will not discuss denuclearization
unless the so-called hostile policy of the United States
is removed. It has set a year-end deadline for the United
States to come up with a bold proposal agreeable to
Pyongyang and warned that it would otherwise take a
new path.
While it is unclear what the new path may entail, the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea stated, on 30 November, that we may
see what a “real ballistic missile is in the not distant
future”. In terms of timing, the Central Committee of
the ruling Workers’ Party of Korea will hold a plenary
meeting in the latter half of December to
“discuss and decide on crucial issues in line with the
needs of the development of the Korean revolution
and the changed situation at home and abroad”.
Previous sessions of the Central Committee have seen
the ruling party prepare for major announcements.
The Secretary-General is very concerned by the
latest developments on the Korean peninsula. The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s reference to
launching ballistic missiles and its threat of potentially
taking a so-called new path in the coming weeks are
deeply troubling. The Secretary-General is reiterating
his call on the leadership of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to comply fully with its international
obligations under relevant Security Council resolutions,
resume working-level talks with the United States and
work for peace and stability.
19-40374

11/12/2019

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

On 15 December 2017, the Secretary-General
described the situation on the Korean peninsula as “the
most tense and dangerous peace and security issue in
the world” (S/PV.8137, p. 2). Significant progress was
made in 2018 towards building trust, reducing the
risk of war and opening channels of communication.
The summits involving the leaders of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, the Republic of Korea and
the United States, respectively, gave rise to the hope
that it is possible to build an atmosphere conducive
to advancing sustainable peace and complete and
verifiable denuclearization on the Korean peninsula.
Today, however, as I have already mentioned, talks
between the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
and the United States, as well as between the two
Koreas, have stalled. The Secretary-General calls on
the parties to continue what they have started. It will
require perseverance, political courage and painstaking
diplomacy. He urges the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea and the United States to resume talks.
Diplomacy can continue to reduce tensions that could
otherwise set events on an unpredictable trajectory.
The Secretary-General calls for the international
community to support the parties in their endeavours
and to ensure the full implementation of relevant
Security Council resolutions. The unity of the Security
Council remains essential for achieving the goal of
complete and verifiable denuclearization and creates
the space for diplomatic initiatives to that end.
I would like to close by noting that a breakdown
in diplomacy will not help the human rights or
humanitarian situations in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. Meeting the population’s basic
needs of food and access to essential health services,
clean water and adequate sanitation is a humanitarian
imperative but also a basic human right. While the
primary responsibility to meet these needs lies with
the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea — as is the case for any Government towards
its people — the Secretariat has consistently stressed
the humanitarian imperative to provide humanitarian
assistance when the basic needs of the population are
not being met.
International humanitarian operations in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea remain critical
for over 10 million people, or approximately 40 per
cent of the population. The Secretariat recalls that the
measures imposed by the Security Council are not
intended to negatively affect or restrict food aid and

S/PV. 8682

humanitarian assistance that are not prohibited by
relevant Security Council resolutions. The Secretariat
is encouraged by the adoption by the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006) of Implementation Assistance Notice No.7 in
August 2018, which provides guidelines for obtaining
the exemptions necessary to facilitate humanitarian
assistance in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, as well as improvements in the rates and
timeliness of exemption approvals.
Addressing the humanitarian needs in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea requires an
integrated response — for example, by addressing
water, sanitation and hygiene to also improve health
and nutrition — in order to be effective, save lives
and prevent further suffering. I urge all Member
States to fund lifesaving humanitarian operations
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Some
$120 million are required to address the critical
humanitarian needs of the most vulnerable 3.8 million
people in 2019. A gap of $87 million remains.
The President: I thank Mr. Khiari for his briefing.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United States.
Because of the increasingly troubling situation
on the Korean peninsula, the United States convened
today’s meeting of the Security Council. We must
address this issue in a comprehensive manner.
Over the past year and a half, the United States has
sought to engage the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea in a sustained negotiating process intended to
bring lasting peace to all people of the Korean peninsula,
as well as safety and security to the surrounding region.
The process to achieve this vision, as President Trump
and Chairman Kim agreed to in Singapore, would
advance by replacing decades of acrimony with trust,
working towards genuine and lasting peace, achieving
the complete denuclearization of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and healing the lingering
wounds of war that date back nearly 70 years.

19-403743/17

S/PV.8682

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

We have said many times before that we remain ready
to engage in this comprehensive process. We remain
ready to take actions in parallel and to simultaneously
take concrete steps toward this agreement. We are
prepared to be flexible in how we approach this manner
and we recognize the need for a balanced agreement
that addresses the concerns of all the parties. But we
cannot do this alone — North Korea must make this
difficult but bold decision to work with us.
However, we have seen deeply troubling
indications that the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea is headed in a different direction. The reason for
today’s meeting, as we have discussed several times,
is that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
has launched more than two dozen ballistic missiles
just this year. Those ballistic missile tests, no matter
their range, undermine regional security and stability
and are in clear violation of relevant Security Council
resolutions. These actions also risk closing the door
on this opportunity to find a better way for the future.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has
threatened to take a new path in the coming weeks and
has used its public statements to hint at a resumption
of serious provocations. In practical terms, this would
mean that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
could launch space vehicles using long-range ballisticmissile technology or that it could even test launch
intercontinental ballistic missiles, which are designed
to attack the continental United States with nuclear
weapons.
Let me be clear — the United States and the Security
Council have a goal, not a deadline. We have outlined
this goal in detail in a series of unanimously adopted
Security Council resolutions. We want to use this timely
briefing to make it crystal clear to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea that its continued ballisticmissile testing is deeply counterproductive to the
shared objectives that President Trump and Chairman
Kim have discussed on two occasions. Missile and
nuclear testing will not bring the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea greater security. It will not bring
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea or the
region greater stability. It will not help the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea achieve the economic
opportunities it seeks; in fact, it will do the opposite,
complicating our ability to negotiated agreement that
would positively address the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea security and economic goals and
improve regional stability.
4/17

11/12/2019

We hope that we do not find ourselves at an
inflection point in the near future. We trust that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea will turn away
from further hostility and threats and, instead, make a
bold decision to engage with all of us. If events prove
otherwise, we as the Security Council must all be
prepared to act accordingly.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I now give the floor to the other Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China (spoke in Chinese): We
listened closely to Assistant Secretary-General Khiari’s
briefing.
Since early 2018, thanks to the concerted efforts of
the parties concerned, there have been positive changes
in the situation on the Korean peninsula and the issue
of the peninsula has been steered back on track towards
a negotiated solution through dialogue. Earlier this
year, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and
the United States held meetings between their leaders
in Hanoi and Panmunjom, as well as working-level
consultations in Stockholm, which are positive step
towards greater mutual understanding between the two
parties.
At the same time, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea has honoured its promise to suspend nuclear
tests and the test launches of intercontinental ballistic
missiles and has declared on multiple occasions its
commitment to the denuclearization of the peninsula.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the
United States, as the principal parties to the peninsula
issue, should cherish the hard-won relaxation of the
situation on the peninsula, achieved through dialogue,
and work together by taking practical measures to
achieve the denuclearization of and lasting peace on the
Korean peninsula.
The situation on the Korean peninsula has recently
taken another turn, leading to renewed tension
between the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
and the United States and bringing the situation on
the peninsula once again to a critical juncture. China
notes that, on 7 September, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea conducted a test and made a related
public statement. So far, the details of the test, what it
involved and other specific information have yet to be
19-40374

11/12/2019

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

established. The Security Council should therefore not
jump to hasty conclusions.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has
taken a series of positive steps towards denuclearization,
but its legitimate concerns and aspirations with regard
to security and development have not been given
the attention they deserve and remain unanswered.
That is one significant reason explaining the current
deadlock in dialogue and increasing tensions related
to the situation. The Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and especially the United States should take
advantage of the hard-won window of opportunity,
take on board and respect one another’s stances in good
faith, demonstrate genuine flexibility and good will,
act on the consensus reflected in the Singapore joint
statement and, by taking a phased and synchronized
approach, break the deadlock and resume dialogue and
engagement as soon as possible so as to prevent the
dialogue process from derailing or reversing course.
The international community, in particular the main
parties to the peninsula issue, must take an objective
and impartial position, act in the service of long-term
interests and the greater good, and make additional
efforts contributing to the relaxation of tensions in the
dialogue and consultations between the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and the political process on
the peninsula so as to avoid plunging the region into
tensions and confrontations.
The Security Council’s resolutions on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea should
be comprehensively, completely and accurately
implemented. Sanctions are only a means to an end,
not an end in and of themselves. Enforcing sanctions is
required by the relevant Council resolutions. Pushing
for a political solution is also required by the relevant
Council resolutions. Currently, there is a greater sense
of urgency to find a political settlement to the issue on
the peninsula.
Advancing the denuclearization of the peninsula
in parallel with establishing a peace mechanism on
the peninsula, is the only realistic and feasible way to
solve the issue politically. It is the Security Council’s
important responsibility to maintain peace and stability
on the peninsula and move the denuclearization process
forward. In the current context, the top priority is to
maintain the international consensus and momentum to
reach a political solution to the peninsula issue, support
and urge the United States and the Democratic People’s

S/PV. 8682

Republic of Korea to meet one another half way and do
everything we can to head off a dramatic reversal of the
peninsula situation.
It is imperative that the Council take action and
invoke the reversible provisions in resolutions on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea as soon as
possible in the light of the evolving situation on the
peninsula and make the necessary adjustments to the
sanctions measures stipulated by those resolutions,
especially in areas where the livelihood of the people of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is at stake.
That is in keeping with the spirit of the resolutions,
which are conducive to easing the humanitarian and
livelihood-related situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, creating a favourable environment
for dialogue, encouraging the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to take greater strides towards
denuclearization and creating the necessary conditions
for and impetus to a political settlement of the situation
on the peninsula.
China has been consistent in its commitment to the
denuclearization of the peninsula, the maintenance of
peace and stability there and the settlement of all issues
through dialogue and consultations. Approaching the
matter responsibly, China has played a constructive role
by maintaining close communication and coordination
with the parties concerned and encouraging peace
talks between them. With regard to implementing
the Security Council’s resolutions on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, China has unfailingly and
conscientiously fulfilled its international obligations
and sustained huge losses and tremendous pressure in
the process of implementing the relevant sanctions.
China maintains that the Security Council
sanctions against the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea should not negatively affect humanitarian
activities. China calls on the Security Council to
remain united, discharge its historical responsibility
and speak unequivocally with one voice in support
of a political solution. China stands ready to continue
working together with all parties concerned towards
the peninsula’s denuclearization and achieving lasting
peace and stability there.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): The
Security Council has been working for years on the
North Korean nuclear issue and, for years, the threat
has continued to increase and worsen. The risks are
not only real and empirical, but also extremely high

19-403745/17

S/PV.8682

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

and growing. As we meet here, the nuclear programme
continues to advance and fissile material continues to
be produced.
We fully share the concern voiced with regard
to North Korean provocations, in particular the 13
incidents in which some 20 ballistic missiles have
been launched over the past months. Those launches
demonstrate North Korea’s willingness to develop
its missile arsenal. They violate our decisions, which
clearly prohibit North Korea from using ballistic
technologies. They undermine regional stability and
security and international peace and security. They
erode our trust and make us doubt the sincerity of the
regime’s willingness to negotiate.
North Korea has continued to develop its nuclear
and ballistic capabilities. Despite what we may have
heard, it has decidedly taken no measures in the opposite
direction. Sites linked to its illegal programmes
remain operational and active. The test on 7 December
shows not only that the regime plans to continue its
provocations in violation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions, but also that it is not respecting
its own commitments, as Kim Jong Un had previously
announced that the Tongchang-ri site, where that test
took place, would be dismantled, at the inter-Korean
summit held in Pyongyang in September 2018.
In that regard, we must remain both sober and
vigilant with regard to the situation. Our approach to the
issue must be firm, clear and unambiguous. I recall that
the strict and full implementation of the decisions of the
Security Council and, through it, of the international
community, is a collective obligation. It must be selfevident to us all. The regime has methodically pursued
its efforts to circumvent the sanctions and avoid the
consequences of disregarding our decisions, whether
concerning the presence of workers sent by the regime
abroad or the illegal shipments of petroleum products
and coal. The Panel of Experts regularly reports to us
on its findings involving the many violations observed.
Sanctions are not a goal in and of themselves.
They serve our common goal of achieving the
denuclearization of North Korea. The situation does
not justify lifting them or scaling down their level of
implementation. We must also be prepared to respond
firmly to any challenge to our decisions and authority by
the North Korean regime. North Korea is undergoing a
dire humanitarian crisis. The sanctions imposed by the
Council include exemptions with regard to the latter,
6/17

11/12/2019

and they are being applied. But it must be made very
clear that responsibility for the humanitarian crisis falls
squarely on the regime. Instead of devoting the major
part of its resources to the development of nuclear
and ballistic-missile programmes and threatening
international peace and security, the Pyongyang
authorities should feed their people.
The door to dialogue with Pyongyang remains open.
We are extending a hand. We support and welcome the
efforts made by the United States over the past two
years to initiate negotiations. What we now expect are
concrete gestures of commitment from North Korea,
which must refrain from any provocations. It should
comply with the relevant Security Council resolutions
and embark swiftly and in good faith on a process of
complete, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization.
That is the only possible way to achieve a political
solution and lasting peace on the Korean peninsula.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): We are gathered
here today in the name of prevention. International
peace and security are under threat, owing to North
Korea’s unabated development of ballistic-missile and
nuclear-weapon technology. Despite concerted goodfaith efforts by the United States to negotiate a solution,
this year has seen 13 sets of illegal ballistic-missile
tests. We are therefore also gathered here today to send
a message to Pyongyang that it is not too late. It can
prevent the situation from worsening and should seize
this diplomatic opportunity, which has already been
repeated in this Council meeting. The expressed and
united will of the Security Council is that North Korea
should begin the process of complete, verifiable and
irreversible denuclearization, and the United Kingdom
will continue to work with international partners to
support that goal.
What is at stake bears repeating. As the Permanent
Representative of China said, this is truly and
quintessentially a matter for the Security Council, and
of all international bodies, only the Security Council
can really deal with such a challenge deriving from
weapons of mass destruction and proliferation. It is a
vital issue. It is hard to discern what lies behind North
Korea’s provocative and dangerous moves. It has tested
three different types of short-range ballistic missiles
since May, and the tests have demonstrated that its illegal
and reckless weapons programme has made substantial
progress. As other representatives have said, each test
is a violation of Security Council resolutions, and
the Council should support the rigorous enforcement
19-40374

11/12/2019

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

of its sanctions in the face of such violations. At this
point, I also want to wholeheartedly endorse what the
representative of France said about the humanitarian
angle.
The sanctions regime imposed by the Council
will remain in place until North Korea takes concrete
steps towards denuclearization. Further breaches of
Security Council resolutions, whether with ballisticmissile launches, space launch vehicles or nuclear tests,
will only harden the Council’s resolve. And there are
further implications of the possession of such weapons.
It is in no Member State’s interest to see North Korean
technology and expertise proliferate across borders.
With the fiftieth anniversary of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons coming up, next
year will be a very important moment to resolve this
issue.
We should not forget the suffering of the North
Korean people. The human rights situation in North
Korea is disturbing. It is the worst offender on the
Global Slavery Index and is ranked 179th out of 180
in the Reporters without Borders World Press Freedom
Index. The role of human rights in this issue is critical,
and we urge North Korea to concentrate on improving
the lives of its most vulnerable people.
All States have an obligation to enforce the Council’s
sanctions. We urge action to address the continued
reports of fuel shipments to North Korea in violation of
the mandated annual import cap, and we urge vigilance
regarding North Korea’s illegal fundraising activity,
including its use of cyberattacks. Lastly, if I may,
Madam President, we would like to remind States that
all North Korean overseas workers earning an income
should be repatriated by 22 December this year.
Our message as a Council must be united, and it is
a clear one. The continued development of programmes
in violation of Security Council resolutions will not
be tolerated. We urge North Korea to change course,
engage in meaningful negotiations with the United
States and begin a process of complete, verifiable and
irreversible denuclearization.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Many of those who have spoken before me
today mentioned the role of the Security Council. We
see today’s meeting as an opportunity to review the
results of the Council’s action over the past two years
in implementing its own decisions in its quest to find a
political and diplomatic solution to the knotty problems

S/PV. 8682

of the Korean peninsula. Unfortunately, there is almost
nothing to discuss, since for the past two years the
Council has been able to agree on any specific steps.
Ever since a glimmer of progress emerged in the
dialogue between the United States and the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and in the inter-Korean
reconciliation efforts, Russia, China and other Security
Council members have often tried to initiate some
kind of positive response on the part of the Security
Council to the events that have occurred. I want to
remind members that only last year we were talking
about the prospects for concluding the long-awaited
peace agreement and about rapprochement between
South and North Korea. However, for reasons that are
difficult to understand, any kind of response on the part
of the Council in support of that positive momentum
towards a settlement has been blocked.
Meanwhile, the inter-Korean dialogue has come to
nothing, and the dialogue between the United States
and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is
stagnating. Sanctions cannot replace diplomacy, and a
negotiation process is a two-way street. It is impossible
to get an agreement without offering anything in return.
No one is questioning the fact that the existence of a
nuclear-missile programme in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea is unacceptable. However, how can
we expect progress when Pyongyang is called on to
meet all the proposed requirements unconditionally in
return for only a promise of future benefits?
We have often said that the path to
denuclearization — and not only for the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, incidentally, but for
the entire Korean peninsula — should begin with
strengthened confidence-building measures. The
institutions and mechanisms of the United Nations
and its Security Council should act in support of the
processes for a settlement and for inter-Korean dialogue
rather than becoming an obstacle to them. Only then
will it be possible to talk about an effective solution
to the accumulated problems in the region, including
the nuclear issue, on a basis of dialogue and mutually
acceptable arrangements. It is impossible to achieve
that through sanctions and pressure alone. It is also
essential to have a road map for the gradual lifting of
restrictions. The Council’s excessive use of sanctions
is already one of the reasons why Member States and
international organizations, including the United
Nations itself, have frequently been unable to maintain
normal humanitarian, diplomatic and sporting ties

19-403747/17

S/PV.8682

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

with the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea that
have nothing to do with its development of nuclear and
missile programmes.
The so-called autonomous or secondary sanctions
that go around or over Security Council sanctions on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and other States
do their own share of damage. Unilateral restrictions
not only undermine the sovereignty and lawful interests
of Member States and are in breach of the norms and
rules of international trade, but also undermine the
integrity of sanctions agreed through the Security
Council. We once again call on the United States and
other States to stop using unilateral restrictions. The
example of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
is very revealing in that regard. Even things that are not
prohibited under the Security Council sanctions regime
are extremely difficult to implement thanks to these
illegal practices and enterprises’ fears of ending up on
banned lists. Attempts to whitewash such restrictions
by invoking the authority of the Security Council and
its Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006) are unacceptable.
We would also like to point out that every Security
Council resolution on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea contains provisions on measures
for arriving at a political and diplomatic settlement
of the situation on the Korean peninsula as well as a
sanctions component. That is a joint decision of the
Council. Ignoring those provisions is equivalent to
non-compliance with the consensus agreements arrived
at in the Security Council. We have often said that the
Council and its 1718 Committee should contribute as
much as possible to finding political and diplomatic
solutions to the problems of the Korean peninsula
and establishing a multilateral security mechanism in
North-East Asia. Furthermore, the Security Council’s
own resolutions oblige it to regularly assess the
advisability of reviewing any of the restrictions on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea as it makes
progress towards renouncing its nuclear weapons.
To sum up, the positive momentum that emerged
in 2018 in inter-Korean relations did not elicit any
response from the Council. The expectations for positive
movement in the efforts for a settlement on the Korean
peninsula were disappointed. With the aim of emerging
from the stalemate, Russia and China have proposed
a viable road map towards denuclearization and the
normalization of relations that takes into consideration
the existing security guarantees for States throughout
8/17

11/12/2019

North-East Asia and phased efforts to achieve those
aims based on action in exchange for action. All that is
needed to accomplish it is political will. It is important
that we encourage the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to cooperate by responding to what it has already
done in the expectation of a positive reaction on our
part.
We call on all the parties to act with restraint
and resume the dialogue between Washington and
Pyongyang. We want to emphasize once again that the
quest for mutually acceptable political and diplomatic
solutions is the only possible path to a peaceful
resolution of the problems of the Korean peninsula and
the creation of enduring security mechanisms in NorthEast Asia, which is in the interests of all the countries of
the region and the international community as a whole.
To that end, we believe that the time has come for the
Council to adopt a political resolution on the situation
on the Korean peninsula. Russia has always been ready
to cooperate closely with all the parties involved in
order to ensure peace and stability in the region and to
achieve a comprehensive solution to the problems of the
Korean peninsula.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank the United
States for convening this briefing. We also thank
Mr. Khiari for his report this afternoon.
We would first like to stress that the nuclear
and ballistic-missile programme of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea poses a serious threat to
international peace and security, in flagrant violation
of Security Council resolutions, the non-proliferation
regime and international law. We are very concerned
about the fact that the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea has continued actively developing and improving
its nuclear and ballistic-missile programme, which
we see as a challenge to the international community
compounded by its nuclear deterrent effect and defiant
attitude. In addition to violating stipulated provisions,
this has created an atmosphere of uncertainty both
regionally and internationally. Considering that, it is
clear that the discussion of this issue is a very important
one that should continue to be a priority on the Council’s
agenda.
On the other hand, we want to emphasize that last
year’s political and diplomatic advances between the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the United
States and the rapprochement between the two Koreas
19-40374

11/12/2019

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

were important steps in establishing relations, reducing
tensions and building confidence, which we commend.
However, these positive events nonetheless failed to
result in concrete progress towards the denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula. We also regret that since
May Pyongyang has actively resumed its ballisticmissile tests, including of submarine-launched
ballistic missiles, and is working on the possibility of
a space launch and intercontinental missiles. A single
mistake or mechanical failure in those tests would
have devastating and unimaginable consequences for
humankind. We therefore categorically condemn these
launches and all the destabilizing activity in the region
and urge the authorities to show restraint, refrain
from aggressive and defiant rhetoric and return to a
dialogue that facilitates meaningful negotiations on
denuclearization.
We also note with concern the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s continued violations
of the provisions of its sanctions regime, including
its continuing illicit ship-to-ship transfers, which
are a clear evasion of the annual import limit of
500,000 barrels of refined oil established by Council
resolution 2397 (2017). We are also concerned about
the diversion of national resources to the country’s
nuclear and ballistic programme and its acquisition of
new technologies enabling it to expand its armaments
capacity while at the same time worsening its current
critical humanitarian situation. It is therefore crucial to
make greater efforts to ensure full compliance with the
Council’s resolutions. We hope that the talks between
Washington and Pyongyang will resume and will
facilitate an immediate halt to all destabilizing activity
on the Korean peninsula, including ballistic-missile
launches, regardless of their range, while an agreement
is being negotiated for complete, irreversible and
verifiable denuclearization under International Atomic
Energy Agency safeguards.
In conclusion, we reiterate our call for unity on the
part of the Council, which we see as the primary actor
in the proceedings for taking diplomatic initiatives
and resuming dialogue with a view to achieving our
overall goal of ensuring lasting peace and the complete
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Khaled Mohamed Khiari
for his briefing.

S/PV. 8682

We are gravely concerned about the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s announcements that it
is stepping back from its denuclearization talks, as
well as about its threats to continue missile launches
in the future. Its provocations are aggravating the
already fragile security situation on the Korean
peninsula and in the region and are in clear violation
of the relevant Security Council resolutions, which
require the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to refrain from conducting any further nuclear tests
and launching ballistic missiles, suspend all activities
related to its ballistic-missile programme and in that
context re-establish its previous commitment to a
moratorium on missile launches. We therefore urge the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to refrain from
further provocations and take concrete steps towards
abandoning its nuclear and ballistic programmes in
a complete, verifiable and irreversible manner. We
believe that the International Atomic Energy Agency
and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
Organization can play a significant role in that process.
Until a sustainable solution to the problem of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s nuclear
and ballistic programme is achieved, United Nations
sanctions must continue to be thoroughly implemented
by all Member States. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s ongoing sophisticated sanctions
evasion tactics are upsetting.
In that context, the unity of the Security Council
and the entire international community in further
reinforcing the full implementation of sanctions is
essential. At the same time, we reiterate our position
that sanctions are only an instrument to bring
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to the
negotiating table and persuade it to return to compliance
with its international obligations and the law. It is the
responsibility of the Government of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to respond to the basic
needs of its people instead of channelling its resources
to build up military programmes, most of which are
illegal. Consequently, the situation for the citizens of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea will remain
grim as long as the authorities continue to follow that
path.
To conclude, there is no way to achieve security
and sustainable peace, economic development or the
well-being of people on the Korean peninsula other
than through meaningful negotiations. We therefore
call on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to

19-403749/17

S/PV.8682

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

return in good faith and without further delay to the
negotiation talks.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Allow me to thank you,
Madam President, for convening this meeting. I would
also like to thank our colleague, Assistant SecretaryGeneral Khiari, for his briefing.
We believe that our objective remains the same.
We seek the complete, verifiable and irreversible
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula, as well as
lasting peace, stability and prosperity. If we are to
obtain those objectives, we cannot backtrack on what
we have achieved so far. We should avoid all matters
that would hinder progress. In that regard, allow me to
make three points.
First, while we express our concern about the
recurrence of missile testing, Indonesia continues to
support the resolution of issues through dialogue and
negotiations as the only way forward. That includes the
full and expeditious implementation of the Panmunjom
Declaration on Peace, Prosperity and Reunification
of the Korean Peninsula, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea-United States Joint Statement,
and the Pyongyang Joint Declaration. We also urge
the two parties to fulfil their stated commitments,
including those on complete denuclearization. We
support the recent rounds of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea-United States dialogue and view the
technical-level dialogue that took place between them
last October as an important milestone. Continued
dialogue will bring the parties closer to resolving the
issues. It is not an instant process, and we should not
be discouraged if the first round of negotiations did
not yield a concrete result. Persistence and patience are
required. We are following the developments closely
and urge the two parties to resume their next round of
negotiations.
Secondly, we reiterate our call on all parties to
exercise the utmost restraint. This is not a time to
point fingers. Everyone has the same responsibility to
exercise self-restraint and persevere to build mutual
confidence. We commend the relevant parties that have
demonstrated efforts to exercise restraint. We urge
for that to continue in order to create stability and an
atmosphere conducive to dialogue. We must not forget
that self-restraint will contribute positively to the
stability of the region, which is also important to trade
and other economic activities.
10/17

11/12/2019

Thirdly, as responsible members of the
international community, we must also not forget our
overarching obligations on nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation. Indonesia underscores the need to
take concrete measures to reduce and eliminate nuclear
weapons and their means of delivery without further
delay. As a party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and the South-East Asia
Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone, as an ardent supporter of
the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons and
as the coordinator of the working group on disarmament
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, Indonesia
continues to stand determinedly for a world without
any nuclear weapons. We look forward to the roles
of the International Atomic Energy Agency and the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization
in the denuclearization verification process and in
advancing the possibility of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea returning to the fold of the NPT as a
non-nuclear-weapon State.
As a voice from the Asia-Pacific region, let me
conclude by reiterating that our common goal should
be to achieve lasting peace, stability and prosperity in
the region and beyond. Let us work together to achieve
those goals. We owe that to the people of the Korean
peninsula, of Asia and of the entire world. Let us
build trust, confidence and an environment conducive
to generating political solutions and dialogue. The
Council should be united in sending the message to all
parties to continue dialogue.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Allow
me first to convey my delegation’s sincere condolences
to the people and the Government of the Niger following
the attack last night on a military base in Inates that
killed 70 soldiers. Our thoughts go out to the families
that are in mourning.
I would also like to commend Mr. Mohamed Khaled
Khiari for his very informative briefing.
As all those who have spoken before me have
stated, the security situation on the Korean peninsula
remains a source of concern for the international
community. While the inter-Korean summits and,
in particular, the dialogue between the leaders of
the United States and of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea raised a great deal of hope, the talks
concerning the nuclear programme of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea have stalled. In addition,
19-40374

11/12/2019

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

since April, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
has continuously tested new types of so-called tactical
weapons and multiple short-range ballistic missile
launches, in violation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions and air safety regulations. Côte d’Ivoire
clearly condemns those repeated military exercises,
which constitute serious breaches of international
security and undermine the efforts of the international
community to ensure peace and a peaceful coexistence
among the countries of the region.
In the face of the threat that this situation poses
to international peace and security, Côte d’Ivoire urges
the North Korean authorities to exercise restraint and
to refrain from any action that could jeopardize future
talks. We also urge the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to comply with its obligations, as mandated in the
relevant Security Council resolutions, and to resume its
negotiations with the United States as soon as possible.
My country also calls on all stakeholders involved in
the North Korean nuclear issue to play their roles by
making every possible effort to bring the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea back to the negotiating table
and increase mutual confidence-building measures.
In that regard, Côte d’Ivoire commends the United
States for postponing its joint military air exercises
with South Korea last month with a view to creating
an opportunity to resume the talks. We urge the
United States to maintain its offer of dialogue with
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea so that the
parties may resolve all the points of divergence that
were identified at the meetings in Hanoi and Stockholm.
We also encourage the Republic of Korea to preserve
the achievements of the inter-Korean dialogue as a
guarantee of peace and stability in the region.
In order to achieve the ultimate objective of the
complete denuclearization of the Korean peninsula, it
is imperative that the Security Council maintain the
unity it demonstrated in its adoption of resolution 2397
(2017) and previous resolutions. That will enable it to
speak with one voice and bring all its weight to bear to
achieve a swift and definitive resolution to this crisis,
which carries alarming humanitarian consequences.
In the same vein, it is the duty of the Council to act
in perfect unity on the North Korean issue in backing
and supporting any rapprochement process on the
Korean peninsula that could serve as a tool to build the
confidence needed to achieve lasting peace.
Côte d’Ivoire takes this opportunity to reaffirm
its commitment to the international non-proliferation

S/PV. 8682

architecture, which is an essential tool for the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
therefore hope that our call for dialogue with North
Korea towards the complete, verifiable and irreversible
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula will be
heard. The people of the Korean peninsula, who have
contributed so much to humankind through their
cultural richness, ingenuity and hard work, deserve
more than the endless tensions and ongoing threat of
a military confrontation with potentially disastrous
consequences.
Mr. Popolizio Bardales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the convening of this meeting and the
informative briefing by Assistant Secretary-General
Mohamed Khaled Khiari.
We would like to begin by expressing our strongest
condemnation of the recent ballistic missile launches by
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, which not
only are provocative and a serious threat to international
peace and security but also highlight the clear contempt
of North Korea’s Government for international law,
the nuclear non-proliferation regime and the relevant
resolutions of the Council.
We are concerned that such actions, which affirm
North Korea’s intention to continue developing and
improving the scope and sophistication of the capacities
of these programmes, will be accompanied by new
threats in exchange for significant concessions to be met
before the end of this year. All that illustrates a scenario
that is not very promising for the negotiating process,
whose ultimate objective is the denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula.
In that regard, we reaffirm the importance
of keeping the channels for frank dialogue open,
beginning with the resumption of talks with the United
States, with a view to reaching a political settlement.
To that end, it is essential to maintain the unity of the
Council around that objective.
We reiterate that the North Korean nuclear and
ballistic missile programmes, including related
activities, must be abandoned in a complete, verifiable
and irreversible manner. Until that happens, the
sanctions imposed by the Council must remain in force
and be universally implemented, which requires the
proactive efforts of Member States.
In that context, we are concerned about the lack of
monitoring regarding compliance with those sanctions,

19-4037411/17

S/PV.8682

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

especially those related to transfers of refined petroleum
products to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
It is alarming that such transfers have increased in
scope, scale and sophistication.
We urge all States to exercise greater vigilance
against the illicit transfers expressly prohibited under
paragraph 11 of resolution 2375 (2017). We believe that
the existence of this sanctions regime, which takes into
account the humanitarian situation in the country, is
useful in fostering a positive climate for negotiations
that will make it possible to denuclearize the peninsula
and, at the same time, deal with one of the most serious
threats to international peace and security today.
Mrs.
Van
Vlierberge
(Belgium)
(spoke
in French): First of all, allow me to thank you,
Madam President, for convening this briefing on
an issue that is currently of vital importance to
international peace and security. I also warmly thank
Mr. Mohamed Khaled Khiari for his informative briefing.
The Council is once again frequently called on to
consider the issue of ballistic missile launches by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, which are also
a challenge to the international community. Belgium
expresses its deep concern at these repeated launches
and at the ongoing diplomatic impasse. We reiterate
our strong condemnation of the launches, which are
in flagrant violation of the Council’s resolutions.
We also regret the bluster and threatening rhetoric
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. They
are unacceptable provocations while a resumption of
negotiations is still on the table.
Given that gloomy picture, Belgium calls for the
unity of the Council in pursuing its objective, namely,
establishing lasting peace on the peninsula, which
requires the complete, verifiable and irreversible
dismantling of the nuclear and ballistic programmes
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. To that
end, the sanctions must be fully implemented by all.
In particular, Belgium calls on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to proactively and specifically
move towards denuclearization, as it has undertaken to
do, and to resume bilateral negotiations in good faith.
We therefore call on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to show restraint and de-escalate tensions.
Provocative missile launches must stop, as must bellicose
rhetoric. Dialogue must be resumed as soon as possible.
Belgium places particular emphasis on the following
points. We ultimately believe that the denuclearization
12/17

11/12/2019

of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea should be
part of the broader multilateral nuclear non-proliferation
regime as soon as possible, with the country’s return to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
and accession to the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty.
Of course, the Council must also assume its
responsibilities. In particular, it must mitigate, as
far as possible, the negative humanitarian impact of
the sanctions regime in place against the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. Access to the country for
United Nations agencies and humanitarian organizations
must be facilitated. That is why we are working, with
our partners in the Council, to improve the system of
exemptions from sanctions on humanitarian grounds.
Finally, Belgium is concerned about the recent report
of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human
rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
(see A/74/275/Rev.1), which describes a situation on
the ground that is still a catastrophe in terms of the
oppression of fundamental freedoms and human rights
violations.
This yearend will have seen a resurgence of
tensions regarding the North Korean issue and, despite
our differences, the Council must remain united
in the way forward towards our common goal: the
complete, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Belgium therefore calls on the Council, and more
broadly the diplomatic stakeholders, to continue to
work for a rapid and favourable way out of the crisis
for all.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Madam President,
for convening this meeting. I also thank Assistant
Secretary-General Mohamed Khaled Khiari for his
valuable briefing.
The situation on the Korean peninsula is one of the
most long-standing, dangerous and fragile issues on the
agenda of the Security Council. Only two years ago, we
followed with great concern the heightened tensions on
the Korean peninsula and the risk of a military escalation
in the region following nuclear tests and ballistic
missile launches by North Korea in clear violation of
relevant Security Council resolutions. However, the
initiative of the United States and countries of the
region in choosing a path of direct dialogue has borne
out and led to the convening of presidential summits
19-40374

11/12/2019

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

and subsequent agreements, which were endorsed
by the State of Kuwait and the entire international
community. Those agreements contributed to defusing
the military confrontation and reducing tension on the
Korean peninsula in order to reach the desired goal of
the denuclearization of the region in a verifiable and
irreversible manner and to achieve comprehensive and
lasting peace between the two Koreas.
It is also important to underline that those diplomatic
initiatives coincided with a series of international
resolutions adopted by the Council. The cohesion and
unity of the Council have played a leading role in
condemning all North Korea’s illicit programmes, be
they related to nuclear or ballistic missiles. It is of the
utmost importance for the Council to remain united,
firm and resolute towards the full implementation of all
its relevant resolutions, while taking into account the
humanitarian situation and ensuring that humanitarian
aid provided by the relevant international agencies
reaches those who need it.
Despite the optimistic climate over the past
year, such optimism has rapidly started to dissipate,
threatening to overturn any progress on the Korean
peninsula. We have begun to see talks grind to a halt
and a return to ballistic missile launches, accompanied
most recently by inflammatory statements, including
threats of conducting further provocative missile attacks
that would jeopardize regional and international peace
and security. Those threats led us to hold a number of
closed meetings and to convene today’s to consider
how to deal with the current situation on the Korean
peninsula.
In conclusion, the State of Kuwait believes that
dialogue is the best way to address this issue. We
call on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
return to the negotiating table to resume direct talks
with a view to reaching a peaceful solution to the crisis
surrounding the nuclear programme of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and establishing sustainable
peace on the Korean peninsula. At the same time, we
stress the need for the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to fully comply with all its international
obligations in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions. It must also dispose of its nuclear
weapons, abandon its illicit programmes and return to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
as a non-nuclear-weapon State.

S/PV. 8682

Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): First, let me thank
Assistant Secretary-General Mohamed Khaled Khiari
for his briefing on developments in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. My intervention this
afternoon will focus on denuclearization and the
humanitarian situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
On the issue of the denuclearization, South Africa
welcomes the meetings that have been held between the
leaders of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
and the United States. We encourage the parties to
continue on that path in order for peace to prevail on the
Korean peninsula. The hosting of the three inter-Korean
summits, paving the way for the normalization of
relations between South Korea and the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, as well as the joint projects
and enhanced people-to-people activities that have
taken place in the past year, need to be encouraged to
continue in order to strengthen the peace track.
Despite the setback following the unsuccessful
outcome of the working-level meeting held in Sweden
in October, we join others in expressing our delegation’s
support for a negotiated solution that addresses the
issue of the Korean peninsula in a holistic manner.
We urge the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to fulfil its commitments, including those taken under
the Six-Party Talks. It is only through dialogue that
seemingly intractable disputes such as these can be
resolved. It is therefore important that the Council
continue supporting the dialogue on the Korean
peninsula. South Africa calls upon the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to pursue a path towards
the complete denuclearization of the Korean peninsula,
rejoin the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and fulfil its safeguards obligations to the
International Atomic Energy Agency.
With regard to Security Council sanctions against
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, South Africa
wishes to reiterate our view that all sanctions against the
country should be implemented in a balanced manner,
including the four pillars as outlined in resolution 2397
(2017), namely, support for the political process on the
Korean peninsula; the implementation of all sectorial
sanctions, travel bans and assets freezes; and, last, but
not least, humanitarian exemptions.
We would like to urge the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to fully implement its obligations
under the various resolutions of the Security Council.

19-4037413/17

S/PV.8682

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

We join other Council members in expressing our deep
concerns about the dire humanitarian situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and wish to
remind the Council that resolution 2397 (2017) empowers
it to exempt, on a case-by-case basis, the provision of
humanitarian assistance and other economic activities
and cooperation to the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. We call on the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1718 (2006) to avoid any delays to such
approvals so as not to negatively affect the provision
of humanitarian assistance to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
In conclusion, South Africa calls upon all
stakeholders involved to refrain from any action that
might undermine the pursuit of a negotiated solution on
the Korean peninsula, increase tensions or disturb the
peace process that is emerging in the region.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to thank the Assistant SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Mohammed Khaled Khiari, for his
detailed briefing to the Security Council. We also
thank the delegation of the United States for convening
this important and informative meeting.

11/12/2019

situation with a view to achieving peace on the Korean
peninsula.
The Government of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea supports and recognizes the diplomatic efforts
that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
Government has undertaken thus far towards the
peaceful denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. We
therefore encourage the country’s authorities to return
to the path of dialogue and reconciliation between the
two Koreas and with the international community,
primarily for the good of all Koreans — both from
the North and the South — and to ensure peace on the
Korean peninsula. None of the parties to the conflict
should renounce dialogue, nor must they deprive the
citizens of the Korean peninsula of the dream that,
sooner rather than later, their situation of constant
worry and concern will finally be resolved. One day,
they will be able to sleep soundly, knowing that they
will wake up free from the fear of a North-South war
or nuclear extermination. Each party should recall
its commitments to humankind and rectify the minor
obstacles preventing the advancement of the process
through dialogue towards a better world and a peaceful
Korean peninsula.

We note with concern the information provided by
Mr. Khiari, as well as notifications received previously
by the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1718 (2006) and reports by the world media, on the
latest ballistic missile launches conducted by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The Republic
of Equatorial Guinea has been harbouring hope for the
process of negotiations and dialogue held in Singapore,
in Viet Nam and, finally, on the border between the two
Koreas. We have always been quick to congratulate
the United States, North Korea and South Korea on
the detente process. However, in recent months it has
unfortunately come to a standstill. From May onwards,
the stalemate has led the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to resume its ballistic missile tests after a
pause of over a year and a half.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea, given its
traditional position regarding the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, condemns any State
that may possess, produce, stockpile or carry out
tests on such weapons. We therefore condemn the
ballistic missile tests carried out in recent months by
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. In that
connection, we wish to reiterate the imperative need for
the authorities of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to refrain from further ballistic missile tests and
return to the negotiating table, which the Government in
Malabo would gladly host, should there be an interest.

In the light of the escalating nature of rhetoric
among the actors directly involved in this issue as a
result of the that impasse, the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea calls on the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to comply with the relevant Security Council
resolutions. We also call on the United States to ensure
that both countries resume the process of dialogue
as soon as possible and ease tensions in the current

Mr. Heusgen (Germany): In his very sober opening
statement, Mr. Khiari quoted the Secretary-General,
who described the situation on the Korean peninsula
as “the most tense and dangerous peace and security
issue in the world” (S/PV.8137, p. 2). I therefore
welcome the fact that the President put this matter on
the agenda. Many of us reminded one another of the
fact that, in 2006, the Security Council decided that the

14/17

Finally, we wish to draw the attention of the
international community to the need to support
the Government and the people of North Korea in
addressing their urgent humanitarian needs.

19-40374

11/12/2019

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Democratic People’s Republic of Korea must abandon
its weapons of mass destruction and its ballistic missile
programme. The Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea has consistently disregarded its obligations.
I would once again applaud the United States for the
diplomatic efforts that it has undertaken to achieve
what the Security Council demanded of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, and we support all efforts
to resume meaningful negotiations.
Despite all the recent efforts, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea resumed its ballistic missile
launches on 19 May. I need not repeat all the different
activities that were cited earlier by many. I found that
perhaps the most worrying aspect of the situation was
the recent public announcement by the regime of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea that more
provocations can be expected. We as the Council need
to be prepared for that, and, as many said earlier, we
have to preserve the unity of the Council.
Germany chairs the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006). For us, it is
clear — and I repeat what the French Ambassador
said earlier — that the sanctions are not a goal in and
of themselves. As I listened to my Russian colleague
earlier, I had the impression that the sanctions were at
the origin of the miserable situation that the country
is in and the tensions we are seeing. Once again, we
should not confuse cause with effect. The sanctions can
and should be lifted only when the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea implements the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
As Chair of the 1718 Committee, I would like to
remind all United Nations Members that they are under
obligation to repatriate to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea any of that country’s nationals
earning income within their States’ jurisdiction. As
I said, all Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
Government safety oversight attachés monitoring that
country’s workers abroad should be repatriated no later
than 22 December, in line with resolution 2397 (2017).
Let me turn to the human rights situation.
Yesterday we commemorated Human Rights Day. It
was a very sad day for the North Koreans. They are
being deprived by the regime of their basic civil and
political rights — freedom of information, freedom
of the press, freedom of expression and freedom of
assembly. Those are all things that the people in North
Korea can only dream of. The regime is also depriving

S/PV. 8682

its people of their basic economic and social rights.
Only by torturing and arbitrarily locking up of millions
of people in a Gulag system can the regime quell the
aspirations of its people. Those gross human rights
violations, in our view, have an impact on peace and
security and warrant the attention of this organ.
With regard to human rights issues, I would also
like to raise the issue of foreign nationals abducted
by, or on behalf of, the Government of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. That remains an unresolved
international problem. I urge the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to finally return to the families their
loved ones.
My last point concerning the humanitarian situation
is the fact that it is a myth that the sanctions regime
is at the root of the dire humanitarian situation. First
of all, we swiftly process and approve all legitimate
requests for humanitarian deliveries in the Sanctions
Committee. But, as with the human rights situation,
the same also holds true for the humanitarian situation.
The North Korean regime is depriving its population of
the essentials. Ten million people are undernourished.
Just imagine what would happen if the regime stopped
building missiles, equipping the military and giving
money to the political elite, and, with that money,
bought thousands of tons of rice, built medical facilities
and schools and provided clean water to its population.
The President: I shall now make a further
statement in my capacity as the representative of the
United States.
Any discussion of a new road map or Security
Council draft resolution must bear in mind the reality
that, over the past year and a half, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea has continued to advance
its prohibited programmes, tested its prohibited
programmes and repeatedly refused to engage in
sustained diplomatic engagement. We have not asked
North Korea to do everything before we do anything.
The United States is prepared to be flexible in how
it approaches this matter. We recognize the need for a
balanced agreement and parallel actions that address
the concerns of all parties. In fact, we have taken many
steps to bring about a resolution through dialogue and
have conveyed this message clearly to North Korea. But
we need a committed negotiating partner to take the
reciprocal actions required for progress. We are happy
to consider ideas put forth by our counterparts that
could advance the agreement that President Trump and

19-4037415/17

S/PV.8682

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

11/12/2019

Chairman Kim agreed to in Singapore, and if they do,
we can work together to achieve such an outcome.

and focus, and every effort should be made to keep the
momentum of the process going.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

We are now, however, faced with the recent turn of
events, which, if left unchecked, will have a negative
effect on the historic process. My Government shares
the concern of the international community about the
repeated testing of missiles by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. We strongly urge the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to fulfil its obligations under
relevant Security Council resolutions and to remain
meaningfully engaged in dialogue with the United
States and the Republic of Korea so that progress in
negotiations can lead to concrete results.

I give the floor to the representative of the Republic
of Korea.
Mr. Cho Hyun (Republic of Korea): I thank you very
much, Madam President, for convening this meeting
and giving me an opportunity to speak to the Security
Council on non-proliferation issues pertaining to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. I also thank
Mr. Mohamed Khaled Khiari for his comprehensive
briefing.
The Republic of Korea has consistently pursued the
Korean peninsula peace process to achieve complete
denuclearization and lasting peace on the Korean
peninsula. The process is at a critical juncture. Today’s
meeting could be helpful in taking stock of the progress
made so far and consolidating our efforts towards
achieving the shared goal.
Over the past two years, an unprecedented
diplomatic endeavour involving strong commitment
and determination from the highest political levels
brought about a historic shift on the Korean peninsula.
It started with the participation of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s in the 2018 Pyeongchang
Olympic Winter and Paralympic Games, which then led
to three inter-Korean summits, two summits between
the United States and the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea and a trilateral meeting in Panmunjeom,
where the top leaders of the two Koreas and the United
States agreed to work together to establish lasting
peace on the Korean peninsula and achieve its complete
denuclearization.
Since then, there have been a series of talks and
negotiations to fulfil the commitments based on
the Panmunjeom Declaration for Peace, Prosperity
and Reunification of the Korean Peninsula and the
Pyongyang joint declaration of September 2018, as well
as the broad agreement reached by the leaders of the
United States and the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea in Singapore. The negotiations have had their ups
and downs, but, as has been rightly pointed out, a legacy
of 70 years of war and hostility on the Korean peninsula
cannot be overcome in a single day. We will need to
pursue the delicate path of dialogue with perseverance
16/17

The international community, for its part, must
continue to work together to maintain the momentum for
dialogue. While fully implementing relevant Security
Council resolutions, the international community
should also provide meaningful support, including
humanitarian aid, for the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to make the right decision.
The Government of the Republic of Korea firmly
believes that dialogue and cooperation are the only
possible way forward, regardless of the hurdles we face.
For now, maintaining the hard-won momentum for
dialogue should be our utmost priority. We will continue
to work with the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
under the principle that we will not allow a war on the
Korean peninsula and will guarantee mutual security
and seek co-prosperity, as spelled out in President
Moon Jae-in’s speech at the General Assembly this year
(see A/74/PV.3).
The leaders of the two Koreas met in Pyongyang
last year and agreed to turn the Korean peninsula
into a land of peace, free from nuclear weapons and
nuclear threats. To fulfil that commitment, dialogue
between the two Koreas must be resumed. Genuine
peace for all Koreans living on the peninsula cannot
be achieved without improved inter-Korean relations.
Our commitment to improving inter-Korean relations
through exchange and cooperation projects remains
unchanged. In his General Assembly speech, President
Moon also proposed to transform the demilitarized
zone into an international peace zone to serve as a
physical guarantee of security between South and
North Korea and provide a stable environment for
continued, concerted denuclearization talks between
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the
United States.
19-40374

11/12/2019

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Peace on the Korean peninsula is inextricably
linked to peace around the world. We must seize this
opportunity to break free from the trap of the security
dilemma and the lingering fear of war and to establish
lasting peace on the Korean peninsula. That will not be
achieved by the projection of animosity and mistrust,
which will only lead to a downward spiral of enmity
and instability. It will be achieved through restraint,
courage and faith in the future of a wholly peaceful,
nuclear-free Korean peninsula and the great boost it will
give to regional and global peace and prosperity. My
Government is determined to stay the course. We count
on the unwavering support of the Security Council and
the international community in that endeavour.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I would like to begin by
expressing my appreciation to Mr. Mohamed Khaled
Khiari for his briefing. I would also like to commend
the United States for this timely initiative to focus
on denuclearization and ballistic missile launches by
North Korea.
North Korea has launched more than 20 ballistic
missiles this year. As a number of Council members
have emphasized today, such launches, regardless
of their ranges, are in violation of relevant Security
Council resolutions. Japan believes that this is the right
time for the Council to resume its discussion of those
activities, which cannot be overlooked.
In the pursuit of upholding peace and security in
the region and beyond, I cannot emphasize enough how
extremely important it is to realize the dismantlement
of all of North Korea’s weapons of mass destruction
and ballistic missiles of all ranges in a complete,
verifiable and irreversible manner in accordance with
the resolutions unanimously adopted by the Council.
Japan continues to support United States efforts in that
regard, including the diplomatic process between the
United States and North Korea. As support for that
process is critical, Japan finds it encouraging to hear
today that all participants share a similar view. Japan

S/PV. 8682

strongly hopes that the voices from this Chamber will
be heard.
It should also be recalled that it is the obligation of
all Member States to fully implement relevant Security
Council resolutions. Japan believes that a unified effort
by the international community will provide additional
support for the diplomatic process to move forward.
The series of ballistic missile launches by North
Korea are a serious challenge, not only to Japan but
also to the entire international community. Those
provocations have taken place while the United States
has repeatedly called for the resumption of talks. It is
important that the agreement of both leaders, including
the commitment by North Korea towards the complete
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula, be fully
and expeditiously implemented, as set out in the Joint
Statement of the United States-North Korea summit
meeting.
Japan seeks to normalize its relations with North
Korea, in accordance with the Japan-Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea Pyongyang Declaration,
by comprehensively resolving outstanding issues of
concern, such as abductions, nuclear weapons and
missiles, and finding a settlement to the unfortunate
past. That policy remains unchanged. Prime Minister
Abe has publicly stated his determination to meet
Chairman Kim Jong Un face to face without any
condition.
In conclusion, Japan continues to strongly urge
North Korea to heed the messages from the Council.
North Korea needs not only to refrain from further
provocations in violation of Council resolutions,
including launches that use ballistic missile
technology, but also to take concrete action towards
its denuclearization. Japan calls upon North Korea to
choose a path to a bright future. Japan will continue
to cooperate closely with the international community
and hopes that the North Korean issue will continue to
be appropriately addressed by the Council.
The meeting rose at 4.40 p.m.

19-4037417/17
