General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

28

and security and to give due consideration to the report of
the Secretary-General;
6. Invites the Secretary-General, in discharging his
responsibilities under the Charter, to continue his efforts
towards strengthening the capacity of the United Nations
to fulfil the effective and decisive role envisaged for it in
the Charter;
7. Urges that efforts to this end continue, taking into
account the views expressed by Member States during the
thirty-seventh session of the General Assembly as well as
those which Member States may wish to offer, while views
of institutions and eminent persons may also be taken into
consideration as appropriate;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the General
Assembly informed on the implementation of the present
resolution.
9 I st plenary meeting
3 December 1982

37/68.

Further appeal for clemency in favour of South
African freedom fighters

The General Assembly,
Having been informed that the appeal against the death
sentences imposed on 19 August 1981 on Mr. Anthony
Tsotsobe, Mr. Johannes Shabangu and Mr. David Moise,
members of the African National Congress of South Africa,
has been rejected by the appellate division,
Recalling its resolution 36/172 J of 17 December 1981 ,
in particular its demand that the racist régime of South Africa
refrain from the execution of persons sentenced under arbitrary repressive laws for acts arising from opposition to
apartheid,
Deeply concerned that the South African authorities have
not yet heeded the General Assembly's appeal for clemency
contained in its resolution 37/1 of l October 1982 in favour
of three other South African freedom fighters, namely Mr.
Simon Mogoerane, Mr. Jerry Mosololi and Mr. Marcus
Motaung,
Considering that the continued repression against and
executions of opponents of apartheid are bound to have
grave repercussions,
l. Calls upon the South African authorities not to proceed with the execution of the six above-mentioned freedom
fighters and to commute the death sentences as soon as
possible:
2. Recommends that the Security Council should direct
an appeal for clemency to the South African authorities not
to proceed with the exécution of the six above-mentioned
members of the African National Congress of South Africa;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the present resolution to the South African authorities immediately
and to report on the matter to the General Assembly not
Iater than 15 December 1982.
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 1982
37/69.

Policies of apartheid of the Government of South
Africa52

Having considered the reports of the Special Committee
against Apartheid, 5 '
Reaffirming that apartheid is a crime against humanity
and a threat to intemational peace and security,
Bearing in mind that it proclaimed 1982 Intemational
Year of Mobilization for Sanctions against South Africa,
Conscious of the responsibility of the United Nations and
the intemational community towards the oppressed people
of South Africa and their national liberation movement, as
proclaimed, in particular, in General Assembly resolution
3411 C (XXX) of 28 November 1975,
Convinced that it is incumbent on the 'intemational community to provide ali necessary assistance to the oppressed
people of South Africa and their national liberation movement in their legitimate struggle for the establishment of a
democratic society pursuant to their inalienable rights, in
conformity with the principies contained in the Charter of
the United Nations and the Universal Declaration ofHuman
Rights, 54
Commending the oppressed people of South Africa and
their liberation movements, particularly the African National Congress, for intensifying the armed struggle against
the racist régime,
Reaffirming that the apartheid régime is totally responsible for precipitating violent conflict through its policy of
apartheid and inhuman repression,
Grave/y concerned at the intensification of repression in
South Africa, the growing number of deaths in detention
and the imposition of death sentences on freedom fighters
of the African National Congress,
Reaffirming that freedom fighters of South Africa should
be treated as prisoners of war in accordance with Additional
Protocol 15 5 to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949,56
Commending the courageous struggle of the black workers of South Africa for their inalienable rights,
Condemning the policy of "bantustanization" designed
to dispossess further the African majority of its inalienable
rights and to deprive it of citizenship, as well as the continuing forced removals of black people, as an intemational
crime,
Grave/y concerned at the growing number of displaced
and missing persons resulting from the criminal policies of
the racist régime of South Africa,
Reaffirming that apartheid cannot be reforrned but must
be totally eliminated,
Denouncing the manoeuvres of the racist régime of South
Africa to divide the oppressed people through so-called constitutional dispensations and other means, and commending
the oppressed people of South Africa for rejecting those
manoeuvres,
Recognizing that comprehensive and mandatory sanctions
by the Security Council under Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations are essential to avert the grave threat
to intemational peace and security resulting from the policies
and actions of the apartheid régime of South Africa,
Considering that political, economic, military and any
other collaboration with the apartheid régime of South Africa encourages its persistent intransigence and defiance of
the intemational community and its escalating acts of repression and aggression,

A
SITUATION IN SOUTH AFRIC'A

The General Assembly,
Recalling and reaffirming its resolutions on this question,
particularly resolution 36/172 of 17 December 1981 ,
" See al~o sect. l. footnote 8, and sect. X 8.3, decision 371406.

" Official Record.,· o( the General A.uemblv, Thirty-seventh Session,
Suppk!ment No. 22 íA/37/22) and Supplement No. 22A (A/37122/Add.l
and 2).
" Resolution 217 A (111)
"A/32/144, anna l.
6
'
United Nation,. Trean !oieries. vol. 75, Nos. 970-973.
