TWENTY-SIXTH

YEAR

MEETING:

NEW

13 DECEMBER

197 1

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/ 16 12) . . . . . , . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Adoption

of the agenda

Page
1

. . .. . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . .

1

Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent Representative
of Cyprus to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/5488):
Report by the Secretary-General on the United Nations operation in Cyprus
(S/10401)
. , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . *. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I.

1

s/PV.l612

/,

/

:

‘!,

4

I:

:.

:

,

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Cotmcil, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Securi& Council The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SIXTEENNUNDREDANDTWELFTBMEETING
Held in New York
President: Mr. I. B. TAYLOR-KAMARA

on iMonday,

(Sierra Leone).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America.

13 December

1971, at 10.30 a.m.

requested to be allowed to participate in the discussion of
this item without the right to vote. In accordance with the
usual practice of the Council, and if there is no objection, I
propose to invite those representatives to participate in the
Council’s discussion.
At the invitation of, the President, Mr. S. Kyprianou
(Cj~prus), Mr. U. H. Eayiilken (Turkey) and Mr. D. S.
Bitsios (Greece) took places at the Council table.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 6 12)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/5488):
Report by the Secretary-General on the United
Nations operation in Cyprus (S/10401).
3. Letter dated 12 December 1971 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/10444).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
1. The PRESIDENT: May I interpose at this stage that I
have the great pleasure of having our Secretary-General
sitting on my right this morning. He has been away for so
long for reasons all of us know well. We are happy to see
him back with us, although he may not be with us for long.
I wonder how I would have felt if he had not given me one
morning to honour my Presidency by sitting on my right as
he has been used to doing for other colleagues, I am happy
you are here, Mr. Secretary-General, and I hope you will be
with us at least for a few minutes before you withdraw.
2. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
Thank you very much
for your very gracious references to me. I am most grateful.
I am sure you speak on behalf of the Council and I am most
grateful to all the members of the Council also for having
reflected their sentiments through the President.
Letter dated 26 December 1963, from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/5488):
Report by the Secretary-General on the United Nations
operation in Cyprus (S/10401)
3. The PRESIDENT: The representatives of Cyprus, Turkey and Greece, in letters addressed to the President, have

4. The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council will now
consider the question on its agenda. I wish to draw
attention to the report of the Secretary-General contained
in document S/10401 which is before the Council.
5. As a result of consultations prior to this meeting, a
draft resolution has been prepared (S/10441], copies of
which have been distributed to the members of the Council.
In this connexion I wish to mention that there is a slight
omission. In operative paragraph 2 of the original text the
words “and accelerate” should be inserted after the word
“continue”. Operative paragraph 2 would accordingly read
as follows: “Urges the parties concerned to act with the
utmost restraint and to contmue and accelerate determined
co-operative efforts . . .“.
G. It is my understanding that the Council wishes to take a
vote first on this draft resolution and that I should call on
speakers, in the order in which they are inscribed, on my
list, after the vote. Accordingly, if there is no objection we
shall now proceed to vote on the draft resolution contained
in document S/10441, as corrected.
A vote was taken by a show of hands.
The draft resolution was adopted by 14 votes to n0ne.l
One member (China) did not participate in the voting.
7. The PRESIDENT: I shall now call upon representatives
who wish to speak in explanation of vote after the voting.
8. Mr. CHEN Cho (China) (translation from Chinesej:
With regard to the Cyprus question, the Chinese delegation
is of the opinion that, fundamentally speaking, this is a
question left over from imperialist colonial rule. We have
consistently maintained that questions, of this nature should
be settled in a reasonable way by the countries concerned
through consultation on an equal footing.
9. As for the question of the United Nations forces, the
Chinese Government has always had its own principled
1 Seeresolution 305 (1971).

underestimate the significance and dangers involved in,
other crises which still persist and have not been removed,
We are fully aware of the circumstances in which we meet
today and it is not, therefore, our intention-as far asmy
delegation at least is concerned-to take up unnecessarily
any of the valuable time of this Council in dealing with
aspects of the problem which either are not urgent or are
well known. Therefore I shall confine my remarks to
certain aspects which are very pertinent to this meeting.

stand. This is well known
to
all the representatives.
Therefore we could not participate in the voting on this
resolution.
10. We support the people af Cyprus in safeguarding their
national independence and sovereignty and hope that the
two communities of the Greek and Turkish peoples will live
together in peace on the basis of equality.
11. The PRESIDENT:
tative of Cyprus.

I give the floor to the represen17. The Security Council has been seized of the Cyprus
problem since December 1963 and, after a long debate in
the Council in February and March 1964, it adopted a
resolution on 4 March 1964 1186 /1964)] which, while
respecting the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of Cyprus, provided for two basic objectives, It
provided for a peace-keeping operation in Cyprus. It also
provided for a peace-making machinery, because it was
rightly considered that peace-keeping aIone is not enough if
the causes which threaten peace are to be removed.
Therefore the peace-keeping an,! the peace-making should
go together. The peace-keeping operation in Cyprus has
been going on for a long time, although at the time it was
hoped that it would be a temporary affair; in fact, the first
provision was for three months. From what we see in the
report of the Secretary-General, this is the twentieth time
that he is suggesting a renewal of the mandate of the Force,
and since 1964 almost eight years have gone by. Despite
certain faults, despite certain shortcomings-and
it is not
perhaps the proper time here to analyse and discuss
them-despite
some ambiguities regarding the terms of
reference which from time to time gave rise to misunderstandings, on the whole the peace-keeping operation has
been successful. It has been successful in the sense that it
has been able to prevent the recurrence of fighting of a
major nature and also it has at least done its best to
contribute, perhaps without much success, as can be seen
from the report of the Secretary-General before us, to the
efforts for the normalization of the situation. I shall not
deal any further with peace-keeping. I shall go into
peace-making.

12. Mr. KYPRIANOU (Cyprus): Mr. President, first of all
1 should like to extend to you my best wishes in your
capacity as President of the Security Council during a
rather delicate and most difficult period when you have
been called upon to preside over this highest body of the
United Nations and of the world community.
13. The presence of the Secretary-General at this meeting
fills us with extreme pleasure and happiness and we are glad
to see him back in his office and at his duties. As
representative of Cyprus, I think there cannot be a better
occasion than this to express to him personally our deep
appreciation and our gratitude for what he has been doing
for Cyprus during all these difficult years, for the well-being
of Cyprus, for peace in the area, as well as for all his efforts
towards a just solution to the Cyprus problem in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and the
principles laid down in the resolutions of this Organization.
He has been ready at all times to give advice, to direct, to
guide us. His objectivity and his integrity are beyond any
question and, as I said, I should like to take this
opportunity, on behalf of my President, on behalf of the
Government and people of Cyprus, to express to him our
gratitude and our deep appreciation, to wish him all the
best and a complete restoration to health and happiness for
many years to come.
14. We hove heard a report that the Foreign Minister of
Bulgaria has lost his life in an accident and we should like
to express our regrets and our grief at this event, He was a
friend of long standing and an outstanding statesman.

18. For the past few years many have quite legitimately
been advising, urging and requesting us to do our best to
solve the Cyprus problem. We have heard from many that
this situation cannot. go on indefinitely, that the Cyprus
problem must be solved.

15. We meet today to consider the report of the Secretary-General in regard to Cyprus. Before I make any
remarks on that, I would wish to congratulate the representative of Turkey 011 ilssuming the post of Foreign Minister
of his country and I look forward to co-operating with him
in our efforts to improve the r&ions
between our two
countries on the basis of equality and understanding. We
have known each other for a long time. We have on many
occasions found ourselves in direct opposition. We have had
many quarrels and many arguments together, but I believe
that we can make this acquaintance-although
not so
pleasant in the past-a pleasant one in the future.

19. It is very legitimate for those who contribute to the
maintenance of the peace-keeping operation, either in terms
of contingents or in terms of financial assistance, to be
anxious to see the operation concluded. It is also legitimate
for others who do not participate in the peace-keeping
operation to be anxious to see the whole operation
concluded, in view of the fact that as long as this situation
does not end there still remains a threat to peace.

16. We are fully conscious of the fact that the Security
Council is in the middle of dealing with an acute crisis in
the world. WC are fully conscious of the fact that members
of the Council are exhausted, that they have been working
hard and that they have been trying to achieve something
on a specific issue which today appears to be, and is, the
main crisis in the world-without
in any way wishing to

20. It is nai’ve, if I may so suggest, and it is unrealistic to
believe that in the world of today, as I had occasion to
emphasize earlier in the General Assembly and in the
Security Council, we can take the view that we must learn
to live with the problem. But when we hear the calls, the
urging, when we hear of their anxiety and the sdvice that
they give, and when they tell us, “Do your best to reacha
2

quick solution to the Cyprus problem”, my answer is
simple. We should like a quick solution to the Cyprus
problem ourselves, and I should underline that, with all due
respect, we should like to see a solution to the Cyprus
problem much quicker than others might, because we arc
the people who are most directly involved, we are the
people who are suffering the most from the continuation
of, and I shall put it in mild terms, the uncertainty about
the future. Therefore, not only are we ourselves anxious to
see a quick solution to the Cyprus problem and not only do
we share the views of all others who are urging us in this
matter, but, I submit, we indeed have done our utmost in
that direction and we shall continue to do so.

resolution which has just been voted upon is to be
implemented.While reaffirmingall the previousresolutions,
paragraph2 of this resolution speaksof achieving the
objectivesof the Security Council. If thoseobjectivesare
going to be achieved and if a peacefulsolutionis to be
found, aswe all want, thereare certainbasicthingswhich
mustbe acceptedrealistically.And in the caseof Cyprus,as
I supposein most other cases,realismis not something
which is different from principles.

21.

AS I said at the beginning of my statement, there are
elements to the resolution of 4 March 1964-the
peace-keepingand the peace-making.
What happenedto the
peace-making? I think that the Security Council, and I
hope one day soon,will have to examinewhat happenedto
its peace-making effort. What happened to the peacemaking effort of the United Nations? What happenedto
the peace-makingeffort of the Mediator who wasappointed
by the Secretary-Generalin pursuanceof that resolution?
The mediation effort did not produce any results.The
Mediator produced his report.* Wewereready to acceptit,
and we so indicated andworked on that basisfor a solution
of the Cyprus problem. Unfortunately, it wasnot accepted
by the other side.After that variousefforts were made,but
it is not enoughto makeefforts. What shouldbe doneisto
make meaningful efforts, and meaningful efforts to get
somewhere-not negotiation for the sake of negotiation,
and not talk for the sakeof talk, and not an exchangeof
views for the sakeof exchangingviews,nor negotiationfor
proIonging the situation, which usually resultsin complicating the issuesfurther. We shouldhave negotiationswhich
would be meaningful and which would aim at something
specific. I believe that the terms of referencewhich were
Iaid down in the Security Council resolution of 4 March
1964 were quite specific with respect to peace-making.
They had been very properly analysedafter long consultations by the United NationsMediator, Mr. GaloPlaza.
two

22. As I have said, after that various other efforts were
made. Apart from other efforts, there wasthe debatein the
General Assembly, where a resolution was adopted
(2077 (XX)/. I am sure that membersof the Security
Council are anxious to have resolutionsimplemented.It is
very legitimate to put the question:why hasthat resolution
not been implemented? Why have other resolutionsnot
been implemented? Why hasthe good officesprocedureof
the Secretary-General, which was provided for in the
Security
Council resolution of December 1967
/2## [I967)] and which was adoptedafter a seriouscrisis,
not been meaningfully utilized?

24. If we are going to build upon a basisof complicated,
.VLZ’
gene&
improvised arrangements,
then we shallfail. If
we try to build on sand,the structurewill collapse.If we
approach the Cyprus problem as a complicatedproblem
and once again, therefore, try to give it a complicated
solution, we shall fail again.
25. The Cyprusproblem canbe solvedif weapproachit in
its simplicity. Theseare the facts, and may I put it by way
of questions, because if the questionsare negatively
answered,then the whole structureof my thinking cannot
be arguedany further. Thesearethe questions:is Cyprusor
is it not a Member of the UnitedNations?Is Cyprusor isit
not, therefore, entitled to equalsovereigntyasa Memberof
the United Nations? Should Cyprus be regardedas a
second-class
independent State? In the caseof Cyprus,
should intervention be allowed? Should the people of
Cyprus not be left alone to decidehow bestthey cansolve
their problems?
26. There are many other things I could mention,many
other principles I could analyse.I could cite, I could list, I
could refer to international documentsand declarations
adopted by the United Nations. I could refer to the
Charter. But I will not do so, because
my intention is not,
at this stage,to open up a &bate on the substance
of the
issue.I simply want to emphasize
that certain thingsmust
be accepted if we are to have a peacefulsolutionto the
Cyprus problem. To try to createandgive the impression
that Cyprus is under tutelage or that Cyprusis under the
suzerainty of other States-something
which wasdismissed
by the great leader of Turkey, KemalAtatiirk, in the case
of his own country-would not contribute towards a
peacefulsolution of the Cyprusproblem.

27. Cyprus is in a very sensitiveareaof the world, and a
peaceful solution of the Cyprus problemwould be to the
benefit not only of the peopleof Cyprusbut of international peaceand security aswell. Wehavebeentrying for
the last three years to seewhat we could do as far as
resolving the internal aspectof the Cyprusproblem. The
Cyprus problem has two aspects,the internal and the
external. Wehave been holdingtalksin Cyprusbetweenthe
representativesof the Government of Cyprus and the
representativesof the Turkish Cypriots. Thosetalks have
been going on for three years. Unfortunately, there have
23. Again, procedure is not enough. If we are goingto
been
no results. At the endwe found out that there were
llave a solution of the Cyprus problem, certain things-and
important
issuesupon which we couldnot agree.
at the end of my statement I shall make an announcement-must be acceptedrealistically. That mustbe doneif
28. What should be done next, is the questionwhich
we are to reach a solutionof the Cyprusproblemandif the
arises.Should‘we leave it at that? No, we shouldnot leave
/
it at that. But bearing in mind what I saidbefore, it is not
2 official Records
of the Security
Council, Twentieth year,
enoughto provide for a procedure,it isnot enoughto agree
Supplement
for January,
February
and March 1965, document
to talk. There must be the determination,there must be
S/6253.
3

-

basic principles which ought to be accepted, if progress is to
be made. Those principles have been repeated once again in
the report of the Secretary-General for this period, and he
specifies that Cyprus should be sovereign, that Cyprus
should be independent, that Cyprus should be a unitary
State. 3ut the Secretary-General in his effort to see how we
can proceed, how we can have another go, how we can
make another effort, made certain suggestions. He in fact
made two suggestions: he made a suggestion which is
contained in paragraph 79 of his report and he made
another suggestion which is contained in pamgraph 103.
The first suggestion, the one in paragraph 79, concerns the
reactivation of the local talks in Cyprus. He makes certain
suggestions. We shall not go into the background of this
proposal, nor do we consider it necessary to explain certain
thing!: which precededthe suggestion;but the SecretaryGeneralsaidthat:
“The presenceat United Nations Headquartersof the
Foreign Ministers of Cyprus, Greece and Turkey and of
the Secretary-General’sSpecialRepresentativein Cyprus
made possiblean exchangeof views with the SecretaryGeneralon stepsthat might usefully be taken to facilitate
the searchfor a settlementof the long-term problemsof
Cyprus. As a consequenceof these conversationsthe
Secretary-Generalmade a suggestiondesignedto reactivate and make more effective the intercommunaltalksin
Cyprus. Although certain aspectsof this suggestiondid
not prove immediately acceptable to all the parties
concerned, the proposal as a whole still seemsto the
Secretary-Generalto provide a new basisfor achievingthe
endswhich all the partieshave in mind. For this reason
the Secretary-Generalfeels that it may be useful to put
his suggestionin writing for the convenienceand continued considerationof the parties.
“The Secretary-General’s
suggestionis that with a view
to facilitating the future conduct of the intercommunal
talks, his Special Representativein Cyprus, Mr. B. F.
Osorio-Tafall, should, in the exercise of the SecretaryGeneral’sgood offices, take part in the talks betweenthe
representativesof the two communities. It is also suggested that the Governments of Greece and Turkey
should each make availablea constitutional expert who
would attend the talks in <anadvisory capacity.” [See
S/l 0401, para. 79./
29. When this suggestionwas put to us formally by the
Secretary-Generalwe expresseda number of reservations,
which I should have no difficulty in reporting here in a
summaryform.
30. First of all, it hasbeenan establishedpractice that the
talks in Cyprus on the Constitution of Cyprus shouldbe, as
they have been for the last three years, between the
Cypriots themselves.There was a question of principle
involved. Second, we felt that this formula, or this
procedure, might possiblycreateproblemsif differencesof
opinion arosein the courseof the talks. For thesetwo basic
reasonswe have expressedseriousreservationsregardingthe
participation of experts from Greece and-Turkey in the
constitutional talks in Cyprus.I had occasionto discussthis
severaltimes with the Secretary-Generalbefore his illness,
and sincehisillnesswith his colleagues
in the Secretariat.
4

31. We have come to the conclusion that, despiteour
reservations,we would accept this proposal as it stands
as
another indication of our willingnessand our desireta
employ all possiblemeansof makingprogress.
32. Of course, the task of the Special Representativeof
the Secretary-Generalin Cyprus, who will participate ia the
talks, will be a rather difficult one. He will have to assist
US
to find a way out of the deadlock, becausethe purposeis
not to build on the deadlock, and the purpose is not to
complicatemattersfurther.
33. Despite all our reservations,we are ready to listento
the constitutional advice of the constitutional expertsfronl
Greeceand Turkey who will attend the talks in an advisory
capacity, asstressedby the Secretary-General.
34. We may be accused of deviation from accepted
practice. Perhaps it will be said that, with the possible
exception of colonies.under foreign rule, since the eight.
eenth or early nineteenth century there has not beenacase
of a constitution of an independentcountry being worked
out in co-operationwith others. But we accept the proposal
of the Secretary-Generalascontainedin paragraph 79of his
report. I repeat, our reservationswere grave and serious,
and we have informed both the Secretary-Generalarld
membersof the Council, in our individual contacts, of tllese
reservations.
35. Let us however also try this method, on the understandingthat it doesnot createor doesnot implicitly create
a precedent.We expect a great deal in this context, I may
add, from the participation of the SpecialRepresentativeof
the Secretary-Generalin the talks in the exercise of the
Secretary-General’sgood offices, as emphasized in the
aide-mkmoirehanded to the three Governments by the
Secretary-General.
36. But there is another pertinent paragraphin the report
of the Secretary-General,which readsasfollows:
“I should like here to add that it would seemto meto
be appropriate, and indeed most desirable, at tllis
juncture, when the United Nations hasbeen involvedin
this problem for so many years, and with considerable
expenditure both of effort and resources, that the
Security Council shouldbecomemore actively involvedin
assistingthe parties in the searchfor a solution to the
Cyprus problem. On someof the basicissuesit seenis
lo
me that the Council’s advice, guidance and new initias
tives, of coursewith the agreementof the parties, would
be a reassuringand constructive element in their efforts
to reach a settlement. It would be, of course, for the
Council itself to considerhow best it might play sucha
role.” [Ibid., paru. 103.1
37. Having acceptedthe proposalof the Secretary-General
asset forth in paragraph79, to which I have referred,this
becomesevenmore pertinent. It becomesmore pertinelltin
the sense that we are accepting this proposal of the
Secretary-Generalin the Security Council and in pursuance
of the resolutionsof the Council, and alsoof the resolution
adopted today, which “Urges the parties concerned to 8Cl
with the utmost restraint and to continue and accelerate

determined co-operative efforts to achieve the objectives of
the Security Council”. If in this new effort, under the
proposal of the Secretary-General-which
we have accepted-we fail again within the next two or three months,
to achieve the objectives of the Security Council, either the
Council on its own initiative, or the Government of Cyprus,
will ask the Security Council to utilize the spirit and the
Ietter of paragraph 103 of the report of the SecretaryGeneral.

43. In this context, I should like to express once again our
appreciation to Mr. Guyer, Under-Secretary-General, and to
his
staff; to Mr. Osorio-Tafall, the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative to Cyprus; the Force Commander,
Major-General Prem Chand, as well as to all members of
UNFICYP for their dedicated and constructive work. I also
express our appreciation to the contributing countries and
the members of the Security Council, whose efforts and
understanding make the presence of UNFICYP on the
island possible.

38. And having said that, I would like to emphasize one
thing which is of paramount importance. For reasons which
it is not necessary to analyse and enumerate once again-we
have done that repeatedly before the Security Council on
several occasions-the Government of Cyprus has put its
faith in the Security Council; the Cyprus problem is within
the framework
of the Security Council. The Security
Council has been seized of the Cyprus problem since the
crisis of 1963 came about, and we are working for the
implementation of the resolutions of the Security Council
and for the attainment and the achievement of the purposes
of the Security Council, Any attempt to solve the Cyprus
problem in a way which is unacceptable to the vast
majority of the people of Cyprus, will not only find us
ready to oppose it with all the means at our disposal, but I
trust that it would find the Security Council also opposed.
Having said that, I do not wish to indicate that there is
going to be such an effort. I hope there is not. But in any
case, Cyprus is a very small country. It is in a very sensitive
area. It is one of the smallest Members of the United
Nations. Therefore, it is only proper to humbly remind the
Security Council of its responsibilities towards Cyprus.

44. While talking of UNFICYP, it is with emotion and
profound sadness that I should like to recall the memory of
Ralph Bunche whose untimely death has deeply grieved us
all and constitutes a great loss for our Organization.
Mr. Bunche’s selfless dedication to the cause of peace,
conciliation and entente, his unswerving loyalty to the
ideals of the Charter, assured him a world-wide recognition,
appreciation and admiration. We also remember him because of his efforts concerning the conciliation in Cyprus. I
extend our condolences to his bereaved family,
45. I would also like to express my sincere condolences to
the Bulgarian delegation and nation at the untimely and
tragic death of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bulgaria.
We have friendly and good relations with that country. I
knew him personally. It is a loss for the countries which
have maintained friendly relations with Bulgaria.
46. I will now comment on the three principal topics in
the report: the extension of the mandateof UNFICYP, the
daily circumstancesof life betweenthe two coqmunities,
and, thirdly, the intercommunaltalks.

39. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representativeof
Cyprus for his statement, particularly for his referenceto
me. I call on the representativeof Turkey,

47. First, the extension of the mandate of UNFICYP
which appearsasthe immediatetaskbefore the Council,as
indeed was concluded by the adoption of the resolution.
The Secretary-General recommendedan extension for a
period of six months. My Government agreedwith his
recommendation and we are glad the Council acted
promptly on that recommendation.

40. Mr. BAYiiLKEN (Turkey): Let mebeginby thanking
the membersof the Council for their courtesy in inviting
me to appear here. The Council has held more than the
ordinary number of meetingsthis month. Mr. President,we
observed with admiration your patience,your objectivity,
ybur sagacity of both heart and mind, so sorelyneededon 4X. With regard to my secondtopid, the Secretary-General
these trying occasions.You have inspiredthe discussions in his report states:
with a senseof responsibility,with a senseof fairness,with
“Although there has been no recurrenceof fighting,
a senseof compromise, and a senseof expeditiousness,
there has been a marked increasein tension and in the
warranted by the gravity of the problems.Wewill follow
number of provocative incidents, and this hasprevented
your inspiration, We will be brief. We will speakto the
progresstowards a return to more normal conditions.”
point. We will seek to promote the meansto a peaceful
[S/10401,para.
2.1
agreement asrequired by the taskbefore ustoday.
49. The Council does not need to be remindedthat it is
the Turkish community that continues to labour under
greater pressureand greater deprivation in its daily life.
Nearly 20,000 Turkish Cypriots still remain displacedand
the whole community for the eighth year continuesto
subsistunder extremely trying conditions. Unfortunately,
asstated by the Secretary-Generalin part III of hispresent
report, the expectations expressedin the previousreport
about improvementshave not materialized. The rehabilitation of the displaced persopshas not progressed.The
supply of electricity and water has not improved. Turkish
civil servantsof the Republic of Cyprus are still deniedtheir
salariesfrom the public treasury. The Turkish Cypriotsare

41. Customarily, the frame of the debateon Cyprushas
been cast by the Secretary-General’s
report. Wewill follow
the precedent with pleasure,and with appreciationof the
Secretary-General’s invaluable contributions. Without his
sincere endeavours,without his humanitarianapproach,the
intercommunal strife in Cyprus could have engulfedthe
region in turmoil andbloodshed.Hisdedicationwill always
be rememberedand cherishedby all of us.
42. I would like to express my personal feelings of
I-sappinessat seeing our eminent Secretary-Generalrecovered from his recent illnessand taking part againin the
work of our Organization.
5

j

still unable to benefit from the social insurance scheme and
they do not get their share of revenue from the State of
Cyprus or from the international development funds given
to Cyprus. While both sides are reported to have equally
co-operated with UNFICYP for promoting normalization
and for preventing the escalation of isolated incidents, the
report cites a few occasions on which this co-operation was
found to be unsatisfactory. In this regard, once again, I
would like to draw your attention to the difficult and
precarious circumstances under which the Turkish community lives. The deterioration of the situation, particularly
due to an upsurge of a pro-en&s campaign in the island, as
reported by the Secretary-General, was bound to increase
and has indeed increased the sensitivity of the Turkish
Cypriots to their security requirements. And you must
concede that the past experience of the community is not
conducive to an easy confidence which would allow them
to relax their vigilance.

54. Therefore it is necessarythat, while these endeavours
for reactivating the talks continue, the situation in tile
islandshould not be allowed to deteriorate. UNFICYPwill
no doubt contribute to this end, and it is hoped tl~atall
activities in Cyprus not compatible with permanentlnde.
pendencewill be suspendedand the chasmof mistrustand
suspicionbetween the two communitieswill be narrowed
by a sincerethrust towards finding an agreed solutionon
theseconstitutional matters.
55. In a week we shallreach the ninth anniversaryof the
tragedy of Cyprus, with the sight of a peaceful andagreed
solution still eluding us. We have witnessed enoughsuf.
fering, fears and tears, blood and thunder in Cyprus.It is
high time that tears and fears were replaced by joy and
hope and that the certainty of peace, security and
happinessreplaced the dark clouds of yesterday. It ishigh
time the communities began to co-operate on worksor
developmentrather than continue to watch eachotheras
enemiesfrom different camps. That is not difficult to
achieve; it merely requiresthat the realities of the Cyprus
problembe faced and acceptedby all parties with civilized
courage.

50. Now I come to my third topic. Launched more than
three years ago, the intercommunal talks have provided a
channel of serious communication between the two communities and have served as an outlet for tension.
51. In this connexion, I would like to quote the Secretary-General. In his report he states:

56. It is my Government’s hope, therefore, that aswe
enter the ninth year theseendlessand futile discussions
on
semanticswill be set asideand that the realities andpast
experiencewhich constitute the concrete elementsin this
matter will be tackled realistically. The problem beforethe
parties concerned is the exploration of the possibilities
of
reshapingan existing Constitution, having regard to the
desiresand the requirementsof the partiesas well asto the
realities of Cyprus. If slogans are set aside, abstract
conceptsabandonedandpolitical aimsnot compatiblewith
permanentindependenceforgotten, peacemay be foundin
a short time, to the joy of all of us,and I hope 1972willbe
a year of peacefor Cyprusaswell asfor all mankind.

“I remain convinced that the best way of achieving a
solution to the Cyprus problem is through a negotiated
agreement between the two communities on its constitutional aspects. On the other hand, I have come to the
conclusionthat the intercommunaltalks in their present
form have reachedan impasse
which cannot be overcome
without some new impetus being given to them. Two
considerationshave led meto believethat it is possibleto
reactivate these talks. First, all the parties have agreed
that the intercommunaltalks shouldcontinue in modified
form with a view to promoting the searchfor a solution
of outstanding problems; and secondly, the discussions 57. Speakingas a member of the Turkish Government,I
between the Governmentsof Greece and Turkey have
want to assurethis Council that my Government’sdecision
recently led to joint efforts by them aimedat reactivating
and action on Cyprus, as indeed on all international
the intercorrununaltalks.” [Ibid., para. 99.1
problems,will continue to rest on a senseof responsibility
for international peace and security, on a senseof under52. Although the talks have not yielded a positive result,
still they provide somegrounds for optimism. The Secre- standing for international cohesion guided by a spiritof
and fairness,based on the law andjustice
tary-General in part V of his report has given full informa- reasonableness
tion’ about his endeavoursto reactivate the talks. He has which underlie the Charter of the United Nations.
indicated the acceptancein principle of his suggestions
by
58. As I said at the beginningof my statement, I haveno
all the parties concerned+Speakingfor my Government,I
can say that I am confident that the continuation of these intention of taking up the valuable time of the Security
Council. 1,believe that the points I have made are sufficient
contacts with the Secretary-Generalon this matter by the
partieswill SOOJproducea consensus
upon which the talks to show the situation as it exists now and also to express
andunderlineour hopesfor the future.
may be resumed.
53. In this context, Turkey and Greece, motherlandsto
the two ethnic communitiesliving in Cyprus,which shared
the privilege of bringing about the independent bicommunal Republic of Cyprus in 1960, share also a
responsibility in the search for permanent peace and
stability. Indeed both countriesare entrusted with moral
and contractual obligationstowards their respectivecommunities. In fact, strengthenedby a denominator common
to both, in the searchfor a permanent and just solution,
they can be most effective in promoting and speedingthe
commonobjectivesof all.

59. Before concluding, I shouldlike to say that, althot$ I
may differ on somepoints with what was said by the
Foreign Minister of Cyprus, Mr. Kyprianou, nevertheless
I
should like to thank him for his kind words about lYSe[f
andmy new post.
60. I hope that the searchfor a peacefulsolution WU not
be set aside and that, as I have stressedin my statement,
determinedefforts will continue. I think that if the Turkish
community, which is one of the parties in this diffielllf
problem, can be convinced of the goodwill of the Greek
6

Cypriot community and a scheme for an agreed solution
can be arrived at on the constructive basis which created
the partnership of the two communities in the Republic of
Cyprus, a solution of the problem will not be too difficult.
61, The PRESIDENT:
Greece.

I call on the representative of

62. Mr. BITSIOS (Greece) (interpretation from French):
We were happy to see U Thant with us this morning. Our
sincerest wishes went with him during his recent illness, and
we trust that he will enjoy a complete recovery.
63. We also wish to express our deep sorrow at the tragic
death of the Foreign Minister of Bulgaria. He worked with
us to achieve first the normalization and then the strengthening of ties between our two countries.
64. Once again we have to thank the Secretary-General for
his report on the United Nations operation in Cyprus
covering the period 20 May to 30 November 1971
[S/10401/. As in the past, it gives us a clear and precise
picture of developments in the area we are discussing and of
the constructive role the United Nations Force continues to
play in Cyprus.
65. I do not intend to dwell on that part of the report that
deals with the internal situation in Cyprus in the course of
the past six months except to express the satisfaction of my
Government at the fact that, generally speaking, calm has
reigned in the island during that period. For that, the
contribution of the Force was valuable, and it is bearing in
mind the great usefulness of its presence that Greece has
supported the extension of its mandate for a new six-month
period. We will continue to contribute to the expenses of
UNFICYP as far as our possibilities allow. Our contributions to date have gone beyond $10 million,
66. In Greece we have always been in favour of a p:aceful
solution of the problem of Cyprus, and a peaceful solution
can only be devised in an atmosphere of calm and peace.
67. Another essential element is unquestionably the goodwill, the desire of the parties to arrive as soon as possible at
a just and equitable solution in keeping with the spirit of
our day and of the Charter of the United Nations. Thus the
time factor in the talks between Mr. Clerides and Mr. Denktash in Nicosia was very important. Members of the Council
wil1 recall that I have repeated this opinion at each of its
meetings. I am the first to regret that the prediction I made
in November 1969 has turned out to be accurate. At that
time I stated that lack of progress in the Nicosia dialogue
might lead to a hardening of positions and make a solution
more difficult.
68. The Secretary-General, fearing the effects of the
staIemate in which the conversations found themselves at
the end of this summer, addressed to the parties concerned
his aide-m6moire of 18 October 1971, which appears in
paragraph 79 of the report. The Greek Government replied
affirmatively.
In accepting the contents of U Thant’s
memorandum as a whole, my Government was motivated
by the following reason: it shared the concern of the
Secretary-General and his desire to see the intercommunal

talks reactivated and made more effective. We consider that
these talks are the most propitious, if not the only, way of
arriving at a constitutional
solution of the problem.
Furthermore, the Greek Government felt that it was its
duty and in keeping with its previous efforts on behalf of a
successful dialogue not to refuse the appointment of one of
its experts in constitutional questions who, acting in a
purely consultative capacity, might contribute to the
success of the negotiations. Finally, it felt that the
participation of the Secretary-General’s representative in
these conversations, as part of the Secretary-General’s good
offices, was in keeping with U Thant’s appeal of November
1967 [Sf8248fAdd.3] and with paragraph 3 of Security
Council resolution 244 (1967) of 22 December 1967 pursuant to which the Nicosia dialogue was begun in the first
place.
69. Having given our immediate and unconditional agreement we can now only hope that a new phase in these
constitutional talks can be embarked upon soon, in a
renewed spirit of goodwill. But in negotiations of this
nature, there must be no victor and no vanquished. We
must never lose sight of the fact that the two parts of the
population have to live together.
70. I do not intend in this statement to enter into the
substance of the talks between Mr. Clerides and Mr. Denktash. But it is necessary, perhaps even useful, to point out
that paragraph 70 of the report is incomplete when it states
that Mr. Clerides has said that he is willing to accept
separate authorities for communal affairs. He went much
further in his proposals regarding local administration. The
Greek Government felt that the proposals submitted by
Mr. Clerides were constructive and could constitute the
solid basis of an agreement. There are accordingly also good
reasons to insist that the dialogue be resumed, and to hope
it will be successful.
71. As I have just said, the Nicosia talks are the procedure
most likely to result in an agreement embodying the
expressed will of the population of Cyprus itself, particularly after the failure of the mediation called for in the
Security Council resolution of 4 March 1964. Greece agreed
to the mediation attempt and we pinned our hopes on it, as
the Secretary-General points out in paragraph 109 of his
report. We also accepted the final report of the Mediator,
Mr. Galo Plaza. It was in 1965 that the opportunity of
finally reaching a solution was allowed to pass. We do not
want the new opportunity offered by the talks between the
representatives of the two parts of the population of
Cyprus to be lost too. It is for that reason that we should
like to see the Council adopt the suggestion of the
Secretary-General as contained in his aide-mCmoire of
18 October, since it will allow the two parties to resume
their talks. The Security Council would thus be encouraging
the parties along the right lines.
72. We have read with deep regret that the report before
IIS is the last one that U Thant will be submitting on the
r!uestion of Cyprus as Secretary-General. As in other
regions, in respect of other problems, U Thant has struggled
unremittingly for the restoration of peace in Cyprus and its
maintenance in the neighbouring area. He was fortunate in
being surrounded by distinguished colleagues both here at

island and none at all in the important fields of freedom,
of movement and deconfrontation”. [Ibid., para. 5’5~

the Headquarters of the United Nations and in Cyprus. We
wish again to thank them. But it is U Thant who since
1963, when he took over the question, has followed it
personally’ with unequalled moral courage, dedication to
the principles of the Charter, and impartiality. We are
profoundly grateful to him, and his devotion to the cause
of peace and justice will inspire us in the efforts which we
too will continue to make in order to achieve a goal that is
dear to him.

79. My delegation has taken note of the conclusions the
Secretary-General draws from his analysis of the situation,
particularly that no effort must be spared to maintain calm
on the island and to this end that the mandate of UNFlCyp
should be prolonged for a further period of six months and
also that the Security Council might take a more active re]e
in assisting the parties in their search for a solution to the
problem of Cyprus.

73. In thanking you, Mr. President, for allowing me to
speak, may I also be allowed to extend to our colleague,
Mr. Baytilken, our warmest congratulations on his appointment as Foreign Minister of his country. I have had the
pleasure of working with Mr. Bayiilken on various occasions
over the years, and I am confident that in his new and
highly responsible post he will contribute positively to the
solution of the problem before the Council.

80. With regard to the maintenance of calm, my delega.
tion has every confidence in the efficiency and conscien.
tiousness of the officers and men of the United Naticrrs
Force who, since 1964, have contributed decisively to the
restoration of public order and who have done every&g
in their power to prevent incidents from leading to claslres.
81. Furthermore, the efforts to maintain order can be
successful only if, at the same time, the intercomnrurrs1
talks emerge from their present stalemate. My Government
strongly hopes that Mr. Clerides and Mr. Denktaslt v/ill
resume their talks and compose their differences on ttre
local administration and on the guarantees of the indepen.
dence of Cyprus.

74. The PRESIDENT: I have just learned at this very
meeting, with the greatest regret, of the death of the
Foreign Minister of Bulgaria. On behalf of the members of
the Security Council may I e,xtend my condolences to the
Government of Bulgaria as well as to the bereaved family of
the late Foreign Minister. May his soul rest in peace.
75. Mr. VAN USSEL (Belgium) (interpretation from
French): As the representative of a European country
enjoying cordial relations with Bulgaria, may I express
Belgium’s deep sadness on learning of the tragic death of
the Foreign Minister of Bulgaria.

82. Pending an over-all settlement, the role the Secretary
General would like to see the Security Council play secnu
to us at this point less important than the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General. The latter
is not asked to stand as a mediator between the parties, but
by his presence and authority to encourage them to
continue in their search for a solution, and themselves to
find the compromises and the accommodations without
which no settlement is possible.

76. On behalf of my Government and of the Permanent
Mission of Belgium, I wish also to present our most sincere
and cordial congratulations to Ambassador Baytilken, the
new Foreign Minister of Turkey. The relations between our
two countries are very close and trusting, and I am
convinced that under his auspices these relations will
improve further.

83. It is against this background that my delegation
suppor,s the suggestion in paragraph 79 of the report of tire
Secretary-General. The approach and the method suggested
for speeding up the talks between the two communities,
both by their extension and by the presence of the Special
Representative in Cyprus, we believe offer a realistic basis
for consultations leading to a solution acceptable to the
Government and people of Cyprus. It was also in this spirit
that my delegation viewed the hope expressed by the
Secretary-General in the first part of paragraph 103 of his
report. If in the course of this debate members of the
Council are ready to give their support to the suggestionin
paragraph 79, then I am convinced that in the present
circumstances and as of this moment we will have assisted
the parties in their search for a solution to the problemof
Cyprus.

77. Once again the Security Council is asked to prolong
for a further period of six months the mandate of the
United Nations Force in Cyprus. My delegation voted in
favour of the Council’s resolution because we share the
views and the arguments expounded in part VIII of the
Secretary-General’s report on the United Nations operation
in Cyprus for the period 20 May to 30 November 1971,
78. While it is true that this report contains certain
encouraging elements when compared with the last one,
such as the fact that “UNFICYP has suffered no casualties
attributable
to intercommunal incidents”
(S/10401,
para. Ilj
and the relative stability in the number of
incidents, it nevertheless reflects the disquiet and apprehensions of impartial eyewitnesses at the deterioration of the
general situation in Cyprus. Paragraphs 94 to 97 leave no
doubt regarding the aggravation of the tension between the
two communities on the island. After examining developments during the period under review the Secretary-General
states:

X4. May I take this opportunity to pay tribute to tire
tireless perseverance of the Secretary-General and his
Representative in Cyprus in efforts to avoid the threat te
international peace and security inherent in the situation c*
the island.
85. My Government has taken note of the financial
implications of the United Nations operation in Cyprus. As
in the past, Belgium will not fail to make a VduntarY
contribution to help cover the operating expenses of t1ra
Force.

“
a relative, though superficial, calm has been
maintained. (UNFICYP) , . +has been able to achieve only
limited progress in the normalization of conditions in the
8

86. I would not wish to concludemy statementwithout
paying deservedtribute to the officers and men of the
United NationsForce for the exemplary way in which they
are carrying out the tasks which the Security Council
entrusted to them in resolution 186 (1964) of 4 March
1964. We can fairly state that the United Nations has
introduced a factor of order and peacein Cyprus,
87. Mr. NAKAGAWA (Japan): First of all I shouldlike to
congratulate Mr. Bayiilken on his assumptionof the high
office of ForeignMinister of Turkey.

92. In conclusion, I wish to reiterate our earnestdesire
that an early peaceful solution to the Cyprusquestionbe
found in a spirit of compromiseon both sides,so that the
size of UNFICYP could be gradually reducedto a nominal
presence.
93. It is on this understandingthat Japanhascontinuedto
support the peace-keepingoperationsin Cyprusby voluntary contributions and other appropriatemeans.
94. Mr.

TERENCE

(Burundi)

(interpretation from

French): First of all, our congratulationsupon the return
88. My delegationbelievesthat it is necessaryto extend
further the mandateof the United NationsPeace-keeping amongstus of the Secretary-General,after a long absence
during which seriousillnesskept him to hisbed. We offer
Force in Cyprus for six months as proposedby the
him
our sincerestwishesfor perfect health sothat he may
Secretary-Generalin his report [S/10401/. However, our
long
continue to make his contribution to the United
support for this extension is not without somefeeling of
Nations
in which suchgreat hopesarevested.
reluctance. This is the twentieth time that the Security
Council has taken a similar decisionfor extensionand we
9.5. My delegationhasfurther causefor satisfactionin the
are awarethat there isa justifiable criticismdirectedagainst
news that our distinguishedfriend and colleague,Ambasthe apparentlyindefinite perpetuationof the Force.
sador Bayiilken of the Republic of Turkey, has been
appointed to the high office of Foreign Minister of his
89. I shouldlike particularly to draw the attention of the
country whose spokesmanhe now becomes.Wehave had
parties concernedto the last part of paragraph3 of the
the
opportunity to know him, and we know that this event
resolution adopted by the Council just now, which apmay foreshadow a definitive solution to the problem of
proves the extension of the stationing of the United
Cyprus, in view of the tact, dexterity andhighpolitical and
Nations Force in the expectation that by the end of the
diplomatic skill he hasalwaysdisplayed.Wewishhim every
mandate, namely 15June 1972 “sufficient progresstosuccess,not only in his duties but in the broaderframework
wards a final solution will make possiblea withdrawal or
substantial reduction of the Force”. My delegationwishes of his country’s foreign policy and the multilateraldipIoto urge all the partiesconcernedto continue andaccelerate macy of the United Nations.
determined efforts in a spirit of compromiseand states96. We have had an opportunity on severaloccasions
to
manship to fulfil this hope of the Security Council.
speakof this problem of Cyprus. We do not believethat it
90. The Secretary-Generalsaid in his report that during is impossiblefor two communities,belonging-originally,of
the last six mc *ths tensionbetween the two communities course-to two different nations, to build a composite
in Cyprus hasnot only persistedbut hasevenincreased.My
nation and to arrive at a Cypriot identity, whichshouldbe
delegation cannot but view this situation with certain
the end result of the presentsituation.
misgivings.At the sametime, my delegationwelcomesand
97. We aretherefore in favour of a continuousandfruitful
highly appreciates the Secretary-General’sinitiative in
trying to find a constructive clue to break the present search for a political entity of the Cypriots, be they of
deadlock in the intercommunal talks. It is an encouraging Turkish or Greek origin. To reach this objective, it is
sign that, in the courseof a seriesof consultationswhich
essentialthat the leadersof the two communitiesdo their
utmost to keep people calm on both sides.This could be
the Secretary-Generalhad with the representativesof the
Governments concerned, a considerabledegreeof meeting brought about through what I might call a social and
cultural symbiosisof the two communitieswhich wouldin
of minds has been achieved, including the idea of his
fact be the basis of the complementarity which is so
Special Representative’sparticipation in the talks in the
exercise of the Secretary-Crneral’sgoodoffices. My delega- necessary between the two communities, Turkish and
tion hopes that the initiative taken by the Secretary- Greek.
General will give impetus to the future conduct of the
intercommunal talks towards a mutually acceptableaccom- 98. It is true that the minority communitymight havethe
feeling that Vergil expressedin the Aeneid, when he said
modation.
“Timeo Danaoset dona ferentes” (“I fearthe Greeks,even
91. My delegationwould like to emphasize
that we highly
when they bear gifts”). But I do not believethis feelingcan
value the United Nations presencein Cyprus, one of the
be any obstacle when the two communitiesknow one
successful examplesof peace-keepingoperations.No one
another so well. And so, if there are constructiveproposals
from the Greek community, those pro?oqaIsshould be
will deny that It is becauseof UNFICYP’s presence,that
relative calm hasbeen maintainedin Cyprus.The discipline taken into account, respectedand implemented.However,
and dedication which the UNFICYP personnel of all
it seemsto us that what should prevail ;s considerationfor
categories-military or civilian-has shown for more than
individual and personal values before all else. It is this
seven years are indeed remarkableand deserveparticular
personal and individual criterion that shouldbe applied,
praise and appreciation.We alsowish to take this opportuposts and responsibilities being granted, without necesnity to expressour warm gratitude to the Governments sarily-and certainly not automatically-having regard to
which have patiently shoulderedthe burden of providing
the number assuch. What counts is individuals.It isin this
the contingentsfor the peace-keeping
operation.
form that authentic democracy can be conceived. The
9

well as to the Secretary-General’s
rio-Tafall, I take this opportunity
tribute.

citizens of both communities have the right to life and
citizenship on the same footing, and those two communities should not be so greatly committed to their ancestral
or historical allegiance that they cannot bear in mind the
future they must safeguard, irrespective of outside assistance.

representative, Mr, 0s~.
to pay a well-deserved

106. In the circumstances, my Government accepts that
the Security Council cannot at present withdraw the United
Nations force from Cyprus, and my delegation therefore
had no hesitation in voting in favour of the draft resolution
which the Council has adopted, extending the mandate of
UNFICYP for a further period of six months. We are also
willing to maintain our troop contingent in Cyprus for the
period of the renewed mandate and to continue our
financial contribution.

99. As the Secretary-General says in his report, we feel
that the situation in Cyprus is an example on which the
United Nations can congratulate itself on its work to
maintain peace. It would be very desirable for this example
to be followed in other areas where the Security Council is
obligated to try to maintain peace and play a conciliatory
role among the parties.

107. What is perhaps, however, even more serious than Ihe
deterioration in the situation in the island is that, ss tlie
Secretary-General has made clear, there is no progress to
report in the search for a settlement. The intercommunal
talks remain stalled. In this tonne.xion I should like to
repeat what my delegation has said before. I have just said
that my Government is willing to continue its support of
the operation for ,a further period of six months, but czhr
acceptance of the burden of support for UNFICYPinu~ee
and in money cannot be taken for granted. Doubtless the
same is true for other contributors.

100. In a word, we think that it is for the two communities to do everything in their power to build a single
fatherland: Cyprus. That should be their main objective. We
also believe that the present calm could serve as a point of
departure for a definitive solution of the problem. Hence
we hope that in a few months’ time the parties concernedwhether at the governmental Ievel, that is to say, the
leadership, or at the level of the Cypriot communities-will
find a solution to the present situation, which would make
it unnecessary for the United Nations to leave in Cyprus the
troops that have been stationed there since 1964.

108. Nor must it be assumed that we shalI be wilting to
continue it indefinitely. This is both because of the
implications for the Cyprus question itself and becauseit
would be regrettable if the experience of UNFICYP were to
have the result of undermining confidence in the effectiveness of a peace-keeping operation as a tool in dealing with
problems of international conflict. The importance of
making progress towards a political settlement in Cyprus
thus has relevance beyond the confines of the Cyprus
question itself.

101. It is in conformity with the above principles that the
Government of the Republic of Burundi has authorized us
to vote for the resolution, expressing the hope that a
definitive solution-which should before all be worked out
and implemented by the Cypriots, as Cypriots-will
be
found so that the United Nations may concentrate its
resources on other problems which are just as important
and urgent as that of Cyprus.
102. Mr. JAMIESON (United Kingdom): I should like to
associate my delegation with the expressions of regret on
the occasion of the death of the Foreign Minister of
Bulgaria.

109. Nor is this impatience confined to the contributors. I
believe that there is a growing and general belief that it is
high time that this particular problem was solved and that it
has been on the agenda of the Security Council for far too
long. It is, I think, with very much the same thought in
mind that our Secretary-General has suggested that ths
Security Council might become more actively involved in
assisting the parties in the search for a solution to their
problem. It is neither unreasonable nor surprising that he
should have made this suggestion. In present circumstances,
however, we believe that it would be premature to etsbarl;
upon such an exercise and that it is better, as far as the
Security Council is concerned, to do as we have done and
renew the mandate of UNFICYP. This is because in present
circumstances we still believe that the intercommunal talks
provide the best hope for progress. As the Secrelay.
General has again emphasized in his report, in the last resort
a solution to the difficulties can only be reached through
arrangements directly negotiated between the parties. \Ve
also believe that it is too pessimistic and too SONI 10
conclude that there is no hope of reviving the intefi
communal talks.

103. I should also like to join with you, Mr. President, in
saying how glad we were to see the Secretary-General with
us at the beginning of this meeting.
104. I want to begin by thanking the Secretary-General
for his report, which, as he has himself noted, is the last
which he will present to us on the United Nations operation
in Cyprus. This makes it all the more regrettable that he is
unable to report progress towards a solution of the
difficulties which prevailed in that island. That, however, is
certainly no fault of his. This report and its predecessors
make abundantly clear how dedicated an effort the
Secretary-General and his advisers have made in trying to
promote a settlement.
105. Once more there is no improvement to report in the
situation on the island. Indeed, rather the reverse is true,
since the Secretary-General’s report notes a deterioration in
the situation and an increase in tension between the two
communities. Fortunately, although there have been a
number of intercommunal incidents, some of them serious,
a comparative calm has been maintained thanks largely to
the efforts of UNFICYP, to whose commander and men, as

110. But while suggesting that wider consideration of the
matter by the Security Council is premature, I wish alsoLO
emphasize that it is indeed essential that the interconlmUI~31
talks should be given new life. We therefore wlh10

heartedty support the initiative taken by the SecretaryGeneral on 18 October, and we hope that it will be possible
to achieve agreement on a formula for the reactivation of
the talks which is acceptable to all the parties.
111. As I understand it, the Secretary-General’s proposal,
which is essentially of a procedural nature, does not
represent any sort of straitjacket. Its sole purpose is to get
the talks going again. We accordingly urge all the parties
concerned to show the maximum flexibility in considering
this proposal SO that the talks may be resumed on the basis
of what he has suggested,
112. In this connexion, I think we can draw some
encouragement from the statement this morning by the
Foreign Minister of Cyprus. Once talks are resumed, we
hope that flexibility will be shown in working for a solution
to the outstanding substantive problems which divide the
two communities.
113. I should like to make one or two further points.
First, we join with other delegations in congratulating the
representative of Turkey on his translation to a new sphere
of activity. We are confident that in his new post, as in his
previous one, he, for his part, will do all he can to
encourage and pramote a successful dialogue in Nicosia.

115. In his statement in the general debate in the General
Assembly,3 the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of my country quoted our undertaking
in the Charter to practice tolerance and live together in
peace with one another as good neighbours. The Charter
refers to international relations, but it was drawn up on
behalf of “the peoples of the United Nations”, and that
passage surely applies not only to relations between States,
but to the conduct of and relations between communities
within a State.
116. Mr. DE LA GORCE (France) (interpretation frm
Frenchj: The Frenrh delegation heard with sorrow of the
sudden death of the Foreign Minister of Bulgaria. May we
Twenty-sixth

117. Once again the Council has met to consider the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
operation in Cyprus. Once again we have agreed to
recognize that we should prolong the United Nations Force
there; in the course of the last six months, as in the past,
that Force has prevented new confrontations and incidents
which, without its presence, might have jeopardized the
precarious calm that reigns in the island. Once again, on this
point, we must pay tribute to those whose mission is to direct
these efforts of conciliation, to that “model team” to
which I referred last year, and I specifically refer to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Osorio-Tafall, and to the Commander of the Force, MajorGeneral Prem Chand.
118. Once again we have to recognize that the presence of
the Force, whose usefulness in the prevailing circumstances
in Cyprus cannot be challenged, must not be considered
permanent, leading to a crystallization of a situation which
satisfies no one, and which therefore increases the risks of
confrontation between the communities.

114. Secondly, I should like again, as indeed the representative of Greece has done, to stress the importance of the
intercommunal talks as the best method for seeking a
solution of present difficulties. It would surely be a counsel
of despair to suggest that these difficulties could only be
solved with the collective help of people not directly
concerned, and on that basis to be contemplating the
necessity of such intervention. Our aim must surely be to
promote the dialogue without the thought of such a
necessity looming ahead. These intercommunal talks are
indeed of vital importance because, while as parties to the
1960 treaties we, for our part, continue to respect
them-and of course expect the other sovereign States that
entered into them to do the same-we recognize that there
may be some parts of the texts of the treaty instruments
which no longer reflect the wishes of all the parties and
which may now be inappropriate in some respects. It is
precisely with a view to adjusting the internal aspects that
the intercommunal talks have been taking place and should
continue,

3 Official Records of the General Assembly,
Plenary
Meetings,
1944th meeting.

associate ourselves with the feelings of condolence expressed in the Council towards a country with which
France enjoys very old and friendly relations. May I ask the
Bulgarian delegation kindly to accept our heartfeh condoIences.

119. Having said this-or should I say having repeated
this-our feeling is that if this time we remain satisfied with
these overly familiar reflections or findings we shall
overlook two factors that should incite us to leave
well-trodden paths. On the one hand, we must take into
account the observation of the Secretary-General in his
report according to which, “The period under review has
been marked by a deterioration of the general situation in
Cyprus” and “The task of UNFICYP has become increasingly difficult” [A/10401, puras. 94 and 9.51. On the
other hand, there are new proposals regarding the search for
solutions to the problem of the island.
120. With regard first of all to the aggravation of the
situation, the report before us provides us with a great deal
of evidence: it speaks of increasing tension along the Green
Line, an increase in personnel of the National Guard,
reinforcement of the military capacity of the Turkish
Cypriot fighters, rejection, in a certain number of cases, of
recommendations or advice given by the Force to preserve
the status quo. and the continued recurrence of incidents
giving rise to shooting. The report once again brings out the
increasing tendency towards separate development of the
economy of the two communities, with public services, for
their part, being completely separate one from the other.
Furthermore, freedom of movement on the island is still
restricted, and, in the words of the report, “is one of the
most serious irritants to Cypriots of both communities”
(ibid., para. 61/. We must also emphasize, as our Secretary-General has done, the inappropriateness of anything
that might recall a painful and still very recent past and
might therefore contribute to an aggravation of tensions.
121. But this atmosphere of frustration and tension of
which I have just mentioned the most significant highlights,
is linked above all to the profound disappointment created

Session,

11

by uncertainty; in a word, by the setbacksencounteredin
the searchfor a solutionto the problem of Cyprus. The
exchangesof letters betweenthe representatives
of the two
communitieshave resultedin no progress
alongthe road to
agreementand have, basically,only stressed
the continuing
differencein their positions,particularly in mattersof local
administrationand safeguards
of independence.
Needless
to
say, we cannot merelynote with concernthe persistence
of
a considerable
gapbetweenthe viewsof the two sides.
122. Our Secretary-General, who at our request has for a
number of years lent his good offices, has deemed it
appropriate to seek a resumption of the talks between the
two communities; and according to his view, this would call
for a different procedure, one that might give the new
impetus to these negotiations that was SOobviously lacking
heretofore. He was also encouraged by the joint efforts of
the Greek and Turkish Governments, since at the beginning
of the year their Foreign Ministers were able, right here, to
find common ground with regard to ways of assisting the
spokesmen of the parties concerned to break out of their
stalemate, That was a new and significant step on the road
to mutual trust.

specifically and especially of their will to make CO~~HG~
mises and accommodations enabling their talks to be
resumed.
127. We are convinced that in this regard, Mr. Bayiiikez
will bring to bear his wide experience and perfect krm*ledge of our concerns for a settlement of the Cy’prti
problem, to make easier the search for the indispensabTr
conciliation. And may we, on this occasion, congmtuh5
him most warmly on being entrusted with the hr&
responsibilityof directing the diplomacy of Turkey. W~‘C
~?5
coursehope most sincerely that he will enjoy great ar;;j
brilliant successin the high missionnow entrusted to hlz*.
128. Possibly, circumstancesmay now lead us to postpTr,+
the formulation of directives and suggestions,to which h!z
Secretary-General referred in his report. But while it hi
obviously up to the parties themselvesto find a solution ! 2
their problems,the Council’s responsibility for the ma&z.
nance of peace and security, which is the reason for eE;te
presenceof the Force on the island, must lead US to en.%tiz
that no chancefor achieving a settlement be overlooked.
129. With all his experience and his familiarity with ake
problem of Cyprus, the Secretary-General has laid down;P;
courseto be followed. We trust that his proposals, tog&:3
with whatever changesare neededto make them accepta%
to all the parties, will be followed up, and we are graii&
at the new and favourable elements that this &bate hal
brought out. We trust that it will mark a new phasein tk
searchfor a fair solution that will be acceptable to t?z
Cypriots of both communities.

123. The proposals that emerged have since become well
known. Starting from what has been achieved so far, that is,
a formula that still did not meet the expectations of the
parties concerned, and flowing from their divergent concerns, these proposals could not immediately satisfy ah
parties. For our part, however, we believe that we should
keep them in mind, for they do constitute a reasonable
approach to the problem and, as far as is possible, they do
take into account the concerns of both sides.

130. Mr. VINCI (Italy): Mr. President, I wish to join jtiz
and previous speakers in the expressions of fleaniL:
welcome addressedto Secretary-General U Thant. iz
whom my respect and admiration and, if I may sag’s%~~,
sincereaffection have never ceasedto increase through>,:
all the yearsof his tenure of office.

124. It is for this reason that my delegation wishes to say
that the Secretary-General’s endeavours have our sympathy
and should, we believe, be welcomed by all. They can
contribute to an effective resumption of the intercommunal
talks. We believe that the practical approach proposed by
the Secretary-General should allow some common ground
to be found. The Security Council’s support for this
initiative will constitute the reassuring and constructive
element which, according to the terms of the report, should
dissipate all remaining reluctance.

131. The Italian delegation has cast its positive VOICTV
favour of the draft resolution contained in docunz::
S/10441, by which the Security Council has decided r
renew for another six-month period the stationing ;:F
UNFICYP in Cyprus. In so doing, the Italian delegatt.:::
125. AS he himself points out, this report marks the
wishesto expressonce again the unswerving support of 1%
twentieth time that U Thant has appearedbefore us to
Italian Government for United Nations peace-keepingUFK~
recommendan extensionof the mandateof the Force, In
ations, when particular conditions so require. This is 5s:.
the course of the last eight years, my country has the casewith Cyprus, as we can easily conclude from ip.:
constantly supportedhis efforts to achieve,in accordance comprehensive report submitted to us in docun~~
with tne terms of resolution 186(1964) of the Security
S/l0401 by the Secretary-General.
Council, of 4 March 1964, a peaceful solution and an
agreedsettlement of the problem in Cyprus. Our con- 132. The report of the Secretary-General, in fact, !:ti
fidencein him hasneverflagged.That explainswhy, despite given us a complete description of the present situation. \h?
Certainreservationsregardingthe extensionof the mandate feel indebted to U Thant, as well as to his Speal
of the Force-something that is becominga half-yearly
Representativein Cyprus and to all the United Natir.a
ritual-we havealwaysresignedourselvesto it.
forces stationed there, for their very deserving activitks :::
the maintenanceof peace in that sensitive and delicatea~i;
126. Our decisiontoday is no departurefrom the line of
Socloseto my country.
conduct we have set ourselves.However,we do hope that
the variouspartiesconcernedunderstandthe reasonfor our
133. My delegation has examined this report with I&
Position: the new extensiongiven to them is not the result utmost interest and attention and we have noted with mw
of any resignationon our part or of any facile approach,We concern that, in the period covered by tile report, IFS
hope that they will give us proof of their good will,
situation in Cyprus has been characterized by a cansi&
12

able increase in tension and in the number of incidents
which
have prevented the achievement of even small
Progress
towards a return to more normal conditions.
Nevertheless,
the Secretary-General states in his report:
“Despite
the difficulties involved, I am deeply convinced
that, given the necessary goodwill” in accordance with the
Principles of the Charter, “the Cyprus problem is capable of
solution”.
[S/10401, para. 111.1
134. The report of the Secretary-General, therefore, while
stressing
the difficulties which hamper the pursuit of
adequate
solutions, indicates some positive prospects
which,
if they should materialize, could lead to favourable
restits.
These results, in turn, could facilitate the bridging
of the differences still dividing the parties, thus creating the
ground for a lasting solution of the Cypriot problem, which
mould be of great benefit to all countries, as the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Cyprus stated so eloquently this
morning.
I refer in particular to the procedural suggestions
aimed at reactivating and making more effective the talks
between
the two communities. The Italian delegation
deems that these are meaningful suggestions which could
give new life and a fresh start to the intercommunal talks,
providing
a potentially stronger machinery in the search for
a solution
to the problem. We are happy that, as we were
made to understand also from the statements which we
heard
this morning, this last suggestion is acceptable in
principle to all the parties concerned.
135. In this connexion we were most encouraged by the
statement
made by the representative of Turkey, in which
he expressed the hope that 1972 will be the year of the
establishment
of peace in Cyprus. Our confidence is
increased
by the fact that Ambassador Bayiilken will very
soon assume the high responsibilityof the post of Foreign
Minister of Turkey. We congratulatehim most warmly on
this assignment and, although we shall misshim as an
esteemed colleagueand good friend, we aregratified by the
noble Purposes which he will pursue in this highly
responsible position.

respondto the immediate need to agreeon guidelinesfor
more effective peace-keepingoperationsin accordancewith
the Charter.
138. If these are the basic reasonswhy my Government
hasfrom the very beginningsupported the United Nations
operation in Cyprus, this should not prevent us from
expressingour concern about the many yearsduringwhich
we have been occupied with this problem without as yet
seeingthe light at the end of the tunnel. It is, therefore,
essential,at a moment in which mankind is facing global
problems which require the maximum commitment of us
all that the situation in Cyprus shouldbe settledby fully
guaranteeingto the parties concernedrespectfor their own
interestsin the framework of both independence
andunity
of the island.
139. Of course,we realize the complexity of the problems
with which we are confronted, but I wish only to
emphasizethe firm belief that mutual trust, goodwill and
respect for the different positions,when really applied,can
lead to resultswhich may exceedthe best expectations.
140. It is in this spirit that the Italian delegationhas lent
its support to the renewalof the mandateof UNFICYP.
141. The report submitted to us by the Secretary-General
is the last one on the subject prepared by him. May I be
allowed to address to him, on behalf of the Italian
Government, the warmest thanks and expressions
of deep
gratitude for the indefatigablework he accomplished
in this
field and for the commitment, dedication andhighsenseof
responsibiIity with which he has acted throughoutall these
years in the pursuit of an acceptable solution of the
problem of Cyprus.
142. Before concluding, may I associatemyself and my
delegationwith the condolencesexpressedby you, Sir, and
by previous speakers,on the untimely deathof the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Bulgaria. Mr. Bachev was a well
known figure in these circles and I had the privilegeon a
number of occasions to appreciate his knowledge, his
equanimity and goodwill in discussingthe crucialproblems
here and elsewhere.

136. We cannot fail to note, however, at the sametime
that, so far, the situation is uncertain in the islandand is
likely to becomeworseif precautionarymeasures,
not only
aimed at limiting the dispute, but alsointended to lead
towards a solution, are not adopted. The United Nations
Force in Cyprus hasproved its ability in accomplishing
such 343. Mr. ISSRAELYAN (Union of Soviet SocialistRepuba task, and it is for this reasonthat the Secretary-General lics) (tvandation from Russian): Permit me first of all, on
Las suggested the extension of its stay for another behalf of the Soviet delegation, to expressour profound
condolencesto our Bulgariancomradesand friendson the
six-month period.
occasion of the tragic death of the Minister for Foreign
137, In addition to thesefew remarks,the Italian delega- Affairs of Bulgaria, ComradeIvan Bashev,a faithful friend
tion wishes to emphasizethat the peace-keeping
operations of the Soviet Union and a consistent championof the
represent, in our view, one of the ingeniousmeansenabling peace-lovingforeign policy of the socialistStateof Bulgaria.
The Soviet delegation would like to ask our Bulgarian
the United Nations to createthe necessaryconditionsfor a
friends
to convey our feelingsof deepgrief to the family of
more peaceful, just and prosperousworld, thus meetingthe
expectations placed in our Organizationby all the peoples ComradeBashev.
of the family of nations. Also, if we bear in mind that in
building up an effective United Nationsrole in this field, we
144. The Soviet Union invariably approaches
the consider.
are CompIying with another of the mainguidelinesadopted ation of questionsdiscussedin the Security Counciland in
unanimously by our Organization on the occasionof its
the United Nations as a whole from the standpointof the
twenty-fifth
anniversary, namely, the Declaration on the
need to strengthen international security and peace.Such
Strengthening of International Security [GeneralAssembly an approach is fully in accord with the main purposesand
re~~lution 2734 (XXV)], which urgedall MemberStatesto
principlesof the Charter of the United Nations,
13

145. The Soviet Union’s position on the Cyprus question
has frequently been expounded in the statements of the
Soviet Government and of the USSR representatives, in the
Security Council and elsewhere. That position retains its
full force and validity. The Soviet Union has always taken
and continues to take the view that the Cyprus question
must be settled by peaceful means in the interests of the
people of Cyprus and in the interests of the easing of
tension in that important region of the world. Such a
settlement must be based on respect for the freedom,
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Republic of Cyprus which is a sovereign State and a
Member of the United Nations and pursues a policy of
peace and non-alignment with military blocs. There is and
can be no doubt that the solution of the internal problems
of Cyprus is a matter for the Cypriots themselves.
146. The Cyprus question must be solved without any
interference from outside. The lawful rights of all citizens,
whether of Greek or Turkish nationality, must be respected
by all. The Soviet Union is firmly opposed to any attempts
to infringe upon the sovereignty of the Republic of Cyprus
and to any intent to settle the Cyprus question behind the
backs of the people of Cyprus to the detriment of their
vital interests and to the benefit of the imperialistic aims of
outside forces.
147. It is our deep conviction that, in order to ensure the
complete independence, integrity and sovereignty of the
Republic of Cyprus, all foreign forces must be withdrawn
from its territory, and the foreign military bases on the
territory of Cyprus must be removed.
148. The Soviet delegation would also Iike to stress the
need for ail States, in strict compliance with Security
Council resolution 186 (1964) of 4 March 1964, to refrain
from actions contrary to that resolution which might
complicate the situation in Cyprus.

151. The report also states that the intercommunal talks
have virtually reached a deadlock. In this connexion, the
Soviet delegation shares the opinion of the Secretary
General that the best way of achieving a solution to the
Cyprus problem is, indeed, through talks between the two
communities. We take the view that such talks are tile
internal affair of the Republic of Cyprus. There can be no
doubt that only through such talks, based on mutual
understanding and goodwill, without any interference, and,
what is more important, without any pressure from outside,
can conditions be created which would ensure a peaceful
life and security for all Cypriots.
1.52. The report expresses the view that the Security
Council should become more actively involved in the search
for a solution to the Cyprus problem. A similar idea was
also expressed in today’s statement in the Council by the
distinguished Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cyprus,
Mr. Kyprianou. The Soviet delegation, for its part, shares
those views. We should also like to point out that many
years have already passed since the day when foreign forces,
foreign military contingents under the title of United
Nations forces first arrived in Cyprus as a result of
well-known circumstances. Today the Security Council is
considering a proposal to extend the mandate of those
forces for the twentieth time. Their presence on theisland
for such a long time, as has previously been stated by
ourselves and by many other delegations, can in no way be
regarded as normal. As in the past, the Soviet delegation
holds firmly to the view that this United Nations operation
cannot and must not continue indefinitely. In itself, the
presence of foreign forces in the territory of an indepen.
dent sovereign State, even under the auspices and on behalf
of the United Nations, can only be a temporary or
extraordinary measure which should be ended as soon as
possible.
153. ‘The time has come for the Security Council to study
once again all the possibilities for a settlement of the
situation in Cyprus which would lead to the withdrawa of
United Nations forces from that island. The Council must,
of course, itself decide in what way it can best carry out
this task.

149. It should also be pointed out that Cyprus is situated
in immediate proximity to Europe, and the state of affairs
on that continent has the most direct influence on the
situation in Cyprus. That being so, one can only welcome
the recent turn towards the easing of tension in Europe.
For its part, the Soviet Union, together with the other
socialist countries, consistently calls for further measures to
consolidate European peace and security, the most important of which would be the early convening of an
all-European conference on questions of security and
co-operation.

1.54. It is on this understanding, and bearing in mind the
position on this matter of the interested parties and above
all of the Government of the Republic of Cyprus, that the
Soviet delegation will not now raise the question of the
withdrawal of United Nations forces from the territory of
Cyprus.
155. With regard to the resolution just adopted by the
Security Council, the USSR delegation considers it newsary to point out that this resolution reaffirms the basic
provisions of resolution 186 (1964), and also of subsequent
Council resolutions on the Cyprus question. The USSR
delegation considers this to be a decisive factor in detep
mining the Soviet Union’s attitude to this resolution also.

150. Today the Security Council is once again considering
the question of Cyprus in connexion with the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations operation in
Cyprus for the period 20 May to 30 November 1971. On
studying this report, one cannot but draw attention to the
statements it contains to the effect that the period under
review has been marked by a deterioration of the general
situation in Cyprus, that tension on the island has noticeably increased and that there have been a number of
incidents, some of them serious, between representatives of
the Greek and Turkish communities. Such statements can
only give rise to regret and concern.

156. The USSR delegation did not object to the adoption
by the Council today of a resolution extending the
stationing of the United Nations forces in Cyprus until
15 June 1972, on ,the understanding that this extension Will
be effected in full accordance with the provisions of
14

resolution 186 (1964) and of the subsequent Security
Council resolutions on the Cyprus question, which is to say
that these forces will retain their present functions and will
continue to be financed in the same way, namely, on a
voluntary basis.
157. Finally, the Soviet delegation would like to take
advantage of the presence at today’s meeting of the
Security Council of the Permanent Representative of
Turkey, Ambassador Bayiilken, who was recently appointed to the high office of Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Turkey. We should like to express the hope that his great
experience and erudition will foster the further development and the strengthening of Soviet-Turkish goodneighbourly relations and friendship. I congratulate him on
his high appointment.
158. Mr. CARASALES (Argentina) (interpretation from
Spanish): The Argentine delegation wishes first of all to
associate itself with the sorrow expressed by yourself on
behalf of the Council, and echoed by other members, on
the tragic death of the Foreign Minister of Bulgaria. To the
Government and the people of Bulgaria, with whom my
country enjoys the closest of friendly relations, we address
our sincerest condolences.
159. However, at the other end of the spectrum of
feelings, may I congratulate the representative of Turkey,
Mr. Bayiilken, on his nomination as Foreign Minister of his
country. May I express our hopes for great success to crown
his efforts.

frankness, hardly lead the Council to be optimistic regarding events in the island.
163. All this led my delegation to entertain favourably the
request contained at the end of paragraph 104 of the report
before us, that the mandate of UNFICYP be extended for a
further period of six months, that is, until 15 June 1972.
164. We have heard it stated very often in this Council in
all languages and by all delegations that we cannot unduly
delay the efforts to find a definitive solution lo the
problem confronting us. In 1967 my delegation, when it
was a member of the Council, stated it, we repeated it in
May of this year, and we wish to press this matter home
very clearly today, for we consider it to be of crucial
importance.
165. Without in any way lessening our support for any
temporary measure that may lead to understanding among
the parties, or for the intercommunal talks, the strengthening of which is vital for the maintenance of peace and the
pacification of the island, we feel justified in wondering
whether the time has not arrived for us to do more than
merely decide upon an extension of the stay of the Force in
Cyprus. We must state very clearly that we note with great
interest the ideas expressed in part V of the report, which
speak of the good offices of the Secretary-General and
more particularly
of the possibility that the Special
Representative might participate in the talks between the
two communities.
166. In conclusion, I wish to recall what U Thant stated in
paragraph 110 of his report:

160. Once again, the Security Council is meeting to
consider the report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations operation in Cyprus covering the period from
20 May to 30 November 1971, circulated in document
S/10401. First of all we would like to express our
appreciation for the valuable report the Secretary-General
has submitted to us, valuable both because of the precise
description of events that have taken place and the
assessment made of them, as well as for the conclusions
drawn.

“Thus the hopes and expectations of 1964 are yet to be
fulfilled. After nearly eight years, the solution of the
Cyprus problem is still not in sight, conditions in the
island remain precarious and I have to come once more
before the Security Council-in fact for the twentieth
time-to recommend a further extension of the mandate
of UNFICYP. It is obvious that this situation cannot
continue indefinitely, to the detriment of the people of
Cyprus and as a lingering threat to international peace
and security.”

161. We would also like to take advantage of this
opportunity
to congratulate Mr. Osorio-Tafall, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his unremitting
efforts, and the Commander of the United Nations Force in
Cyprus, Major-General Prem Chand, for the very correct
way in which he has commanded the forces under his
orders. They certainly are fulfilling what we would call the
peace mission of our Organization.

167. The PRESIDENT: I still have several speakers inscribed on my list to speak on the item concerning the
question of Cyprus. Members may wish to adjourn now. It
would be my intention, however, to call the next meeting
of the Council at 4 o’clock this afternoon in order to hear
the remaining speakers on this item and then to proceed to
the other item on the agenda. We may use the period from
3 p.m. to 4 p.m. for consultations, as indicated at the last
meeting. Since it is my understanding that members of the
council are agreeable to this course of action, the next
meeting will be scheduled for 4 p.m. The agenda will be the
same as for this meeting.

162. The Secretary-General has very eloquently described
the increase of tension in the island, the lack of progress in
the intercommunal talks, the increase in military activities
on the part of the armed contingents of the different
groups, as well as certain cases where the trust that should
be given the United Nations has been found wanting. These
elements
and these facts, as well as others that the
Secretary-General
details with his usual accuracy and

The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.

15

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
may be obtained
throughout
the world. Consult
your bookstore
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write
to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
depositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aup&s de votre libraire
a : Nations Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
K&C

IIOJfY9HTb

Hs~miurr

NBJ(A1IHJ-f

OPrAHH

3AI(HII

OB%EJ$HHEHH~IX

et lea agences
ou adressez-vous

HAU(HR

samen
Haunti,

Opramrsaqm
06’bequneanbrx
Haunt
MOH(HO nynkrrb
B mui~nhrx
hfaran &renTcTsax
BO Bcex patoaax
hrnpa. HasoAure
cnpasxw
06 n3AannRX
n
~mirnno~
Mara3nne
mm nsmnre
no anpecy:
Oprarnmauua
O@beAwnenribrx
Cercqurr no nponaxe
u3~aaut& Hbro-FLopa
mm Zenesa.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

3nHax

PUBLICACIONES

DE

LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Nacionea Unidas
est.&n en venta an librerfas
y casas distribuidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte
a su librero
o dirfjase
a: Nacionea
Unidae, Seccidn de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: $U.S. 1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)
