VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Declaration in response to the request made to it in
General Assembly resolution 3267 (XXIX), the informal working group set up by the Commission at
each of its sessions since 1974 has so far adopted
the title and preamble of a draft Declaration, 63
l. Requests the Commission on Human Rights at
its thirty-fifth session to give high priority to the
drafting of the Declaration on the Elimination of All
Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on
Religion or Belief and to strive towards completion of
the draft Declaration at that session;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to make available to the Commission on Human Rights the provisions of existing international instruments which
relate to the problem of religious intolerance;
3. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
instruct its working group which has been established
to carry out this task to set a time-table for a full
consideration of the remaining articles of the draft
Declaration during the thirty-fifth session of the
Commission;
4. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth
session, through the Economic and Social Council, a
single draft Declaration on the Elimination of All
Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on
Religion or Belief;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fourth session the item entitled "Elimination
of all forms of religious intolerance" and to give it
high priority.
86th plenary meeting
16 December 1978
33/162.

Migratory labour in southern Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/105 A to N of 14 December 1977 and 32/105 0 of 16 December 1977
relating to the policies of apartheid of the Government of South Africa,
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution 2082 B (LXII) of 13 May 1977, in which the
Council recommended that the General Assembly
should declare 1978 the International Anti-Apartheid
Year,
Noting with satisfaction the proclamation of the year
beginning on 21 March 1978 and ending on 20 March
1979 as International Anti-Apartheid Year,
Bearing in mind the Programme for the International Anti-Apartheid Year, 64
Recalling also the resolutions on accelerated economic development and international action and on the
promotion of development strategies with a view to
reducing economic dependence on South Africa and
the Charter of Rights for Migrant Workers in Southern
Africa which were adopted by the Conference on
Migratory Labour in Southern Africa, 65 held at Lusaka
from 4 to 8 April 1978, and organized by the Economic Commission for Africa and the International
63 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 6 (E/5927), para. 198.
64 Resolution 32/105 B, annex.
65 E/CN.14/ECO/142, part two.

151

Labour Organisation, in co-operation with the Government of Zambia and the liberation movements of
southern Africa that are recognized by the Organization of African Unity,
Aware of the heavy dependence of Botswana, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia and Swaziland
on their supply of migrant labour to South Africa and
of the need to eliminate such undesirable dependence,
Convinced that the continuance of the system of
migrant labour to South Africa both perpetuates the
evils of apartheid and retards the social and economic
advancement of the States supplying migrant labour,
Convinced also that the removal of this evil system
of migrant labour would facilitate the elimination of
apartheid and accelerate the socio-economic development and transformation of the supplier States,
Realizing that the weak position of the supplier
States to take action individually with a view to extricating their dependent economies and their migrant
nationals from the stranglehold of apartheid and the
economy of South Africa calls for urgent concerted
action and co-operation among the affected Member
States as well as assistance from other African States,
international organizations, non-African Governments
and other organizations,
I. Endorses the Charter of Rights for Migrant
Workers in Southern Africa as adopted by the Lusaka
Conference on Migratory Labour in Southern Africa
on 7 April 1978 and annexed to the present resolution;
2. Urges all Member States and all organizations
of the United Nations system and other international
organizations, pursuant to the Lagos Declaration for
Action against Apartheid66 adopted by the World Conference for Action against Apartheid, to extend to the
African States affected by the migration of labour to
South Africa all material, financial, technical and
political support for the initiation and implementation
of specific development programmes and projects aimed
at enabling those States to utilize fully their available labour force for the development of their own
economies and thereby eliminate the necessity to export
such labour to the apartheid economy of South Africa.
90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978
ANNEX
Charter of Rights for Migrant Workers in Southern Africa
adopted on 7 April 1978 by the Conference on Migratory
Labour in Southern Africa

We, tlze representatives of tlze States and peoples of soutlzern
Africa,
Noting that apartheid has been declared a crime against
humanity by the General Assembly of the United Nations,
Noting the work done by the International Labour Organisation on the problems of migratory labour in southern Africa
and recalling International Labour Organisation Conventions
No. 87 of 9 July 1948 and Nos. 97 and 98 of 1 July 194967
concerning, respectively, the freedom of association and protection of the right to organize, migration for employment and
the application of the principles of the right to organize and to
bargain collectively,
66 Report of the World Conference for Action against Apartheid, Lagos, 22-26 August 1977 (United Nations publication
Sales No. E.77.XIV.2 and corrigendum), sect. X.
'
67 See International Labour Organisation, Conventions and
Recommendations adopted by the Intcrnatio11al Labour Conference, 1919-1966 (Geneva, International Labour Office, 1966).

General A88embly-Thirty-third Session

152

Recognizing that the migratory labour system is one of the
major instruments of apartheid,
Mindful of the gross indignities it inflicts on workers, who
are denied many of their basic human rights,
Noting that it undermines family life and disrupts agrarian
economies,
Hereby pledge ourselves to strive for the abolition of the
migratory ,labour system practised in South Africa and, pending its elimination, agree to the present Charter of Rights for
Migrant Workers in Southern Africa.

Article II
AM workers shall have a right to:
(a)

Free medical services for themselves and their families;

Sick leave and, where applicable, maternity leave with
full pay;
( b)
( c)

Annual paid holidays.

Article I 2

All workers shall be entitled to retire on full pension or
with a gratuity proportionate to their period of service.

CHAPTER I

Article 13

RIGHTS OF ASSOCIATION, MOVEMENT AND RESIDENCE

A.I! workers shall have a right to determine their terms and
conditions of employment through collective bargaining.

Article 14

Article I
All workers shall have the right to:
(a)

All workers shall have a right to unemployment benefits.

Article 15

Form and join trade unions of their own choice;

Participate in coHective bargaining on equal terms
with all other workers regardless of race, sex, political affiliation or religion;
(b)

(c) Withhold their labour by strike action in support of
their demands.

Article 2
All workers shall have the right to freedom of movement
and shall not be required to carry a pass or similar document.

Article 3
All workers shall have the right to be accommodated near
their place of work with their families in suitable houses under
home ownership schemes or to reside elsewhere if they choose
so to do.

Article 4
All workers shall have the right of occupation free from
colour bar, job reservation and all other forms of discrimination.

Article 5
Every worker, regardless of race or sex, shall have the
right to work, choose his occupation and change from one
employer to another without ,Joss of accrued benefits and claims
to promotion.

Article 6
AU workers, without exception, shall have the right to
equal pay for equal work.

Article 7
All workers shall have equal rights to vocational training
and adult education for the purpose of acquiring skills and
increasing their awareness.
CHAPTER II
RIGHT TO A DECENT STANDARD OF LJVING

Article 8
Every worker is entitled to a minimum basic wage sufficient
for the maintenance of the health and weM-being of his family.

Article 9
All workers shall have the right to adequate protection
against occupational accidents and diseases by means of approved safeguards and close supervision by an independent
industrial and farming inspectorate operating in conjunction
with workers' representatives.

Artide JO
All workers and their families shall have an equal and
absolute right to adequate, immediate and effective compensation for death or disability arising out of ocoupational diseases
and accidents.

All women workers shall have the right to participate in
all sectors of the economy without discrimination in respect
of wages, training, job allocation or pension benefits.

33/163.

Measures to improve the situation and
ensure the human rights and dignity of
all migrant workers

The General Assembly,
Recalling the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 68 and the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination, 60
Considering the Migrant Workers (Supplementary
Provisions) Convention, 1975,70 and the Recommendation concerning Migrant Workers, 1975,71 adopted by
the General Conference of the International Labour
Organisation,
A ware of the fact that the problem of migrant
workers is becoming more serious in certain regions
for transient political and economic reasons and for
social and cultural reasons,
Recalling that the family is the natural and fundame~tal group 1:1nit of society and is entitled to protect10n by society and the State and that, in that
context, the families of migrant workers are entitled
to the same protection as the migrant workers
themselves,
Bearing in mind the need for the Governments of
h<?st coun_tries and of_ countt?es of origin to co-operate
with a view to findmg satisfactory solutions to the
situation of migrant workers,
Considering the provisions relating to the question
of migrant workers contained in the Declaration and
the Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, 72
Recalling its resolution 32/ 120 of 16 December
1977,
Bearing in mind Economic and Social Council resolution 1978/22 of 5 May 1978,
11 8 Resolution
6 9 Resolution

217 A (III).
2106 A (XX), annex.
Labour Office, Official Bulletin, vol. LVIII,
1975, series A, No. 1, Convention No. 143.
71 Ibid., No. 1, Recommendation No. 151.
72 Report of the World Conference to Combat Racism and
Racial Discrimination, Geneva, 14-25 Au[?ust 1978 (United
Nations publication. Sales No. E.79.XIV.2), chap. II.
70 International
