S/PRST/2003/4

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
2 May 2003
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4749th meeting of the Security Council, held on 2 May 2003, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Burundi”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council congratulates the Burundian parties on a peaceful
transition of power in accordance with the 2000 Arusha Peace Agreement. The
transition in presidency represents a major milestone in the implementation of
the Agreement.
“The Security Council believes that it is now crucial to follow up this
positive development with the implementation of those Arusha provisions that
are still outstanding, such as meaningful security sector and judicial reforms.
Resolving such pressing and other related issues is the only way to ensure that
the 36-month transitional period is a success.
“The Security Council condemns the 17 April and 25 April attacks on
Bujumbura and other cities by the forces of CNDD-FDD (Nkurunziza). The
Security Council takes note of the CNDD-FDD’s 27 April statement that it will
refrain from attacking unless attacked and urges all Burundian parties to
observe the terms of the ceasefire agreements and implement them without
delay.
“The Security Council reiterates its demands that FNL (Rwasa) lay down
its arms and immediately enter into a ceasefire with the Government of
Burundi without preconditions. The FNL’s unwillingness to date to seek a
peaceful resolution of this conflict makes it difficult for the international
community to accept the legitimacy of its concerns.
“The Security Council urges all relevant regional parties and actors to
continue their efforts to bring about a lasting peace in Burundi and stands
ready to consider steps against those that are found to continue to support
armed attacks by the Burundi rebels.
“The Security Council also expresses support for the speedy deployment
of the African Mission in Burundi to facilitate the continuing implementation
of the ceasefire agreements. The Council appeals for adequate and sustained
international assistance to the African Mission in Burundi, while underscoring
the importance of providing the donor community with as many details as

03-34460 (E)

020503

*0334460*

S/PRST/2003/4

possible to enable it to make determinations regarding the best way to assist
the mission.
“The Security Council urges donors to support the economy of Burundi,
to honour the engagements taken at the Paris and Geneva Conferences, and to,
within their abilities, provide as a matter of the utmost urgency budgetary and
balance of payments support to the Government of Burundi, and to contribute
generously to the transitional debt relief fund, with continued strong
performance on economic reforms by the Government of Burundi.
“The Security Council urges the Burundian parties to take serious,
meaningful steps to address human rights and accountability issues. In this
regard, the Council welcomes the approval by the Burundian Senate on 23
April of legislation on genocide, war crimes, and crimes against humanity, and
legislation establishing a truth and reconciliation commission. The Security
Council looks forward to their effective implementation.
“The Security Council reaffirms the vital importance of the Burundian
parties themselves taking ownership of the process to address the devastating
impact of impunity, as detailed in the Arusha Accords. The international
community pledges its willingness and readiness to assist in efforts to build up
the Burundian capacity for promoting respect for human rights standards and
the rule of law.
“The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to continue to
support the peace process in Burundi including the immediate and full
implementation of the ceasefire agreement signed by the Burundian parties.”

2
