General Assembly-Thh-ty-secon<l Session
~------------~--

164

3. W elcomes the comprehensive way in which thc
Government of the Solomon Islands has approached the
preparation oí a sound political and economic foundation for independence, which is to be achievcd in
July 1978;
4. Requests that further steps be taken towards
diy,ersifying the economy of the Solomon lslands and
that the administering Power continue to enlist the
assistance of the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system, as well as of
regional bodies, in the devclopment and strengthening
of the economy of the Territory;
5. Requests the Special Committec to keep the
situation in the Solomon Islands under review.
83rd p/enary meeting
28 November 1977

32/26.

Question of the New Hebrides

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the New Hebrides,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,13
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and all other resolutions and decisions of the United
Nations relating to the Territory, including General
Assembly resolutions 3290 (XXIX) of 13 December
1974, 3433 (XXX) of 8 Deccmber 1975 and 31/51
of 1 December 1976,
W elcoming the participation of France, as an administering Power, in the work of the Special Committee
relating to the Territory,
Noting the joint statemcnt of the administering
Powers issued on 21 July 1977, 11 as well as their joint
statement of 26 March 1977 ,1"
Having heard the statement of the representative of
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland relating to developments in the New Hebrides,rn
Conscious of the need to accelerate progress towards
the full implementation of the Declaration with respect
to the New Hebrides,
Bearing in mind the constructive results achieved as
a consequence of previous visiting missions to colonial
Territories and reiterating its conviction that the dispatch of such a mission to the New Hebrides is essential
for securing adequate and first-hand information in
regard to the conditions prevailing in the Territory and
to the views, wishes and aspirations of the peoplc
therein with respect to their future status,
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Spccial
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Inde1 3 [bid., Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/32/
23/Rev.1), vol. I, chap. IIT, ancl vol. lll, chap. XIII.
14 A/32/172, anncx.
15 A/32/99, annex.
16 Official Records of the General Assernbly, Thirty-second
Session, Fo11rth Comrnittee, 12th meeting, paras. 12-21.

pendence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to thc New Hebrides; 17
2. Reafjirms thc inalienable right of the people of
the Territory to self-determination and indepcndence
in accordance with the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3. Reaffirms the territorial integrity ami national
unity of the New Hebrides;
4. W e/comes the joint commitment of the two administering Powcrs to independence for the New
Hebrides and urges them to continue their efforts towards the early independence of the Territory, in full
consultation with the people of the Territory;
5. Requests the administering Powers to take all
appropriate steps to strengthen the economy of the New
Hebrides, to continue taking steps on a priority basis
to unify the administration of the Territory and to
work out concrete programmes of assistance and economic development so as to ensure that economic and
social development keeps abreast of political development;
6. Requests the administering Powers to continue
to enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the Uniited Nations system
in accelerating progress in all sectors of the national
life of the Territory;
7. Urges the Governments of France and the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ircland to
continue to co-operate with the Special Committee and
to consider permitting access by a United Nations visiting mission to the New Hebrides, and to report on this
aspect to the Special Committee when it next considers
the question of the New Hebrides;
8. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek the best ways and means for the implementation
of the Declaration with respect to the New Hebrides,
including the possible dispatch of a visiting mission in
consultation with the adminisúering Powers, and to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-third session
on the implementation of the present resolution.
83rd plenary meeting
28 November 1977
32/27.

Question of Brunei

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Brunei,
Having examined the relevant chapter of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on thc Granting of Independencc to Colonial Countries and Peopks, 18
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
as well as other relevant resolutions and decisions of
~he Un\ted Nations relating to the Tcrritory, including
m particular the consensus on the question adopted
by the General Assembly on 13 Decembcr 1974,1\1
17 /bid., Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/32/
23/Rev.l ), vol. 111, chap. XIII.
18 Jhid., chap. XV.
rn /bid., Twcnty-ninth Sessiun, S11pp/e111ent No. 31 (Al
96:< 1 ), p. 117, item 23.
