S/PV.7281

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7281st meeting

Tuesday, 21 October 2014, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Perceval/Mr. Oyarzábal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Argentina)

Members:

Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Mrs. Jakubonė
Ms. Lucas
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Gasana
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

14-58091 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1458091*

S/PV.7281

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Algeria,
Bahrain, Belize, the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
Brazil, Cuba, Egypt, Guatemala, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Malaysia, Maldives,
Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan,
Peru, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine and
Zimbabwe to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in the meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objecton, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, and His
Excellency Mr. Fodé Seck, Chairman of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People, to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objecton, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and I now give him
the floor.
The Secretary-General: I thank Argentina for
organizing this important meeting. As members
know, I returned last week from Egypt, Israel and

2/72

21/10/2014

Palestine, which included my first visit to Gaza since
this summer’s conflict. In Egypt, I attended the
International Conference on Palestine, which focused
on Gaza’s reconstruction. I would like to thank the
co-chairs, Egypt and Norway, for their leadership. The
event surpassed expectations, with pledges from some
50 countries amounting to $5.4 billion. It is important
that those promises quickly materialize into concrete
assistance on the ground.
The clock is ticking. Some $414 million are
immediately needed for humanitarian relief,
$1.2 billion for early recovery needs and $2.4 billion for
reconstruction efforts. More than 100,000 residents of
Gaza remain homeless, with over 50,000 still sheltering
in school buildings belonging to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East. Many still lack access to the municipal
water network. Blackouts of up to 18 hours per day are
common. Meanwhile, winter is approaching. I urge the
international community to move quickly to deliver
much-needed assistance.
Nothing could have prepared me for what I
witnessed in Gaza. I saw mile after mile of wholesale
destruction. I visited a United Nations school in the
Jabaliya refugee camp, which was shelled during the
hostilities. Civilians had sought protection under the
United Nations flag. Parents and children shared heartwrenching accounts of suffering and pain. I met a
young man whose brothers and sisters perished in the
blasts. He is now confined to a wheelchair, having lost
his legs.
I look forward to a thorough investigation by the
Israel Defense Forces of this and other incidents in
which United Nations facilities sustained hits and
many innocent people were killed. I am planning to
move forward with an independent board of inquiry
to look into the most serious of those cases, as well
as instances in which weaponry was found on United
Nations premises.
Israelis also suffered during the conflict. I
travelled to a kibbutz where I met the grieving family
of a four-year-old child named Daniel who was killed
by a Hamas rocket — another innocent victim of this
mindless conflict. As I said in Gaza, firing rockets is
unacceptable, and the rockets have brought nothing but
suffering. I also visited a tunnel built by militants to
launch attacks. I fully understand the security threat
to Israel from rockets above and tunnels below. At the

14-58091

21/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

same time, the scale of the destruction in Gaza has left
deep questions about proportionality and the need for
accountability.
Despite the harsh reality on the ground, I left Gaza
with a measure of hope. During my visit to Gaza, the
first supplies of urgently needed construction materials
entered Gaza under the temporary mechanism brokered
by my Special Coordinator. If implemented in good faith,
that mechanism can help bring stability to Gaza. I also
welcome Turkey’s offer of a ship to serve as a temporary
power plant, and Israel’s positive consideration of that
arrangement. That is the kind of action and cooperation
needed now to alleviate the situation in Gaza.

S/PV.7281

sites in Jerusalem. I take note of Prime Minister
Netanyahu’s personal assurance to me in Jerusalem
of his Government’s commitment to refraining from
altering policies with respect to the holy sites that have
been in place over many decades.
I am also concerned about mounting numbers of
attacks by settlers and others, as well as Israeli plans to
relocate some 7,000 Palestinian Bedouins, the majority
of whom are refugees, from their current locations in
the central West Bank, including in the strategic El area.
Such an action, if implemented in a forcible manner,
would be contrary to international human rights and
humanitarian law.

Palestinians are taking critical steps to forge a united
path to the future. That includes an intra-Palestinian
reconciliation agreement, followed by a historic
meeting in Gaza of the Cabinet of the Government of
national consensus. A united Palestinian Government
is beginning to take shape. During my visit, I met
with Prime Minister Hamdallah and his Cabinet in
Ramallah, and Deputy Prime Minister Abu-Amr and
several Ministers in Gaza to further underscore United
Nations support for a unified Palestinian leadership.

The cycle of build-and-destroy must end. The
international community cannot be expected to
continually pick up the pieces of another war and then
pick up the bill. As I said in Cairo, let this be the last
Gaza reconstruction conference. I welcome the planned
resumption of indirect ceasefire talks between Israel
and the Palestinians, under Egyptian auspices in Cairo.
I also recognize the positive steps taken by Israel to
ease restrictions on movement and trade in the West
Bank and Gaza. These must be further expanded.

The national consensus Government must be
consolidated so it can assume its rightful responsibilities
in Gaza, including deployment to the border crossings.
That is crucial, as effective management of Gaza’s
borders will facilitate the flow of construction
materials into Gaza and allow the restoration of
trade between Gaza and the West Bank. Civil and
administrative reform and other related issues must
also become a priority to help unify the two separate
strands of administration for the Gaza Strip. I welcome
the generous contribution of the Government of Qatar
and the Emir, His Highness Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad
Al-Thani, towards a one-time humanitarian payment
by the end of this month in Gaza for a number of civil
service employees.

But, as I repeated throughout my visit to the region,
there is no hope for long-term stability in Gaza without
addressing the underlying causes of the conflict: an end
to the occupation that has grinded on for nearly half a
century, a full lifting of the blockade on the Gaza Strip,
and effectively addressing Israel’s legitimate security
concerns. Ultimately, long-term stability will require a
comprehensive peace agreement leading to a viable and
independent Palestinian State. Leaders on both sides
must overcome their differences and dispense with
unilateral initiatives that serve only to fuel mistrust and
polarization. The two-State solution is the only viable
option for a durable peace. It is time for courage and
vision to make the tough compromises that are needed
now. I challenge both sides to rise to the occasion.

Notwithstanding the immediate needs in Gaza, the
situation in the West Bank demands renewed attention.
In my meetings in Jerusalem, I reiterated my deep
concerns about plans to construct residential housing
units in occupied East Jerusalem. International law is
clear — settlement activity is illegal. It runs totally
counter to the pursuit of a two-State solution. I urge the
Israeli Government to reverse these activities.

Allow me to take this opportunity to also say a few
words about Syria and Lebanon, neither of which can
be considered in isolation from the broader context.
On Syria, last week I called on all parties to step up to
protect civilians in the town of Ayn al-Arab/Kobani.
Ayn al-Arab/Kobani is just one of many places across
Syria where civilians are under imminent threat.

I also remain deeply concerned by unilateral
actions, restrictions and provocations at the holy

In addition to the barbarity of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant, or Daesh, the Syrian Government
continues to brutally and indiscriminately attack

14-580913/72

S/PV.7281

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

21/10/2014

populated areas, including with barrel bombs. Our
long-term strategic objective in Syria remains a
political solution based on the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex). A purely military response to the
vicious new threat posed by Daesh could ultimately
contribute to the radicalization of other Sunni armed
groups and spark a cycle of renewed violence. I urge the
Council to lend its full support to my Special Envoy’s
efforts to reduce the suffering of the Syrian people and
contribute to a political solution.

are grateful for his leadership of the United Nations
delegation to the Cairo International Conference on
Palestine, “Reconstructing Gaza”, and for his recent
visit to the State of Palestine, including to the Gaza
Strip, where he witnessed first-hand the massive
destruction and devastation wrought by the Israeli
military aggression in July and August and the
suffering that continues in the absence of real recovery,
reconstruction and sustainable solutions to core issues
of this conflict.

In Lebanon, I am troubled by a dangerous
escalation since the August attacks by Daesh and
Nusra Front on Arsal, and the latest fighting earlier
this month between the Nusra Front and Hizbullah
outside the town of Brital. I welcome the efforts of
Prime Minister Salam and Lebanese leaders to uphold
national unity. The Lebanese parties should urgently
demonstrate flexibility to open the way for the election
of a president of the Republic without further delay. In
this context, the challenge of the refugee presence in
Lebanon has become ever more complex. I welcome the
upcoming meeting of the International Support Group
for Lebanon in Berlin on 28 October.

We have long appealed for the Security Council
members to visit Palestine to see, unfiltered, these
realities and the grave injustice being endured by the
Palestinian people under Israeli occupation. We are
certain that this would better inform the Council’s
deliberations and compel greater resolve to contribute
to a viable solution through the implementation of the
Council’s resolutions and in line with its Charter duty
to ensure international peace and security. As noted
by the Secretary-General during his visit to Gaza,
“No amount of Security Council sessions, reports or
briefings could have prepared me for what I witnessed
today”. At this critical time, we again appeal for such
a visit by the Council, stressing the imperative of
salvaging the prospects for Palestinian-Israeli peace.

Finally, I would like to underscore the importance
of ensuring that calm continues to prevail along the
Blue Line. This is vital to the stability of Lebanon
and the region. I welcome the recommitment of both
Lebanon and Israel to their obligations under resolution
1701 (2006), and to cooperating fully with the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon.
I thank the members of the Council once again
for their attention. Let us work together to bring longsought peace and lasting stability to the people of the
Middle East.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I congratulate the
friendly country of Argentina on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council this month,
and express our appreciation, Madam, for your able
leadership of the Council’s efforts to address the many
critical issues on its agenda at this time.
I also express our appreciation to SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his important briefing and
deep gratitude for his dedicated peace efforts. We

4/72

The centrality of the United Nations in pursuit
of a peaceful solution is indisputable. The SecretaryGeneral’s expressions of solidarity and support
resonated deeply with our people, who recognize the
historic role of the United Nations in advocating for
justice and for the rights of the Palestinian people,
including the Palestine refugees, and who continue to
look to the United Nations to ease their hardships and
lead the way to a just, lasting and comprehensive peace.
We join the Secretary-General today in commending
the extraordinary work of the United Nations agencies
on the ground, which exerted valiant efforts during
the recent crisis in Gaza, including, inter alia, the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, UNICEF, the
United Nations Development Programme, the World
Health Organization, the World Food Programme and
the United Nations Mine Action Service, as well as
the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator,
led by Special Coordinator Robert Serry, to whom we
express appreciation for his role in facilitating the recent
agreement regarding access to and reconstruction in
the Gaza Strip.

14-58091

21/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Today, we also pay tribute to the eleven Palestinian
national staff of UNRWA who lost their lives during
the Israeli onslaught on Gaza. We honour their
selfless humanitarian service to their people and
convey our sincerest condolences to their families
and colleagues. We also memorialize the many others
of our humanitarian and medical personnel, as well
as journalists, who were killed while aiding others or
trying to give voice to the anguish of our people during
this criminal war.
Nearly two months ago, since the Israeli aggression
against Gaza ended, following the ceasefire reached on
26 August under the auspices of Egypt, the magnitude
of the carnage, terror and destruction inflicted continue
to weigh heavily, impacting every aspect of life and
fuelling despair and hopelessness. The SecretaryGeneral has described the toll as “beyond words”,
a sentiment repeatedly conveyed in the universal
expressions of disbelief and shame that such devastation
and trauma could again be inflicted on the Palestinian
people, and so cruelly, deliberately and systematically.
While all may know by now the figures, they merit
repeating in the Council, to be put in the official
record but also to impel a greater sense of urgency
for expediting recovery, including by the complete
lifting of the illegal Israeli blockade, which continues
to suffocate Gaza and impede efforts to alleviate the
humanitarian disaster and to expedite the long-overdue
solution to the conflict.
As of 26 August 2014, among the breaches of
international law amounting to war crimes committed
by Israel, the occupying Power, in its 50-day aggression
against Gaza are the following.
There were 2,180 Palestinians killed, the majority
civilians, among them 516 children and 283 women.
Among families, 142 lost three or more members
in the same incident, with a total of 739 people from
those families perishing, including in Israeli bombings
that flattened homes atop entire families. That fact
confirms in stark terms the excessive, indiscriminate
nature of Israel’s offensive and the abject failure to
protect civilians. The numbers also belie Israel’s claims
to the contrary, including false claims about human
shields. In that regard, I recall a statement by Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs KyungWha Kang at the height of the conflict, addressed to the
Human Rights Council special session on Gaza in July:
“Families are taking the heart-wrenching decision
to split to different locations — mother and son

S/PV.7281

to one, father and daughter to another — hoping
to maximize the chance one part of the family
survives”.
Our people were trying desperately to save themselves
from the Israeli war machine.
So far, 1,500 girls and boys have been orphaned.
More than 373,000 traumatized children require
psych-osocial support. More than 11,000 Palestinians
were injured, including 3,000 children, of them 1,000
disabled for life. Even now, victims of Israeli assaults
are dying due to the severity of their wounds or the lack
of life-saving medical treatment in Gaza. More than
half a million people were displaced at the height of
the aggression, the largest displacement of Palestinian
civilians since 1967. More than 80,000 homes were
damaged by the occupying forces, with 20,000 homes
either entirely destroyed or damaged beyond habitation.
To date, 108,000 people have been rendered homeless,
with more than 40,000 people continuing to shelter at
18 UNRWA schools.
More than 100 United Nations facilities were
damaged, including UNRWA schools, where civilians
believed they were safe under the United Nations flag,
yet where many lost their lives in abhorrent Israeli
attacks. In addition, 75 hospitals and clinics were
damaged and 23 health personnel were killed and
83 injured. More than 33,000 metres of water and waste
networks were damaged. The attack on the Gaza power
plant caused up to 22 hours a day of power outages, with
18-hour outages continuing due to lack of fuel, with
the many consequences for civilian life. At least 500
economic and industrial facilities, constituting 60 per
cent of Gaza’s production capacity, were destroyed,
directly and indirectly impacting more than 35,000 jobs.
Approximately 8,000 unexploded ordnance, 10 per cent
of the munitions launched by Israel at Gaza, remains
scattered in civilian areas, obstructing rubble removal
and reconstruction and endangering lives.
The same period witnessed the killing of at least
32 Palestinian civilians in violent and destructive raids
throughout the West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
and the arrest and detention of more than 800 civilians,
including children.
This list is not exhaustive and these facts alone
cannot convey the depth of our people’s misery
following this horrific war and our collective grief at the
immense loss of life and tragedy endured. As we seek to
move forward, we cannot ignore the pain of the families

14-580915/72

S/PV.7281

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

21/10/2014

who have lost and buried their loved ones and must do
all we can to heal the injured bodies, wounded souls
and broken spirits of those who remain. Serious efforts
are required to allay their suffering, but also to ensure
accountability for these crimes and give them hope for
the future. In that regard, I must clarify — tending to
the wounds of our people and seeking justice is neither
incitement nor provocation; rather, it is responsible,
moral behaviour and an absolute imperative to promote
genuine healing, without which peace and reconciliation
between the two peoples can ever be realized.

practices as the occupying Power continues its
attempts to illegally alter the demography, character,
identity and spirit of the Holy City with repeated
provocations at Al-Aqsa Mosque, threatening to deepen
polarizations and instigate a religious conflict, with
grave consequences, and paying no heed to the clear
sensitivities and volatility of the region. Armed settlers
persist with their terror rampages against Palestinian
civilians, just days ago killing a 5-year old Palestinian
girl, Inas Khalil, in addition to incessant attacks on our
land, mosques and churches.

Therefore, while we are grateful for the outpouring
of support and the generosity and the principled
commitments by donor countries in Cairo, and while
we reaffirm our gratitude to the Governments of Egypt
and Norway for their sponsorship of the Conference,
we reiterate whas was stressed by the UNRWA
Commissioner-General: “Nowhere in the world does
humanitarian assistance alone make up for the denial of
dignity and rights”. Palestine is not the exception. Hence,
while we seek to immediately address, in coordination
with the United Nations, urgent humanitarian and
reconstruction needs to restore dignity to the lives of
our people in Gaza, including by lifting the blockade
and consolidating the ceasefire, we will also act
resolutely, with the support of all concerned and
friendly countries, to ensure a broader political horizon
and mobilize the global will for political action to
justly, finally and peacefully resolve the conflict’s core
issues and to realize the legitimate national aspirations
and rights of the Palestinian people, including to selfdetermination and freedom.

While the international community appeals for
calm and restraint, Israeli officials are outbidding each
other with provocative declarations and incitement
against the Palestinian people and their Government.
I am sure we will hear such crude incitement in this
Chamber again today by the Israeli representative.

The time is past due to acknowledge that Israel,
the occupying Power, rejects peace and is deliberately
destroying the two-State solution and undermining
every effort to realize it. That is not the Palestinian
narrative; it is the reality confirmed over and over by
the actions of the Israeli Government and the words
of its representatives at the highest levels. On the
ground, Israel’s illegitimate and destructive colonial
project continues apace. As it did throughout the
nine months of United States Secretary of State John
Kerry’s sponsored negotiations, Israel persists with its
settlement construction, the construction of its apartheid
annexation wall, land confiscation, home demolitions
and forced displacement of civilians, including threats
to displace more than 12,000 Bedouins.
Occupied East Jerusalem and its Palestinian
inhabitants remain a primary target of those illegal

6/72

Just weeks ago, Prime Minister Netanyahu stood
before the General Assembly (see A/69/PV.17) extolling
the status quo and denying that there is an occupation;
and Israeli war minister Ya’alon has declared openly
that they will never allow the two-State solution and
blatantly exposed their intentions to force the Palestinian
people into isolated, disconnected Bantustans without
sovereignty and under Israel’s perpetual subjugation.
Those declarations and actions are predicated on the
erroneous notion that such an immoral, unjust outcome
would ever be accepted. We reiterate in response that
the Palestinian people will never forgo their inalienable
human rights, including to freedom, independence and
sovereignty, and they will never forgo justice and the
goal of peace.
We believe that the international community, too,
will never accept such an injustice. Our conviction
is firm that the international community will more
precisely continue to demand respect for international
law and for the consensus solution rooted in United
Nations resolutions, and will continue to advocate for
the realization of the rights of the Palestinian people
to defend the vulnerable and to seek peace and justice.
Here, we also reaffirm before the Council that
the Palestinian people and the Palestinian national
consensus Government, under the leadership of
President Mahmoud Abbas, remain fully committed
to peace and will continue to exert every effort, in
partnership and with the support of all concerned
countries, to achieve as soon as possible a just,
comprehensive and viable solution that will bring a
complete end to the Israeli occupation begun in 1967,
14-58091

21/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and achieve the independence of the State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side with
Israel in peace and security within recognized borders,
and a just solution for the Palestine refugee question, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 194 (III).
In that regard we reiterate the importance of the Arab
Peace Initiative and recognize the role of our Arab
brethren in supporting peace efforts.
If we are ever to attain those urgent objectives, we
cannot return to the same cycle of failed negotiations,
which are used by Israel only as a means to alleviate
international pressure and as a cover for its illegal
schemes to entrench, rather than end, its occupation.
How many times have our protestations against Israel’s
settlement activities and collective punishment of our
people, including the cruel blockade of Gaza, been
met with demands that we restrain ourselves to avoid
undermining the peace process?
The credibility of that process has been nullified
by Israel and it is high time to move beyond speaking
of the two-State solution in theory and time to act
forthwith to actualize it, before the small opportunity
that remains vanishes — an impending reality that is
widely acknowledged. We have therefore approached
the Security Council with the initiative of a draft
resolution reaffirming the parameters of the two-State
solution and delineating a time frame for an end to the
47-year Israeli military occupation of Palestinian land,
including East Jerusalem, and for the attainment of
the independence and rights of the Palestinian people.
As affirmed by President Abbas before the General
Assembly, we are committed to that peaceful, political,
non-violent, legal path to achieve our rights and
establish peace and security.
The elements of the draft resolution are based
fully on the provisions of relevant Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions comprising the
foundation of a lasting peace settlement. Moreover,
the draft calls for a cessation of Israel’s illegal policies
and practices; its compliance with international law,
including humanitarian and human rights law; and
the protection of the Palestinian people, which are
imperative for reducing tensions, promoting calm
and creating the appropriate environment and level of
trust required for the conduct of genuine, accelerated
negotiations to end the occupation and resolve the core
issues.
We reiterate our call on the members of the
Security Council and the international community

S/PV.7281

to support the initiative and the approach to reaffirm
the fundamental parameters for a just solution, and
to inject new momentum into the efforts to achieve
lasting peace and security between the Palestinian
and Israeli peoples. We urge all States to uphold their
responsibilities — collectively here at the United
Nations and as high contracting parties to the Geneva
Conventions, as well as individually — to back the
efforts towards making peace a reality.
In that regard, we express gratitude to Sweden for its
principled announcement regarding recognition of the
State of Palestine as well as the motions on recognition
put forward by the Parliaments of the United Kingdom
and Spain, and we encourage those who have not yet
recognized the existence of our State to do so as a
legitimate and necessary contribution to peace.
In closing, to our people in occupied Palestine, in
the refugee camps of Jordan, Lebanon and Syria, and
the Diaspora, we reiterate our resolve to end their plight
and to ensure their rights, national aspirations and wellbeing. We recall the question posed by President Abbas
at the Cairo Conference:
“Has the time not come for righteousness and
justice to prevail in Palestine? Has the time not
come for the historic injustice against our people
to end?”
We believe that the time has come, and we appeal
to the international community for all possible support
to our efforts to realize those noble, long-overdue
objectives.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Roet (Israel): I congratulate you, Madam
President, on the Argentine presidency of the Security
Council this month and thank you for presiding over
today’s important debate and for your country’s almost
two years of service to the Security Council. I also
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing,
which we highly appreciate.
Albert Einstein once said that the world was a
dangerous place to live not because of people who
were evil, but because of people who did nothing
about it. There is no question that the world is a
dangerous place to live. What many fail to realize is
that it will remain dangerous — and become even more
dangerous — unless we address the real root causes
of this violence and instability, namely, the poisonous
ideology of extremism.

14-580917/72

S/PV.7281

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

As we speak, violent radical groups are waging
a brutal and aggressive war in order to challenge the
existing world order. It is no accident that the most
dangerous extremist groups operate in the Middle East,
a region plagued by intolerance and tyranny. They are
taking advantage of the area’s instability to advance their
narrow interests and return the region to the Dark Ages.
While many nations struggle to combat terrorist
groups that are thousands of kilometres and oceans
away, Israel finds those threats on its doorstep. The
State of Israel is the only democracy between the Red
Sea and the Caspian Sea. We have built a society based
on democracy, freedom of speech, freedom of worship,
the rule of law and the equal rights of all people. Those
are the values that the United Nations was built upon
and they are the values that the Organization should
be upholding. And yet, as I listen to members of the
international community speak about the root causes
of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, it is clear that those
values are not always the ones being championed.
Madam President, how many times have you
heard it said that the root cause of the conflict is the
“occupation”? And how many times have you heard that
Hamas fires rockets into Israel to oppose the occupation?
It simply is not true — because Israel does not occupy
Gaza. In 2005, Israel turned every inch of Gaza over
to the Palestinians. We uprooted thousands of families
from their homes and dismantled their businesses. We
opened border crossings and encouraged commerce
because we wanted Gaza to succeed — for our sake
and for the sake of the Palestinians. We hoped that it
would serve as a model for two societies living side by
side in peace. But it has not done that. Instead, Hamas
has sought to fulfil the mission stated in its Charter,
namely, that of destroying the State of Israel.
Some have also suggested that settlements are the
root cause of the conflict. There are many threats in our
region, but the presence of Jewish homes in the Jewish
homeland has never been one of them. From 1948 until
1967, the West Bank was part of Jordan and Gaza
was part of Egypt — and throughout that time, our
neighbours still sought our destruction. Nonetheless,
some in the international community continue to cling
to old myths. How many times have you heard, Madam
President, that the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is the
central conflict in the Middle East, that if you solve that
conflict, you solve all the other conflicts in the region?
Make no mistake, it is important for Israel and
the Palestinians to resolve our long-standing dispute.

8/72

21/10/2014

It is important on its own merits so that Israelis and
Palestinians alike can lead peaceful, secure and
prosperous lives. But that can only be done through
direct negotiation. As much as I look forward to the day
when we will make peace, 1 can assure you, Madam
President, that when that day comes, the Middle
East will not magically transform into a stable and
peaceful place. Hizbullah will not surrender its tens of
thousands of rockets, the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant will not join the Peace Corps and stop recruiting
new jihadists, and Hamas will not amend its charter to
recognize the existence of the State of Israel.
President John F. Kennedy said that the great
enemy of the truth was very often not the lie, but
the myth — persistent, persuasive and unrealistic.
Therefore, what are the real underlying causes of the
instability in our region?
The first root cause is Hamas, an organization
committed to the destruction of the State of Israel.
Hamas — an extremist terrorist organization — rejects
our very existence. It believes that Israel has no right
to exist within any borders. Some in the international
community are willing to admit this fundamental fact
behind closed doors, but rarely will they acknowledge
it in public meetings.
Millions of Israeli families spent the summer
months this year running for shelter from the thousands
of rockets fired intentionally and indiscriminately by
Hamas towards our cities and towns. Communities
near Gaza were horrified to learn that their homes and
schools were steps from Hamas’ vast network of terror
tunnels. No nation, no Government could be expected
to stand by as its people are the target of rocket attacks,
kidnappings or terrorist plots. In the face of those
unrelenting threats, we were left with no choice but to
defend our citizens.
Israel did everything it could to safeguard innocent
lives, taking steps beyond those required under
international law. We accepted ceasefire after ceasefire,
we aborted missions to save lives and, before launching
attacks, we dropped leaflets, sent text messages and
made phone calls. What other country goes to those
lengths to protect civilians?
Hamas’ modus operandi is to exploit its innocent
civilians and endanger its own people. There is no
site in Gaza that Hamas deemed off limits — not
ambulances which were used to transport terrorists,
not private homes where Israeli forces discovered

14-58091

21/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

explosives beside a baby crib, not hospitals that were
used as terrorist command centres, and certainly not
schools administered by the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
which were turned into rocket storehouses and where,
from just steps away, terrorists fired rockets.
Despite all of that, Israel — and Israel alone — is
singled out, scrutinized and criticized. At the Cairo
Conference many nations had a great deal to say about
Israel’s policies and actions, but they could not even
bring themselves to mention Hamas by name.
A second real root cause of the conflict is the
unilateral steps that distance us from peace. There are
no shortcuts when it comes to making peace. Making
peace requires courageous leaders — leaders who speak
about partnership and denounce prejudice; leaders who
embrace tolerance and reject terrorism; leaders who
believe in cooperation instead of conflict. When Israel
faced a leader willing to make peace, we made peace.
That was the case with President Sadat of Egypt and it
was the case with King Hussein of Jordan.
In his remarks to the General Assembly last month,
President Abbas delivered a hate-fuelled attack that
accused Israel of the worst crimes, including racism
and genocide (see A/69/PV.12). Just a few days ago, he
called on the Palestinians to prevent Jews from visiting
the Temple Mount in Jerusalem, through the use of
“all means necessary”. Are those the words of a man
committed to making peace? Does that sound like a
leader willing to make painful compromises? Or is that
more incitement and intolerance?
Making peace requires compromise and hard
choices. The remarks made earlier by the Palestinian
observer offer another example of the tendency of
the Palestinians to point fingers instead of taking
responsibility. His remarks touched on many things, but
failed to address the important issues. And so I ask him,
“why do you not condemn Hamas for using your own
people as human shields? Why do you not denounce
Hamas for stealing from the Palestinian people to buy
rockets and build terror tunnels? Why do you pursue
destructive unilateral actions rather than constructive
bilateral efforts?”
The same message should be conveyed to the
international community. Supporting Palestinian
unilateral steps does not advance the cause of peace. By
prematurely recognizing a State of Palestine, European
Governments are sending a message that Palestinians
do not need to make hard choices and may thereby be

S/PV.7281

undermining efforts to bring about a real and lasting
change in our region.
The United Nations must also play its part.
The selection of William Schabas to chair the Gaza
commission of inquiry is just one more example of
the anti-Israel bias that pervades the Organization.
Mr. Schabas’s agenda is clear. He has repeatedly
called for the prosecution of Israeli leaders, saying,
“My favourite would be Netanyahu within the dock of
the International Criminal Court”. It is obvious that
Mr. Schabas is not impartial, and yet he refuses to recuse
himself. If Mr. Schabas does not have the integrity
to do what is right, then it is up to the international
community to step in.
Israel does not shy away from accepting
responsibility, but cannot be expected to abide by a
commission that has predetermined the outcome of
its inquiry. Israel understands that the examination
of its policies is a fundamental part of the democratic
process. For that reason, in the early days of Operation
Protective Edge, Israel established a fact-finding
mechanism in accordance with international law to
investigate exceptional incidents. Those incidents
include, among others, cases which resulted in harm to
civilians or damage to civil or United Nations facilities.
As a democracy, Israel upholds and abides by
the rule of law. We would hope that the international
community would support us in this effort. Premature
and unfounded accusations serve no purpose other than
to inflame tensions in the region.
Israel is committed to partnership with the
international community to advance peace and develop
the Palestinian economy. We have already approved a
three-phase plan to address the Palestinians’ economic
and construction needs and improve the access and
movement of people and goods. Last week, 600 tons of
cement and 60 trucks of construction aggregates and
iron were transferred into Gaza to begin reconstruction
efforts. Furthermore, all projects submitted by the
international community and the Palestinian Authority
have already been approved.
Now that a ceasefire is holding, we must consider
how to bring about a lasting and sustained period of
quiet for the people of both Gaza and Israel. Only the
demilitarization of Gaza can guarantee a durable and
sustained ceasefire between Israel and the Palestinians.
Many in the international community are quick to
denounce Israel’s actions but are blind to one simple

14-580919/72

S/PV.7281

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

fact: if Hamas is allowed to acquire more weapons, it
will use them. We have been at this crossroads before.
Over the years, Hamas has stolen hundreds of millions
of aid dollars intended for development to build its
military capabilities and terror infrastructure.
This time must be different. This time there must be
proper oversight to ensure that all funds and materials
reach their intended destination. This time we must
ensure that Hamas does not stockpile more rockets
and build more terror tunnels. To that end, Israel
welcomes the tripartite mechanism for rehabilitating
the Gaza Strip. Working together, we can build a strong
Palestinian economy while building bridges towards
peace. That will be possible only through partnership,
cooperation and direct negotiation. Unilateral actions
are not a step forward; they are a step in the wrong
direction.
The third root cause is States sponsors of terrorism.
As the international community comes together to
fight the threat posed by radical extremist groups, it
should not lose sight of the even greater threat looming
on the horizon: a nuclear Iran. The horrific death and
destruction we are seeing today in our area pales in
comparison to the devastation that would unfold if the
world’s most dangerous regime were to get its hands on
the world’s most dangerous weapons. The international
community has realized the need for a robust strategy
that will contain the threat posed by terrorist groups
such as Daesh. The same thinking is needed with State
sponsors of terror such as Iran.
The nuclear deal that is currently on the table allows
Iran’s nuclear infrastructure, knowledge and ambitions
to remain intact. That is a dangerous mistake. The
international community must see Iran for what it is:
a ruthless and repressive regime that is determined to
acquire nuclear weapons.
It has been over a year since Hassan Rouhani
became President of Iran. He came to power promising
to tackle corruption, grant freedoms and defend
minorities. Now, one year later, what exactly has
changed? According to a United Nations report issued
in March, religious minorities in Iran still face rampant
discrimination. In particular, “Iranian authorities at
the highest levels have designated house churches and
evangelical Christians as threats to national security”
(A/HRC/25/61, para. 40).
What does it say when a nation is desperate to
acquire weapons of mass destruction, but regards
churchgoers as weapons of “Sunday Mass” destruction?
10/72

21/10/2014

In the year since Rouhani was elected President, has
Iran reformed its justice system? Not in the least. Every
month, dozens of Iranians are hanged from cranes in
public squares, and hundreds of political prisoners are
beaten and tortured. Are the Iranian people in any way
freer or happier? It turns out that even being happy is
a crime in Iran. Just days after Rouhani denounced
Internet censorship as “cowardly”, six young Iranians
were arrested for creating a YouTube video in which
they sang and danced about being happy. Rouhani may
smile happily for the cameras, but Iran’s own citizens
are denied that privilege.
For decades, Iran has funded hundreds of terror
campaigns that have taken thousands of innocent
lives in Africa, Europe, Latin America and the
Middle East. In Syria, Iran has sent its Revolutionary
Guards to fight alongside Al-Assad’s forces and spent
billions sustaining the bloody civil war that has taken
almost 200,000 lives. In Lebanon, the Iranian-backed
Hizbullah terrorist group has built a militia larger and
stronger than many armies.
For years, we alerted the international community
to the fact that illegal arms continued to flow into
southern Lebanon. We warned that Hizbullah was
amassing tens of thousands of rockets and missiles. We
were met with silence. That is the same response we
received when we reported that Syria was arming itself
with chemical weapons and Hamas was smuggling
thousands of rockets into Gaza.
Will the Council continue to remain silent as
Hizbullah escalates its attacks on Israel? Two weeks
ago, three improvised explosive devices were detonated
on the Israeli side of the Blue Line. Shortly after the
attack, Hizbullah claimed responsibility for planting
the devices. This is not the first incident of this nature.
Earlier this year, Hizbullah leader Nasrallah admitted
his organization’s responsibility for planting a roadside
bomb in the vicinity of Mount Dov.
Before the situation deteriorates any further, the
Security Council must demand that the Lebanese
Government fully abide by Security Council resolution
1701 (2006) and deploy its armed forces to prevent
any further attacks before it is too late. Israel will not
tolerate any attack on its sovereignty and will act to
protect its territory and its citizens. The citizens of
Israel want to live in peace. There is nothing we want
more. Israelis envision the day when we can live free
from divisions, hatred and violence. But making peace
requires courageous action.
14-58091

21/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The international community must lead by example
and confront the real root causes of the instability
plaguing the Middle East. It must stand firm against
the jihadist groups that are spreading the poison of
radical extremism throughout our region. In the coming
months, our values and our resolve will be tested time
and again. We must stand firm, because the safety of
our citizens and global security are at stake.
The global community has been clear about its
opposition to Daesh, Al-Qaida and Boko Haram, but
that same determination must be shown with respect
to Hamas and Hizbullah, which share the same
dangerous and radical views. It is time to speak out
clearly and unequivocally, to call on President Abbas
and the Palestinian Authority to denounce Hamas, stop
the anti-Israel incitement and take constructive steps
towards peace. That is the only way to ensure that all of
our children can inherit a more open, more tolerant and
more peaceful planet.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now give
the floor to the members of the Security Council.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I, too,
would like to thank the Secretary-General for joining
us today and for briefing us on his recent trip to the
region.
We are living in a time of tremendous turmoil
in the Middle East, a time that demands brave and
decisive leadership by both regional leaders and the
international community. Across the region we see
the need for hard choices. In Syria, the international
community must summon the collective resolve to stop
the Al-Assad regime’s monstrous atrocities as well as
the horrors of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) and find a political solution to the conflict. In
Lebanon and Iraq, political leaders must strengthen
the institutions necessary to honour the aspirations
of their people and to defeat violent extremist threats.
And Israeli and Palestinian leaders must recognize that
there is no alternative to a negotiated peace and invest
the political will to build it. I will discuss each of those
critical issues today in turn.
We have seen how failures in leadership can help
foster the conditions in which extremist groups thrive.
By failing to make the hard choices necessary to address
the grievances of its Sunni population, Iraq’s former
leaders helped to create conditions that ISIL exploited.
The consequences have been horrifying. To cite just
one example, earlier this month ISIL announced strict

S/PV.7281

rules on what can be taught in universities in Mosul,
one of the cities it now controls. When Iraqi university
professors rejected those restrictions and boycotted,
ISIL declared that any professor who did not return to
work would be executed.
More than three years ago, Bashar Al-Assad lost
the legitimacy to lead when he responded to peaceful
protests with brutal violence. Atrocities committed
by his regime — atrocities of the kind and scale the
world has rarely seen — played a key role in spurring
the emergence of ISIL and other terrorist groups, and
Al-Assad’s indiscriminate attacks on his own people
continue to this day.
In September, the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) released its second
report, which found “compelling confirmation that a
toxic chemical was used as a weapon systematically
and repeatedly” in three opposition-held villages in
northern Syria. The OPCW concluded with confidence
that chlorine was used. Witnesses described the attacks
as being carried out by helicopters, which only the
Al-Assad regime possesses.
The consequences of Al-Assad’s actions have
been staggering — more than 200,000 Syrians killed
and nearly 11 million Syrians in need of humanitarian
assistance. Yet despite the valiant efforts of international
humanitarian groups, United Nations agencies and
others, the Al-Assad regime is deliberately obstructing
the delivery of crucial assistance to millions of people
in dire need. The regime declares itself the antidote to
the horrors of ISIL, but its chemical and barrel bomb
attacks and its use of starvation as a tool of war are
every bit as indifferent to the fate of innocents and
every bit as grotesque.
One community subjected to the Al-Assad regime’s
merciless attacks has been that of the Palestinians in the
refugee camp of Yarmouk, which the regime has sealed
since July 2013. The 18,000 residents who remain there
have been relying on untreated ground water and a
single well for drinking water for nearly a month. Just
yesterday a spokesman for the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNWRA) issued a statement that began “UNWRA
was not cleared to distribute humanitarian assistance
in Yarmouk today, 20 October”. The day before,
UNWRA’s statement began “UNWRA was not cleared
to distribute humanitarian assistance in Yarmouk
today, 19 October.” UNWRA notes that, since July this
year, there has been a steady and significant decline in

14-5809111/72

S/PV.7281

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the quantity of food and other essential items, such as
medicine, that the Agency has been able to offer to the
Palestinians in Yarmouk. That on any day — let alone
so many days — the Al-Assad regime is not allowing
aid to flow to the Palestinians suffering in Yarmouk
shows extreme cruelty. The international community
must be more vocal in its condemnation of those
unspeakable tactics. And when the Syrian Government
hails its leadership, on behalf of the Palestinian people,
they should be reminded by all of us of the people living
in Yarmouk.
There are 3 million Syrians who have fled to
neighbouring countries to escape the regime’s and
extremist groups’ violence, up to 80 per cent of them
women and children. The threat posed by ISIL is felt
across the region, but especially in Iraq and Syria.
Foreign fighters and Syrian nationals, who have
been recruited and trained to fight in ISIL and other
terrorist groups, pose a threat to countries far from
the battlefield. Among the countries most severely
impacted are Iraq and Lebanon. For example, 180,000
Iraqis fled the city of Heet, in Anbar province, as it fell
to ISIL in recent weeks. They are among an estimated
1.8 million Iraqis displaced just this year. Lebanon has
taken in 1.2 million Syrian refugees, over a quarter of
the country’s population, placing immense pressure on
its already strained resources.
We know what we must do. We must defeat ISIL
and other terrorist groups; we must hold accountable
all those in the Al-Assad regime responsible for
its widespread attrocities and we must mitigate the
suffering of the Syrian people. But we wholeheartedly
agree with the Secretary-General that a political
solution is absolutely essential to address the root
causes of extremism in Syria and to address the
legitimate aspirations and grievances of its people. A
political solution is not an enshrinement of the status
quo. The majority of Syrians will not accept being
ruled by a regime that has used sarin and chlorine to
suppress its own people. We commend the efforts of
United Nations Special Envoy for Syria Staffan de
Mistura, who is working urgently to build support for
a political solution by engaging multiple stakeholders.
The Special Envoy met with a representative of Iran
over the weekend and is meeting with a representative
of Russia today — countries whose influence will be
critical to reaching a long-sought solution.
Given the massive suffering that Syria’s crisis is
causing the threat it poses to our collective security,

12/72

21/10/2014

leaders in the region must be part of the efforts to forge
a political solution. But regional leaders also must
address problems closer to home, which impact the
rights of their people and are a source of the suffering,
disenfranchisement and intolerance that feed groups
like ISIL. Yet some leaders still choose to put shortterm interests ahead of the tough decisions needed to
best serve their people. Others take devisive steps when
they could instead build consensus. The international
community stands ready to help address the regions
challenges, but we need partners to exert the political
will and courage to seek real solutions.
In Iraq, newly elected leaders must break from the
sectarian style of leadership that defined the tenure of
the Al-Maliki Government and build institutions that
represent the whole nation, rather than advancing one
groups interest at the expense of another’s. In Lebanon,
the position of president has been vacant for nearly
five months during a time when the country faces
considerable security, economic and humanitarian
challenges. Lebanon’s political leaders must come
together urgently to select a president.
We have seen leaders within those countries
willing to choose unity over division and to make great
sacrifices for their people. In August, the Lebanese
Armed Forces and internal security forces fought
bravely to defend the city of Arsal from extremists.
They served and died for their country, not for any
one religious sect. In Iraq, Prime Minister Al Abadi
is taking steps to form a more inclusive Government,
establishing the country’s first complete cabinet since
2010. He is also moving towards decentralizing power
and granting greater authority to provinces.
Real leadership is also required to advance IsraeliPalestinian peace. The most recent wave of violence,
was devastating — both in terms of its enormous
human toll and because it was avoidable. Preventing
another round of violence requires leaders who are
willing to make difficult choices and commit to the hard
work of negotiations. We commend Egypt for helping
broker a ceasefire agreement. The Gaza reconstruction
conference raised $5.4 billion and reaffirmed the
international community’s commitment to rebuilding
the lives of Palestinians in Gaza, who have suffered
so much during and since the recent crisis. The United
States is providing $212 million in assistance to the
Palestinian people for relief and reconstruction, atop of
the $118 million announced in September. Of course, as
has been said, aid and assistance cannot produce peace

14-58091

21/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7281

in the Middle East. Leadership and compromise are
needed. For reconstruction not to be required again in
the future there must be a real change on the ground.
Even the most durable of ceasefires is not a substitute
for real security for Israel or for an independent State
for the Palestinians.

to accelerate reconstruction efforts, including by
implementing the United Nations mechanisms agreed
with the Palestinian Authority and Israel to allow the
import of construction materials. Urgent progress
is also needed to improve access to electricity, clean
water and sanitation.

That is only more difficult to achieve when both
sides continue to take actions that may be politically
popular with domestic constituencies, but that come
at the expense of advancing the cause of peace. We
continue to urge all parties to refrain from such actions,
including unilateral steps at the United Nations, Israeli
settlement activity and provocations at the Temple
Mount/Haram Al-Sharif, where we urge all sides to
respect the status quo of the holy site.

This conflict in Gaza, the third in six years,
underlines that a return to the status quo is unacceptable.
Why should the international community spend billions
of dollars rebuilding Gaza when there is no guarantee
that it will not be destroyed again within a few years?
There must be rapid progress towards a durable
ceasefire that ends the cycle of violence and addresses
Israel’s legitimate security concerns. The ceasefire
should be underpinned by a comprehensive monitoring
and verification mechanism that provides guarantees to
both sides. It is crucial that the Palestinian Authority
return to Gaza and restore effective and accountable
governance, capable of providing people with services
and security.

The United States remains fully committed to
achieving a negotiated final status agreement allowing
two States to live side by side in peace and security.
That is the only viable way forward and, if the parties
are willing to go down that path and are genuinely
dedicated to the hard work of peace, we stand ready to
support them. Together we can and must support those
taking the courageous steps to strengthen the Middle
East in these immensely troubling times. The cause of
peace in the region and the dignity of its people depend
on it.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and
the representatives of Israel and Palestine for their
statements.
One of the consistent themes of the speeches heard
in the high-level debate in the General Assembly
last month was grave concern about the situation in
the Middle East. Violence and conflict in the region
continue to present the international community with
many challenges — challenges that this Council has a
responsibility to address.
The conflict in Gaza this summer was a grim
reminder of the devastating toll of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict on the lives of ordinary civilians.
The international community must act with urgency
to help the people of Gaza get back on their feet and
begin the hard work of reconstruction. We welcome the
$5.4 billion pledged towards the reconstruction of Gaza
and commend the efforts of Egypt and Norway to rally
international support for reconstruction efforts.
The humanitarian situation in Gaza must be the
immediate priority. The parties must move quickly

We continue to have serious concerns about
deteriorating conditions on the ground in the occupied
Palestinian territories. We deplore Israel’s recent
decisions to advance settlement plans in Givat Hamatos
and plans to expropriate land near Bethlehem. We
are deeply concerned about an impending decision
by Israeli to proceed with proposals to relocate the
Bedouin population from around the sensitive E1 area.
We urge the Government of Israel to change course now
and to reverse those plans.
We are also concerned about tensions at the Haram
al-Sharif/Temple Mount compound in Jerusalem
in recent weeks and urge the Israeli and Jordanian
authorities to work together in order to stabilize the
situation.
We are clear that the best way for both Israeli and
Palestinian families to live without fear of further
violence is agreement on a comprehensive negotiated
solution without delay. The United Kingdom will
continue to work closely with international partners to
support efforts towards a negotiated solution that will
deliver an independent Palestinian State alongside a
safe and secure Israel. We urge all parties to make the
difficult choices required for meaningful progress.
We continue to witness appalling violence in Syria.
While an international coalition has been trying to save
Kobani from falling into the hands of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), the Al-Assad regime has

14-5809113/72

S/PV.7281

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

continued it murderous policy of indiscriminate attacks
and aerial bombardments on Syria’s civilian population,
including around Aleppo and Damascus.
There should be no doubt that Al-Assad cannot be
part of the solution to the crisis in Syria. There needs
to be a Government in Damascus that enjoys legitimacy
in the eyes of the Syrian people and credibility with
the international community and that can take effective
action against extremism. For as long as Al-Assad
remains in power, there will be no peace in Syria.
We strongly support the efforts of the United Nations
Special Representative and urge all parties to work
towards a Syrian-led political transition.
In Iraq, the security situation remains very serious,
with ISIL maintaining control of significant swathes
of territory. It has made advances in Anbar province
in recent days, including taking control of the city
of Hit and attacking the provincial capital, Ramadi.
Liberating that territory from ISIL will take months
and years, not days and weeks, and the horrific effects
of ISIL on governance, security and Iraqi society
will be felt for even longer. We welcome Prime
Minister Al Abadi’s steps towards the formation of a
Government of national reconciliation. To preserve the
integrity of the Iraqi State, its Government must commit
to a more inclusive approach to the decentralization of
power to Iraq’s communities and to a more equitable
sharing of Iraq’s natural-resource wealth.
It is vital now that all parties in Iraq have the
courage to build bridges to each other, in particular to
appeal to the Sunni populations who are living under,
and in some cases acquiescing in, ISIL’s brutal regime
and who must be brought back into the political fold if
ISIL is to be comprehensively defeated.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Jordan
has repeatedly warned about the repercussions of
the stalemate in the Palestinian territory and the dire
consequences of the deadlock in the efforts to realize
peace on the basis of the two-State solution. The world
has seen how that has led to bloody conflict, taking
a high toll among Palestinian civilians. Due to the
illegal, unilateral practices of Israel, today we find
ourselves once again on the threshold of yet another
bloody confrontation threatening innocence civilians,
jeopardizing peace and stability in the region and
exacerbating the feelings of frustration and despair.
Israel’s desecration of the sanctity of the Haram
al-Sharif, the Noble Sanctuary, has escalated recently,

14/72

21/10/2014

following the ceasefire in Gaza. That points to one
thing: that Israel is determined to incite and provoke
Arabs and Muslims by any means possible. Israel
knows all too well that the Noble Sanctuary, Al-Quds
al-Sharif, is a red line for more than 1.5 billion people
in the world. They will not remain silent with regard
to such violations. Israel’s actions are incompatible
with the pursuit of peace and security for its citizens,
because such acts put Israel in direct confrontation with
the Arab and Islamic world.
Last March we warned the Council against such
acts. We clarified how they are illegitimate and
explicitly contravene the provisions of international
humanitarian law. East Jerusalem is an occupied
territory, as recognized by the international community.
Israel is the occupying Power, as per resolutions of
the Security Council and General Assembly and the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
on the Legal consequences of the construction of a wall
in the occupied Palestinian territory.
The unilateral actions of Israel, including those
undertaken in the Noble Sanctuary, will not change
the status quo. Israel must therefore cease forthwith all
of its acts of provocation and deliberate policies that
seek to create a new fait accompli. The detention of
Muslims at prayer and preventing them from entering
the Sanctuary, committing acts of aggression against
them and against officers of the Endowment authorities,
humiliating them and allowing Israeli political and
religious extremists to attack them under the protection
of Israeli police, allowing them to desecrate the
Sanctuary ‑ all those acts are violations of the rules of
international law, and the Hague Regulations of 1907.
The international community in general, and
the Security Council in particular, should therefore
shoulder their responsibilities to put an end to Israeli
acts of aggression against the Noble Sanctuary. Should
such acts continue, they would result in unqualified
disaster, threatening international peace and security.
On the basis of the historic Hashemite guardianship of
the holy sites in Jerusalem held in trust by His Majesty
King Abdullah II ibn Al-Hussein, and Jordan’s special
historic role in relation to the holy Islamic shrines,
recognized by Israel in article 9 of the peace agreement,
Jordan will continue to address and respond to Israeli
violations in the Noble Sanctuary through all available
diplomatic and political means. We will continue to
work to preserve, protect and prevent the undermining
of the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque, the Dome of the Rock and

14-58091

21/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

other such sanctuaries. We hope that the message is
clear to anyone who may cast doubt on the status of the
noble sanctuary Al-Haram Al-Sharif and on the status
of Arabs and Muslims in general and Palestinians and
Jordanians in particular.
Geographically, the Gaza Strip and the occupied
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, are a single,
integral unit and the territory on which an independent,
fully sovereign Palestinian State would be built, in
accordance with the terms of the peace process and the
Arab Peace Initiative, including all its elements. We
therefore welcome the significant talks on Palestine
and rebuilding Gaza hosted by the Arab Republic of
Egypt. We emphasize that Jordan, at the direction of
His Majesty King Abdullah, continues to provide
political and humanitarian support and assistance for
our brothers in Palestine, including the steadfast men
and women of the Gaza Strip, who have been so hard
hit by events. The Jordanian field hospital has worked
non-stop to treat the injured, and our hospitals have
also received many citizens of the Gaza Strip critically
injured during the act of aggression. Our Hashemite
charity organization has deployed humanitarian and
relief convoys to the Strip, and we will be sending more
than 2,000 mobile-home units for families that have
been displaced.
We stress how important it is that the Security
Council recognize the Palestinians’ legitimate right
to live in dignity and ensure that a framework is put
in place so that the occupation can be ended and a
Palestinian State established. In that regard, we should
emphasize that the main guarantee that the recent
bloody events are not repeated would be by making
the two-State solution a reality through a resumption
of negotiations designed to make that happen. The
negotiations should be serious, robust and held to
standards for producing results within a limited time
frame. They should be accompanied by a complete halt
to unilateral or illegal measures, which could obstruct,
undermine and even preempt the negotiations through
attempts to change the status quo or the legal status
of the Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem,
or through efforts to target holy Islamic or Christian
shrines in Jerusalem, particularly the noble sanctuary
and the Al-Aqsa Mosque at its heart.
Jordan would like to emphasize the importance
of arriving at a political solution to the crisis in Syria,
ending the bloodshed and providing a political transition
compatible with the Syrian people’s legitimate

S/PV.7281

aspirations. It should restore peace and stability in
Syria and establish a welcoming environment for
refugees returning home. Jordan also stands with Iraq
in its pursuit of stability and security and its efforts to
maintain its territorial integrity. We encourage all the
Iraqi political forces to be involved in a comprehensive
political process that allows them to share in
decision-making and improves unity and the potential
for national reconciliation among the Iraqi people.
In Jordan we fight terrorism and terrorists, and
those who advocate for or support them. We strive to
block their sources of financing and work to address
the risks of terrorism and extremism, particularly
through initiatives aimed at promoting dialogue among
religions, cultures and civilizations. We try to explain
the true tenets of the noble religion of Islam, and in that
context I would like to recall the message of Amman
and many of the other conferences that have been held
on this subject. Our fundamental focus is on fighting
extremist thought in all its forms and manifestations.
We stand at the forefront of international and regional
efforts to fight terrorism and extremism. Doing so,
in our view, constitutes protecting Jordan’s national
interests, because we are against terrorism that targets
us or perpetrates crimes on our territory or against our
citizens.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the Secretary-General’s
participation in today’s open debate and his report
on his visit to the region. Perhaps the time has come
to implement Russia’s proposal of four years ago to
establish a Security Council mission to Palestine and
Israel. If that initiative had not been blocked at the time
by a particular member of the Council, who knows if
perhaps the current surge in violence might not have
been avoided?
We listened attentively to the statements by the
representatives of Palestine and Israel, which did not,
unfortunately but not surprisingly, give indications for
hope. The current situation in the Middle East is hardly
very propitious to a relaunch of the peace process. As
has happened more than once in the past decade, the
Israeli-Palestinian talks begun last year under American
auspices have reached a dead end. Israel continues
to expropriate Palestinian lands, thus reducing the
chances of arriving at a just two-State solution. The
situation is aggravated by the expansion of settlements
in the West Bank and particularly in East Jerusalem.
The recent events surrounding the Al-Aqsa Mosque

14-5809115/72

S/PV.7281

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

are seriously worrying. We urge both sides to exercise
maximum restraint and to refrain from unilateral action
on a problem that touches the feelings of millions of the
faithful around the world.
At the same time, we must all recognize that there is
no alternative to negotiations. The Russian Federation
supports continuing the indirect contacts between
Palestinian and Israeli representatives in Cairo, with
Egypt playing an active role with the goal of reaching an
agreement on regulating the situation around Gaza for
the long term. We believe that within the framework of
the Cairo contacts it is essential that an understanding
be reached that excludes any relapse into escalation in
the future. That task would be assisted by a resumption
of full-on Palestinian-Israeli talks on final status issues
for the Palestinian territories.
Today we are focusing on the serious humanitarian
effects of the tragedy that has been playing out in Gaza.
We welcome the decision to allocate $5.4 billion to the
reconstruction sector’s needs, made during the course
of the international donor conference held in Egypt
on 12 October and in which Russia also participated.
If Gaza’s ruined infrastructure is to be rebuilt, it is
essential that the ceasefire regime be strictly observed
and that all agreements on goods access to the area
under United Nations auspices be fulfilled.
It is vital in that regard that the authority of the
Palestinian Government of national unity extend over
the whole of Palestinian territory, including the Gaza
Strip. That is because, in our view, no alternative to
Palestinian unity exists. In order to continue the
negotiations and, especially, to implement an eventual
peace agreement, it is essential that there be a partner
on the Palestinian side representing the interests of all
Palestinian society, not its various parts. In that regard,
we support overcoming the internal Palestinian split
on the basis of the political platform of the Palestine
Liberation Organization and the Arab Peace Initiative.
Despite all the difficulties, we must never throw
up our hands. Russia is ready to work to reach a peace
settlement both through bilateral channels and in
multilateral formats. We think that not using the Middle
East Quartet more fully during the past few years
has been a mistake. We have always been in favour
of activating the Quartet and of involving it further
in dealing with the peace settlement process. We are
ready for substantive discussions during the Quartet
special representatives’ meeting to be held in Brussels
on 24 October.
16/72

21/10/2014

With regard to the draft resolution prepared by
Palestine and submitted to the Security Council by
Jordan, we would like to note that the text refers to the
well-known international legal basis for a Middle East
peace settlement and affirms the route of negotiations
for reaching a settlement with Israel. That kind of
approach merits our support.
The turbulent processes under way in the Middle
East that are often referred to as the Arab Spring are far
from complete, but attempts to draw lessons from what
has happened lead us to only one conclusion: there is no
alternative to a peaceful, non-violent resolution to any
crisis situation. The concrete facts show us that clearly
that the more brazen the intervention was in a given Arab
country, the more the process became unpredictable.
In Libya, after three years of illegal NATO bombing
and the ousting of Al-Qadhafi, the situation has only
deteriorated. The legitimate Libyan authorities are not
even capable of controlling the situation in their capital,
not to mention the rest of the Libyan territory.
Another example is Syria. Although there was no
direct military involvement, there was a very aggressive
attack by radicals on the legitimate Government
authorities. That is no secret. It occurred with the full
support from the West for the Syrian opposition. In
fact, for a long time, the West approved the actions
of terrorists because they formed the backbone of
the opposition to President Al-Assad. But do all ends
justify the means? The latest events in Iraq involving
the atrocities of the so-called Islamic State force us to
recall the terrible American invasion of 2003. At the
time, the United States destroyed that State’s structures
and provoked a sectarian conflict from which the
country has still not recovered.
The Security Council should consider holding
a brainstorming session to consider the lessons of
the Arab Spring and make an in-depth analysis of
the deterioration of the situation in the Middle East.
Perhaps that could prevent us from making the same
mistakes in the future.
Today, it would seem that our Western partners
have once again made mistakes, and it is the countries
of the region that will have to pay for those mistakes.
Anti-terrorism efforts should be undertaken in
compliance with international law and be conducted
under the auspices of the Security Council, as the main
body responsible for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Instead of that, we see air strikes
on Islamic State positions in Syrian territory without
14-58091

21/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the consent of the Government of Syria. The so-called
coalition has refused to cooperate with Damascus and
Tehran, which are logical allies in the fight against
terrorism in the region. Perhaps the campaign against
the Islamic State would have been more successful with
such support.
Against that backdrop, it is contradictory and
paradoxical that the United States and its allies are
providing arms support to the so-called moderate
opposition to help them overthrow President Al-Assad.
We have seen more than once how so-called moderate
oppositions become radicalized, and it then becomes
difficult to distinguish them from more extremist
organizations.
Russia continues to support constructive
intergovernmental relations with Syria, Iraq and other
States of the region, and we will continue to fulfil
our international obligations and to make efforts
to strengthen the capability of those States in their
courageous attempts to combat international terrorists
and extremists.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing earlier this morning and the
Palestinian observer and the Israeli representative for
their statements.
Like all of us, Australia welcomed the ceasefire
agreement that brought the destructive conflict in
Gaza to an end, but all parties to the agreement must
scrupulously honour its terms. The ceasefire must put
an end to rocket and mortar attacks on Israel and enable
the opening of border crossings for humanitarian aid
and reconstruction materials into Gaza, which should
include an effective United Nations supervision
mechanism. We thank Egypt and Norway for organizing
the Cairo Conference on reconstructing Gaza, and we
are committed to supporting those efforts through our
development programme.
The Gaza conflict was a very stark reminder that
Israel and the Palestinians must renew their efforts
towards finding a two-State solution. Encouraging
and supporting such efforts must be the focus of
the international community and the Council. Both
sides should avoid any unilateral actions that could
undermine the prospects for a return to negotiations,
whether it be expropriating land in the West Bank or
pursuing international initiatives that set conditions
and fail to recognize Israel’s right to security.
In Iraq, the atrocities of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) have descended to new depths

S/PV.7281

of depravity. The organization is neither Islamic nor
a State — a view shared by Muslim religious leaders
around the world. Its barbaric attacks make it impossible
to deny the extreme threat that ISIL represents to the
region and the world at large. It stands in opposition
to the basic values of the international community and
our shared sense of humanity, and my own country,
along with everyone else, condemns its terrorist actions
absolutely.
Australia has committed to playing its part in
helping Iraq and the international coalition in combating
ISIL. With the consent of the Iraqi Government, we
have deployed Australian aircraft and personnel, who
are undertaking missions over Iraq. That is in addition
to our air assets already providing humanitarian and
logistical support to Iraq. Australia will also deploy a
special operations task group on the ground to advise
and assist the Iraqi security forces. Those measures
represent a prudent and proportionate response to the
threat posed by that murderous organization. We urge
other Member States to show their support for the Al
Abadi Government as it rebuilds a stable and cohesive
Iraq, and to join the efforts to combat a common enemy.
There is still more we can do to win this fight. ISIL
is seeking to bolster its ranks by appealing to people
at risk of radicalization in other countries, including
Australia. In that context, the full implementation by
all Member States of resolution 2178 (2014), on foreign
terrorist fighters, which we adopted in September, is
crucial. My own Government is introducing legislative
measures to make it easier to prosecute foreign fighters
and to prevent people from leaving Australia to fight
in foreign conflicts. We are strengthening counterterrorism engagement with our partners, including
efforts to address the threat posed by foreign terrorist
fighters, and we encourage other Member States to
consider similar cooperation.
The Al-Assad regime is, in large part, responsible
for the disorder and violence in which ISIL has thrived
and for the conflict that is destabilizing the region.
The Syrian people must have a better choice than that
between the Al-Assad regime and ISIL. More than ever,
a political process is needed that can bring the conflict
to an end and give all Syrians a say in their future.
We welcome the efforts of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Staffan de Mistura, and
look forward to discussions with him in the Council
shortly. A renewed focus by the Council on a political
solution in Syria is long overdue.

14-5809117/72

S/PV.7281

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We commend the excellent work being done inside
Syria by United Nations agencies and humanitarian
organizations in the most challenging, difficult and
dangerous circumstances. Resolution 2165 (2014) has
brought about a modest but notable increase in the
numbers being reached by United Nations agencies,
but the humanitarian crisis continues to worsen. Close
attention to coordination with existing cross-border aid
delivery mechanisms will be essential to getting the
most out of improvements in access.
Despite small improvements in access, the parties
to the conflict continue to flout the provisions of
resolution 2139 (2014), which we adopted unanimously
in February, particularly the Al-Assad regime and
extremist groups in Syria. We are appalled at the grave
violations of human rights that continue to take place,
including the targeting of children on a scale never
before seen. The Al-Assad regime continues to use
barrel bombs and to illegally use chlorine as a weapon in
attacks on civilian neighbourhoods, which are targeted
as a deliberate military strategy. The Secretary-General
remarked on that this morning. In resolution 2139
(2014), the Council unamiously demanded that such
attacks and all indiscriminate shelling stop. There must
be accountability for the terrible international crimes
being committed in Syria.
Finally, Australia acknowledges the heightened
security threats faced by Lebanon and commends
the efforts of the Lebanese armed forces to prevent
terrorist attacks, to counter militant groups, including
ISIL and Jabhat Al-Nusra, and to provide security in an
increasingly difficult environment. The Lebanese armed
forces should not be without a commander-in-chief at
such a critical time, and Lebanon’s politicians should
elect a President without further delay. Events near
Arsal, including the ongoing detention of Lebanese
personnel, show that the threats to Lebanon’s security
are very real. We urge the international community,
and this Council specifically, to continue to support
Lebanon as it faces complex and growing challenges,
including the burden of hosting more than 1.2 million
Syrian refugees.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and for his
tireless efforts to bring a peaceful and secure futuure to
the Middle East. In particular, the Secretary-General’s
recent trip to the region was both timely and relevant,
as it renewed the international community’s attention
to the urgent situation in Gaza and its commitment to

18/72

21/10/2014

seeking a peacful solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
issue.
In that vein, the Republic of Korea welcomes the
United Nations-brokered reconstruction mechanism for
Gaza. We believe that the trilateral agreement offers
a robust plan to facilitate the Palestinian Government
in leading the reconstruction efforts, while also
addressing Israel’s legitimate security concerns. As
the much-needed construction material is brought into
Gaza, the parties must seek ways to prevent another
cycle of destruction from occurring in the future.
We are also encouraged by the results of the Gaza
donors conference, held in Cairo on 12 October. The
Republic of Korea pledged to provide $12 million in
assistance to the Palestinian people, of which $2 million
will go to supporting Gaza’s economic recovery. We
hope that all the pledges made are promptly fulfilled to
help lessen the suffering of the Palestinian people.
However, despite the reconstruction efforts,
the Republic of Korea remains concerned about
the underlying instability and the repeated cycle of
suffering in that region. We agree with the SecretaryGeneral that time is not on the side of peace. The
longer that the present state of insecurity continues, the
longer the path to genuine peace will be. The prolonged
isolation of Gaza not only is having devastating effects
on the economic and social situation; it also may lead
to more lasting effects in terms of the radicalization of
youth. Scant access to food, medicines and electricity,
coupled with the pronounced rate of unemployment,
will only continue to give rise to more extremism and
violent tendencies. That is certainly not in the interest
of Israel’s long-term security or of regional peace.
More efforts are needed to build a foundation
for lasting and durable peace. Although the August
ceasefire is being maintained in Gaza, it cannot be
the final solution. We support a continuation of the
Egyptian-brokered talks with a view to addressing both
outstanding issues and the root of the conflict. We call
on all parties to respect the previous agreements and to
return to the negotiating table so as to work out a viable
framework to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
with the two-State solution at its core.
In that regard, we look forward to the Quartet
meeting in Brussels later this week. We hope that it
can galvanize mediation efforts at this critical time.
As any unilateral action will only hinder progress, we
oppose Israel’s newly announced settlement expansion.

14-58091

21/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We are also concnerd about the growing insecurity in
the West Bank and the clashes that have taken place at
Jerusalem’s Holy Sites. We call on all parties to cease
the further fuelling of tensions on the West Bank and
in East Jerusalem.
Turning to Syria, the Republic of Korea is
concerned about the fate of Kurdish civilians under
siege from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) in Kobani. Mass displacement is occurring at an
unprecedented pace and, as Special Envoy Staffan de
Mistura recently stated, the threat of massacres, war
crimes and possible crimes against humanity are very
real. We urge all actors to take the necessary steps to
ensure civilian protection, including the possible easing
of cross-border restrictions.
We remain very concered about the continued
abuse by the Syrian Government of its own people. The
use of barrel bombs continues despite the Council’s
explicit ban of such weapons in resolution 2139 (2014).
Furthermore, the conclusion of the fact-finding mission
of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons that chlorine was used systematically and
repeatedly as a weapon is a cause for serious concern.
The only way to end the ongoing conflict in Syria is
through the resumption of negotiations and a political
solution. We support the ongoing efforts of Special
Envoy De Mistura in that regard.
Regarding Lebanon, we remain deeply troubled
over the simmering tensions inherently related to both
the Syrian conflict and the ISIL threats, which have
deep implications for Lebanese society. The Lebanese
armed forces hostages, held by the Nusra Front and
ISIL, are a source of serious concern, as is the growing
resentment and backlash against the Syrian refugees in
the country. We hope that Lebanon will elect its next
President as early as possible to ensure much-needed
political stability.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon, for his statement. I
associate myself with the statement to be made by
​​ the
observer of the European Union. I will talk briefly about
the Israeli-Palestinian peace process, the situation in
Iraq, Syria and Lebanon, and the crisis in Libya.
The two-State solution must be revived. This
summer, war again devastated Gaza. That crisis was
the third in six years. Even more violent than those of
2008-2009 and 2012, it has had tragic consequences, of
which we are aware — more than 2,100 people dead,

S/PV.7281

including hundreds of children, 11,000 people wounded
and unprecedented destruction. The Cairo Conference
made it possible for the international community to
express its solidarity towards Palestine and its support
for the reconstruction of Gaza, with the announcement
of the mobilization of $5.4 billion. We hope that those
pledges will be promptly translated into action.
However, we cannot continue to agree to endlessly
participate in the cycle of reconstruction and destruction
while the perpetrators of the destruction are not requested
to contribute financially to the reconstruction. It is our
responsibility to put an end to that spiral of violence.
That requires going well beyond the ceasefire agreed
on 26 August, which does not provide a lasting solution
for Gaza. Today, as in 2009 and in 2012, nothing has
truly been settled. The parties are expected to resume
their talks in Cairo soon. We encourage them to do so
without delay. A lasting agreement must be concluded
so as to achieve both a complete lifting of the blockade
and a response to Israel’s legitimate security concerns.
However, Gaza is only the symptom of a deeper
problem: the impasse in the peace process. We must be
clear: the lack of a political horizon for the Palestinians
and the threat weighing heavily over the two-State
solution led to the initiative of President Abbas,
announced in the General Assembly (see A/69/PV.12).
Speeding up colonization in particularly sensitive areas
such as Givat Hamatos ‑ which created a new settlement
in East Jerusalem for the first time in over fifteen years
‑ makes the emergence of a Palestinian State on the
ground more difficult with each passing day. We will
have to bear the repercussions.
Heightened tensions in the Haram al-Sharif are also
very worrying. France reaffirms its commitment to free
access to the holy sites for all religions and emphasizes
that any challenge to the status quo of those sites could
carry risks of major destabilization.
Nevertheless, the parameters for a solution to the
conflict are known: an independent State of Palestine ‑
democratic, contiguous and sovereign, living in peace
and security side by side with Israel, based on the 1967
borders, with Jerusalem as the capital of both States.
France believes in the possibility of a definitive
settlement, but we do not have unlimited time to find
a lasting solution. The time has come to implement the
two-State solution, before it is too late. To do so, we
must provide ourselves collectively with the means
to reach that end. We need to start thinking about

14-5809119/72

S/PV.7281

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

developing a method to reach a conclusion, not just
to negotiate. Fresh negotiations will come to nothing
unless they start with clear parameters and a programme
of work. The successive failure of negotiations for the
past twenty years reminds us of that. Security Council
action making it possible to establish a framework for
negotiation would be timely. International partners
must commit themselves further to support the parties
in the negotiation of a comprehensive and permanent
settlement.
The role of the United States is decisive and
remains central. The role of Europe and the Arab
League is equally important. Both have made ​​proposals
to encourage the conclusion of a permanent agreement
and open the prospects for regional peace. Europe and
its international partners must be prepared to use the
leverage they have on all parties so that the negotiations
can succeed.
In fact, we can no longer settle for simply trying.
We must succeed. France is prepared nowto contribute
to that collective effort. Without rapid progress and
without success, we will have to recognize a Palestinian
State at some point.
The region is facing the emergence of a regional
terrorist scourge that extends from Iraq to Lebanon,
via Syria. In Iraq, the fight against Daesh calls for
an unprecedented mobilization of the international
community, alongside the Iraqi Government. That
response rests on three pillars.
First is a lasting political strategy to support the
Iraqi authorities with regard to reconciliation and
national unity. Daesh has thrived on the weaknesses
of Iraq, a country torn by divisions and sectarian
conflicts. The resolution of the crisis must above all be
political, taking the path of redress and reconciliation.
The recent appointment of the Ministers of the Interior
and Defence, as well as the swearing-in of the Kurdish
Ministers, have completed the formation of an inclusive
Government. We must encourage that approach.
Secondly, humanitarian assistance and reconstruction
efforts must be enlarged.
Thirdly, the fight against Daesh must be coordinated
with regard to military support, drying up financial
resources and extinguishing terrorist networks. In
terms of military support, France is engaged in air
support operations for the Iraqi armed forces and the
Pesh Merga. We encourage all our partners to join our
efforts.
20/72

21/10/2014

In Syria, it is the regime of Bashar Al-Assad that
has deliberately fostered the development of Daesh to
block the moderates, who are now fighting two barbaric
elements ‑ the regime and Daesh. Syria does not have to
choose between these two barbarities. Daesh’s heinous
crimes should not cause one to forget that the Syrian
regime, which continues to bomb civilian populations
on a daily basis, is primarily responsible for the current
tragedy, which has left 200,000 dead. It thus feeds
extremism and the rejection of its own people and can
in no way represent the Syria of tomorrow.
The Syrian crisis calls for two responses. In
the medium term, a political response to the crisis
needs to be worked out. France will give its full
support to the initiatives of Staffan de Mistura to
relaunch negotiations and give durable responses to
the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people. On an
immediate basis, the capabilities of Daesh, which has
eastern Syrian as its rear base, must be reduced. France
supports the coalition strikes against Daesh. France
actively contributes to the fight against terrorism in
the framework of task-sharing. We also continue our
support for the democratic opposition of the Syrian
National Coalition, led by Hadi Al-Bahra. That support
is, and will be, political, financial and logistical.
In Lebanon, the situation has clearly deteriorated.
The fighting by various terrorist groups, including
Daesh and Jabhat Al-Nusra, against the Lebanese
army last August in Ersal demonstrates how Lebanon
is suffering the repercussions of the crisis in Syria.
We must do our utmost to end the attacks against
the army and the attempts to destabilize the country.
The dissociation policy and principles of the Baabda
Declaration of 2012 (S/2012/477, annex) provide the
framework to which all Lebanese forces must subscribe.
The mobilization of the Security Council is needed
to support Lebanon in three concerns. First, it is
urgent that a President be elected. Countries that can
influence the Lebanese actors and their regional allies
should advocate the election of a President. Secondly,
support for the Lebanese Armed Forces should be
strengthened and accelerated in the short and medium
term. France is working closely with Saudi Arabia to
finalize the initiative to strengthen the Lebanese Army.
Thirdly, our economic and financial support must be
reinforced in order to strengthen the institutions and
infrastructure in Lebanon. With the highest ratio of
refugees to population in the world, Lebanon ought to
benefit from a sharing of the burden.

14-58091

21/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7281

Finally, allow me to briefly mention the situation
in Libya, which is of increasing concern to us. This
Council must remain united and mobilized in order to
respond to the two major challenges in Libya.

Foreign and European Affairs was able to reaffirm the
strong solidarity of Luxembourg with the Palestinians,
which translates into an ongoing financial commitment
of approximately €7 million euros a year.

First is the political transition. The legitimacy of the
authorities elected on 25 June must be recognized by all.
At the same time, that does not exempt the authorities
from having an inclusive approach. The conclusion of
the ceasefire in Libya and the launching of an open
and sincere political dialogue, focused on the search
for a lasting agreement, are the first steps towards the
restoration of peace. That is the challenge facing the
mediation efforts of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Bernardino León. All international
actors must encourage the parties to take part in that
dialogue in a spirit of compromise. As for ourseves,
we must be prepared to use individual sanctions under
resolution 2174 (2014) against those who endanger
peace, stability or security in Libya, or those who
hinder the success of its political transition.

We also welcome implementation of the mechanism
established by the United Nations, the Palestinian
Authority and Israel, which is another necessary step in
the reconstruction of the Gaza Strip. But we all know
that we need to go further. No people can live under
the conditions imposed on the inhabitants of Gaza,
besieged between three walls and the sea, surviving
only thanks to UNRWA and international aid. We must
lift the blockade that strangles Gaza and its economy.

The second challenge facing Libya is that of
terrorism. The presence in Libya of various terrorist
groups is a significant risk for the region, but for
Europe as well. It allows terrorist groups in the Sahel to
rebuild their forces, especially in Mali. In neighbouring
countries, a strategy to contain the terrorist threat, as
well as illicit arms trafficking, must be encouraged.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I thank
the Secretary-General for his presentation, as well as
the Permanent Observer of the State of Palestine and
the Deputy Permanent Representative of Israel for their
briefings.
Luxembourg fully associates itself with the
statement to be made by the representative of the
European Union.
The Secretary-General has just presented a
damning assessment of 50 days of war in the Gaza
Strip, the third war in six years that has caused so many
deaths and wounded, destroyed so many lives and
neighbourhoods.
We would like to thank Egypt, whose efforts led to a
ceasefire agreement concluded on 26 August. It was the
first step necessary to end the hostilities, the sufferings
and humiliations. We also welcome the holding of the
conference in Cairo on Palestine, “Reconstructing
Gaza”, on 12 October, organized by Egypt and Norway
in support of the Palestinian Authority. Our Minister of

The war in Gaza confirms that fighting is
inevitable in the context of political deadlock, hatred
and discord. For 20 years, the peace process has seen
the repetition of three successive stages: stimulus,
stagnation and failure. Each new cycle has brought its
share of suffering. It is now high time to think outside
the box. It is no longer time to repeat the same sterile
processes of perpetual negotiations that go nowhere. It
is our responsibility to learn the lessons from the past.
The elements of a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East have often been stated. We all know
the terms of the equation; there is no need to repeat
them. The goal is clear — an independent, democratic,
contiguous and sovereign State of Palestine, living
in peace and security alongside Israel, based on the
pre-1967 borders with Jerusalem as the capital of two
States. It is time to take bold and concrete measures
to implement the two-State solution before others take
new measures that make that solution impossible.
In that context, Luxembourg condemns the
recent decision by the Israeli authorities to approve
construction plans for 2,610 dwellings in Givat
HaMatos. That decision directly threatens the two-State
solution and the need for Jerusalem to be the capital of
two States, Israel and Palestine. If upheld, the decision
would confirm our doubts about Israel’s commitment
in favour of a negotiated solution with the Palestinians.
Luxembourg recalls that the settlements are illegal
under international law. We call on Israel to reverse
that decision and, more generally, to immediately end
settlement activities in East Jerusalem and the whole of
the West Bank. Like the European Union, Luxembourg
will not recognize any changes to the 1967 borders other
than those agreed by both parties. We hope the Security
Council will play a constructive role in achieving peace

14-5809121/72

S/PV.7281

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to encourage and facilitate efforts aimed at safeguarding
the two-State solution and ending the occupation. My
country is ready to support those efforts.
I must mention another tragedy, the conflict that
has been ravaging Syria and decimating its civilian
population for more than three and a half years. The
numbers speak for themselves — over 191,000 Syrians
have been killed in three years, including more than
10,000 children; 10.8 million Syrians, more than half
of them children, are in need of urgent humanitarian
assistance; 4.7 million Syrians are trapped by combat
in areas difficult to access; more than 3 million Syrians
have been forced to leave their country; and over
1 million of them are refugees in Lebanon, representing
nearly one-third of the total population of Lebanon.
Within just a few weeks, 200,000 civilians have fled
the city of Kobani and taken refuge in Turkey to seek
protection from the murderous rampage of the Islamic
State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). Those numbers of
deaths and displaced persons are staggering, but they
do not capture all the suffering inflicted on the Syrian
people, suffering that must deeply affect the human
conscience.
To respond to the humanitarian emergency, the
Security Council has been able to mobilize. The
first positive action has been taken under resolution
2165 (2014), adopted by the Council three months
ago, for cross-border humanitarian assistance across
the Syrian-Jordan and Syrian-Turkey borders and
for cross-line assistance through lines of conflict.
However, the parties to the conflict, particularly the
Syrian authorities, continue to ignore the demands of
resolution 2139 (2014). Indiscrimiпate attacks against
civilians, schools and hospitals, bombardements using
barrel bombs, the denial of humanitarian assistance
and the use of starvation as a weapon of war continue
unabated. Administrative obstacles to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance remain. The suffering of the
Syrian people will not be relieved by half measures,
the issuance of visas at a snail’s pace nor by the
approval of a few additional national non-governmental
organizations. We demand that the parties, in particular
the Syrian authorities, adopt concrete measures to
implement resolutions 2139 (2014) and 2165 (2014) in
their entirety. This is all the more urgent as the Syrian
people will soon face their fourth winter since the
conflict began.
We hope that progress on the humanitarian front
will facilitate the task of those seeking a political

22/72

21/10/2014

solution, the only possible solution to the conflict.
As Under-Secretary-General Valerie Amos said
yesterday, we urgently need a political solution. Such
a solution entails a political transition that responds
to the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people, in
line with the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex)
of June 2012. In that regard, we support the efforts of
the Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, to
restart talks on the political level.
Luxembourg is gravely concerned by the
findings of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons fact-finding mission, published
on 10 September. It is now well-established that a
toxic chemical, specifically chlorine, was used as a
weapon systematically and repeatedly against villages
in northern Syria. Witness statements contained in
the report established a link between the attacks with
chlorine and the use of helicopters. However, only the
Syrian armed forces possess helicopters in Syria.
A year ago, with the adoption of resolution 2118
(2013), our goal was clear. It was to ensure that crimes
using chemical weapons were not repeated again in
Syria. In our view, the Security Council should not
tolerate violations of resolution 2118 (2013), which are
being ignored in silence.
Today, we can no longer be indecisive or procrastinate
in the face of war crimes and crimes against humanity
perpetrated in Syria, whether committed by the Syrian
authorities or extremist or terrorist groups, chief among
them the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant. That
group, which is neither a State nor Islamic, defiles
Islam and merely strives to spread its reign of terror
to take root in Syria and Iraq and to destabilize the
entire region. The advance of ISIL makes it even more
urgent and necessary for the international community
to provide support to the countries suffering the impact
of the Syrian conflict — Iraq, Jordan and Lebanon. We
encourage the political leaders of Lebanon to elect a
President who can continue to implement the policies
of dissociation from the conflict.
My country fully supports the measures adopted to
counter the terrorists of ISIL, the Nusra Front, Al-Qaida
and their affiliates to cut off their funding channels to
prevent radicalization and stem the flow of foreign
terrorist fighters. We can do that under resolutions
2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014). Beyond the actions taken
at the political, economic, military and humanitarian
level, it is important to redouble efforts to combat
impunity, whoever is responsible for the crimes. It is
14-58091

21/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

at least important to give a ray of hope to relatives of
victims of the Syrian conflict and the victims of the
ISIL throat-slitters and other terrorist groups; the hope
that in the end, justice will be rendered; the hope that
the perpetrators of the heinous crimes in Syria and Iraq
will be held accountable for their terrible actions. In
our opinion, the International Criminal Court must play
a key role in nurturing that hope for justice.

S/PV.7281

Concerning the upheaval in the Middle East,
especially the hotspots and impasses in armed
conflict that encourage radicalization and terrorism,
such situations are both unacceptable and extremely
dangerous. We deplore the fact that many years of
negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians have not
yielded any concrete results.

Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
to begin by thanking you, Madam President, for having
convened this open debate on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question. I also wish to
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing.
I commend his personal commitment, especially his
recent mission to the region and, in particular, to Gaza,
which enabled him to assess the situation on the ground
and the extent of the human and material damage
suffered by the Palestinian population during Israel’s
most recent military operations.

In that context, there must be a change in strategy
and to explore other options. It is the responsibility of
the international community to bring Israel to reason
in order to renounce its intransigence by accepting a
negotiated political solution leading to the realization of
the vision of two independent States living side by side
in peace and security based on the pre-1967 borders.
In the absence of that, the international community
will have to finally recognize the State of Palestine and
thereby ensure protection of the Palestinian people even
under occupation, based on respect for international
law.

My statement will focus on the question of Palestine.
My country appreciates the convening in Cairo on
12 October of the Gaza reconstruction Conference
and welcomes the commitments made by donors to
contribute to Gaza’s rebuilding and development
efforts.

In that respect, the new initiative of Mahmoud
Abbas, President of the Palestinian Authority, supported
by the League of Arab States, sets a date to end the
Israeli occupation and form a Palestinian State based
on the pre-1967 borders. It deserves the full attention of
the international community.

Nevertheless, my country believes that the time
has come for the international community to take
responsibility and establish safeguards to ensure that
the aggression against the Gaza Strip does not become
a recurrent phenomenon every two or three years,
jeopardizing all peace efforts and wasting the enormous
financial resources allocated to Gaza’s reconstruction.
From that perspective, it seems crucial to us that we
emerge from that vicious cycle and end the continuing
spiral of violence, thereby leaving behind the cycle of
continuing construction and reconstruction.
Furthermore, we must not lose sight of the fact that
the Palestinian problem is not confined to aggression
against Gaza. Clearly, it is important to end the blockade
and to protect Gazans from all forms of aggression.
Above all, however, there must be an end to the Israeli
occupation of the Palestinian territory, which has
persisted for far too long and for which no durable or
permanent solution seems to be visible on the horizon.
Despite the well-known parameters for a solution,
Israel continues to hamper the legitimate rights of the
Palestinian people and prevent the two-State solution
by flouting the relevant United Nations resolutions and
its other international commitments.

In that regard, we salute the adoption by the United
Kingdom Parliament of a resolution calling on the
Government to recognize the State of Palestine. We also
commend Sweden’s courageous decision to recognize
the State of Palestine. Those positions, beyond the
profound symbolic character, represent a step in the
right direction to put an end to the historic injustice
that the Palestinian people have bitterly experienced on
a daily basis for six decades.
We are profoundly concerned by the recent actions
of the Israeli occupation forces and groups of extremist
settlers on the esplanade of the Al-Aqsa Mosque in
carrying out profane attacks against the holy sites and
brutally attacking pilgrims who have made the journey
in fulfillment of their religious duty. Such actions are
provocations — even attacks — against the feelings
of the Muslim world that risk undermining the peace
efforts.
We also condemn the settlement policy and the
destruction of Palestinian homes and all arbitrary acts
committed against the Palestinian population.
In that vein, it is Chad’s belief that aggressive acts
committed by Israel against the civilian Palestinian

14-5809123/72

S/PV.7281

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

population in the Gaza Strip, the displacement and
transfer of civilians by the Israeli authorities, the
destruction of civilian property and all acts of collective
punishment represent grave violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights.
To conclude, I wish to again stress that the
international community must emerge from its inertia
and assume its historic and moral responsibility by
considering all possible options and exerting the
necessary pressure upon the parties to ensure the
relaunching of the peace process in order to end the
suffering of the Palestinian people and enable them
to exercise their right to a sovereign, independent
and viable State. That also constitues the road map to
settling other conflicts in the Middle East.
The President (spoke in Spanish): Before giving
the floor to the next speaker, I will take a minute, as an
aside, to note that sometimes we have that impression
in the Security Council that we are unable to do here
what we are able to do elsewhere. If we can turn off
our cellphones in cinemas and theatres, I would
ask participants, out of respect for the topic we are
considering and for the speakers taking the floor, to
silence their cellphones.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank you, Madam President, for
convening this open debate. We also highly appreciate
the presence of the Secretary-General and thank him
for his tireless efforts towards dialogue between the
Palestinians and the Israelis. Chile promotes peace
between both peoples and the two-State solution. We
therefore recognized the State of Palestine in 2011,
including for the sake of supporting negotiations.
Under the framework of the recent conflict in Gaza,
my country repeatedly condemned the rocket launches
by Hamas and the disproportionate use of force by
Israel in densely populated areas leading to the loss of
life of hundreds of innocent civilians. That is why my
country called for consultations with the Ambassador
of Israel during the conflict and contributed financially
through the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. We have also
continued participating in the bilateral cooperation
programme of the Latin American region.
Chile welcomes the role of mediator played by
Egypt, as well as the ceasefire agreed on 26 August in
Cairo. However, as has been mentioned, the ceasefire
cannot mean a return to the status quo ante, which is

24/72

21/10/2014

unacceptable and a fertile breeding ground for violence.
The international community must support the urgent
restart of negotiations. In addition, the parties have the
responsibility to move towards a mutual understanding
and to refrain from taking decisions that undermine
dialogue. In that vein, threats by Hamas and other
radical groups against the Israeli civilian population
must come to a halt. Israel must put a stop to building
settlements in occupied Palestinian territory and lift
the blockade imposed on Gaza.
The Charter of the United Nations is clear in the
functions it assigns to the Security Council. It is our
task to speak out on this issue and thus isolate those
who advocate for extremist positions. The Quartet also
has a role to play in resolving the conflict, as we have
said in the past. Chile wishes for peace for both peoples.
In that spirit, my country is organizing an international
meeting with prominent Israeli and Palestinian figures
to advance dialogue and understanding, which will take
place in November in our capital.
With respect to the problems affecting Lebanon
and the side effects resulting from the Syrian conflict,
we agree with the remarks made by the Administrator
of the United Nations Development Programme at
the latest meeting of the International Support Group
of Lebanon. It is not only a humanitarian crisis, but a
crisis of development and stability. Lebanese political
leaders must return to dialogue with a focus on national
unity. It is crucial to follow the principle of dissociation
established in the Baabda Declaration and for the
Lebanese militia, including those with political aims,
to refrain from taking part in the Syrian conflict. There
will be no peace in Lebanon as long as there is conflict
in Syria.
We deplore the fact that in this latest conflict
there is a continued violence from all actors against
the civilian population. We express our concern at its
effects on women, which has taken the form of sexual
violence and summary executions, as well as the
ongoing aggression against children, including their
recruitment as soldiers.
We are alarmed by the advance of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant and its offensive against the city
of Kobani, which has displaced thousands of people.
We also add our concern to that expressed by the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs on
the situation of those people who continue to be trapped
in Kobani without having access to humanitarian
assistance.
14-58091

21/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Finally, we encourage the Secretary-General’s
Special Envoy for Syria’s continued efforts to mediate
between Syrian and regional actors to break the
stalemate and find a political way out. Despite the
difficulties before us, we must persevere, for that is the
only way of putting an end to the tragic situation in the
region.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I would like to start
by expressing my appreciation to His Excellency
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his comprehensive
briefing on the recent developments in the Middle East.
I also thank Ambassador Riyad Mansour, Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine, and
Mr. David Roet, representative of Israel, for their
respective remarks.
The general situation in the Middle East remains
delicate. The current status in many parts of the region
is not sustainable as it may lead to a spiral of violence,
terrorism and destruction across the Middle East.
Parties and belligerents should therefore understand
that in no way can there be any military solution in the
region. Rather, they should make a serious commitment
to seeking or resuming political talks in order to find
peaceful solutions to all contentious issues within or
between countries of the region.
On the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, it is important
for the leadership in Tel Aviv and Ramallah, with the
support of such key stakeholders as the United States,
the Quartet and the League of Arab States, to keep up
the momentum of the talks aimed at achieving a twoState solution for two peoples living side by side in
peace and security. The parties should make additional
efforts to resume direct and genuine negotiations while
refraining from all provocative actions that would derail
the current process. In that respect, Rwanda believes
that the sustainable solution to the outstanding issues
must be negotiated in good faith and that any unilateral
action may further complicate the current situation.
On Gaza, the humanitarian situation remains a
cause for concern. Rwanda welcomes the outcome of
the Cairo donor conference for the reconstruction of
the Gaza Strip held on 12 October. We commend the
Governments of Norway and Egypt for successfully
co-hosting the conference, which achieved even more
than expected. We hope that pledges made in Cairo will
soon be kept and have a concrete impact on the ground.
We take this opportunity to call on other donors and
international partners to join the international effort to
rebuild Gaza.

S/PV.7281

In the same vein, we welcome the recent trilateral
agreement between Israel, the Palestinian Authority and
the United Nations to enable them to work at the scale
required in the Strip, involving the Gaza private sector
and giving a leading role to the Palestinian Authority
in the reconstruction efforts, with the hope that the
construction materials will not be diverted from their
civilian purpose. Furthermore, we call upon the parties
to continue to uphold the commitments contained in the
Gaza ceasefire agreement brokered by Egypt in August
this year. We believe that a sustained implementation
of the commitments will allow people’s livelihoods in
Gaza to be restored, but even more importantly it will
provide the trust and political environment needed to
reach a larger and sustainable solution to the Palestinian
question.
With respect to Syria, it is unfortunate that military
confrontation continues to escalate to dangerous levels
and that the three-and-a-half-year conflict has claimed
the lives of over 190,000 people, with 10.8 million
people in urgent need of humanitarian assistance.
As we look forward to the briefing to the Council by
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura focusing on possible
avenues to end conflict in Syria, we reiterate our call
on all the concerned parties to resume the Geneva II
peace talks, which is the only possible way to end the
political crisis with its dramatic security, human rights
and humanitarian consequences.
However, it is clear that political talks with terrorist
and/or genocidal forces should never be envisaged. In
that context, Rwanda reiterates its firm support for
the ongoing fight against the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL), which commits mass atrocities
against civilians, beheads journalists and humanitarian
workers and persecutes religious minorities, including
Christians and Yazidis. We believe that it is important
that the Security Council, which has always been
unanimous in its fight against terrorism — most recently
in resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014) — support
the coalition led by the United States aimed at
degrading and ultimately defeating ISIL. The fight to
save the population of the Syrian town of Kobani from
barbaric extermination, which is going on even as
we speak, should be a reaffirmation of our collective
responsibility to protect.
The situation in Lebanon remains severely affected
by the conflict in Syria, with cross-border shelling,
arms smuggling and further influxes of refugees. The
involvement of different Lebanese armed groups in the

14-5809125/72

S/PV.7281

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Syrian conflict, violating the Lebanese Government’s
dissociation policy, has raised tensions, leading to
sectarian violence mainly along the Lebanese-Syrian
border areas that have claimed civilian lives and seen
the kidnapping of members of the Lebanese Armed
Forces.
We commend the Lebanese Armed Forces for
containing threats to the country’s security and
stability, and we reiterate our call on all parties in
Lebanon to continue to uphold the Baabda declaration
and its dissociation policy.
In same vein, Rwanda also welcomes the
announcement of new assistance to the Lebanese
army and encourages further assistance in priority
areas. However, Rwanda expresses its concern over
the prolonged vacancy in the presidency for over
four months now, which increases the country’s
vulnerability in facing the mounting security,
economic and humanitarian challenges. We express
our appreciation for the efforts of Prime Minister
Salam and his Government in ensuring stability in the
country. We hope that the parties in Lebanon, with the
support of the countries of the region, will overcome
their differences and put an end to this constitutional
gridlock.
To conclude, I would wish to recall that for all
conflicts and crises in the Middle East, the genuine
resolve and unwavering support of those who have
real influence on the parties are prerequisites for any
progress or breakthrough. It is therefore critical that
regional and world Powers remain committed and
coordinated so as to ensure lasting peace in the Middle
East.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing and
appreciate his tireless efforts to promote the peace
process in the Middle East.
China has listened attentively to the statements
made by the representatives of Palestine and Israel.
China is greatly concerned about the situation between
Palestine and Israel and by the plight of the Palestinian
people. We are grieved by the large number of casualties
caused by the conflict in Gaza, including civilian
casualties and women and children. We strongly
condemn any indiscriminate use of force or actions that
cause casualties among innocent civilians.
In spite of the ceasefire in Gaza, the situation on the
ground remains fragile, and the humanitarian situation
26/72

21/10/2014

is worrisome. To change the situation once and for all
will require Palestine and Israel to work together with
the rest of the international community. The recurrent
conflicts between Palestine and Israel in Gaza show
once again that a deadlock in the peace talks is bound
to aggravate tension and drag both parties into a vicious
cycle of returning violence for violence. It is also one
more reminder to the international community that
peace talks are the only way out on the question of the
Middle East.
We hope that Palestine and Israel will adhere
to the strategic choice for peace talks and seize the
opportunity offered by the ceasefire to resume as soon
as possible and push forward substantive negotiations,
so as to achieve an early settlement of the question of
Palestine that will eventually create an independent
State of Palestine that enjoys full sovereignty on the
basis of the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital.
Palestine and Israel live next to each other as
neighbours. Peace between them will therefore require
goodwill from both sides. We call on Israel to put an
end to the construction of settlements in the occupied
territories, release Palestinian prisoners as soon as
possible, lift the blockade on Gaza and create the
conditions necessary for the resumption of peace talks.
We hope that the Palestinian factions will strengthen
their unity and work together in support of the national
consensus Government.
Meanwhile, the legitimate security concerns of
Israel should be addressed. Peace and security should
be enjoyed and maintained by both Palestine and Israel.
At present there is a pressing need for reconstruction
in Gaza, and China is pleased by the positive outcome
of the recent Cairo conference on reconstruction in
Gaza. We hope that the international community will
deliver promptly on its commitments. We hope also
that Israel will cooperate actively with the international
community’s relief efforts so as to enable relief to reach
the people of Palestine quickly and smoothly.
The question of Palestine is one in which
international peace and security is at stake. The
Security Council should shoulder its responsibility and
play a role, as is called for. It should push Palestine
and Israel to keep the ceasefire in place so that the
safety and security of civilian lives and property can be
protected, and push also for substantive progress on the
question of Palestine. We welcome the draft resolution
of the Security Council recently distributed by Arab
14-58091

21/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

States and support action being taken by the Security
Council so as to effectively respond to the reasonable
request made by Palestine and other Arab States.
China is a firm supporter and sincere mediator for
peace between Palestine and Israel. China has been
pushing for peace and negotiations between Palestine
and Israel, including the five-point proposal for peace
submitted shortly after the recent outbreak of conflict.
We have also twice provided emergency humanitarian
assistance in cash to the people of Gaza. We are ready
to join the rest of the international community in a
continued and tireless effort to achieve peace between
Palestine and Israel so as to maintain regional peace
and stability in the Middle East.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I thank the SecretaryGeneral not only for his briefing but especially for his
unflinching and abiding efforts to achieve peace and
security in the Middle East.
My comments will focus on three issues, namely,
the Palestinian question, Syria and Lebanon.
On the question of Palestine, we note that both sides
are abiding by the terms of the ceasefire agreement of
26 August. That has provided ample opportunity for
the international community to focus attention on the
much-needed reconstruction of Gaza. We welcome
the convening of the donors conference in Cairo on
12 October, co-chaired by Norway and Egypt, to fund
the reconstruction. We commend the leadership of the
United Nations for its role in brokering an agreement
between Israel and the Palestinian Authority providing
a framework for the reconstruction effort.
While we pay close attention to the reconstruction
of Gaza, we must never lose sight of the need to move
forward the peace process in a very determined manner.
We must seize every moment, and I believe that the
current ceasefire should be viewed as representing
an opportunity for both sides to restart the stalled
negotiations. We are convinced that dialogue remains
the only viable means of resolving the question of
Palestine. The two parties should heed the well-meaning
appeals from various stakeholders to resume direct
negotiations without further delay. That dialogue must
be complemented by concrete action to demonstrate the
sincerity of both parties. It should also be consistent
with relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
principles, the Quartet road map and the 2002 Arab
Peace Initiative. We restate our support for a two-State
solution with Israel and Palestine living side by side in
peace and security.

S/PV.7281

Concerning Syria, we welcome the successful
completion of the work of the Joint Mission of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
and the United Nations for the Elimination of the
Chemical Weapons Programme of the Syrian Arab
Republic. Syria’s declared chemical weapons materials
have now been destroyed in designated facilities outside
the country. The progress achieved in the completion of
that delicate process is a significant milestone in the
implementation of Council resolution 2118 (2013). We
acknowledge the cooperation of the Syrian Government
with the Joint Mission, as well as the efforts of Member
States who contributed financial and material resources
in aid of the Mission.
With the steady progress on the chemical weapons
track in Syria, the Council must now focus its attention
on seeking ways to achieve a cessation of violence
and, indeed, a political settlement. In that regard, we
look forward to the Council’s engagement with Special
Envoy Mr. Staffan de Mistura in order to assess the way
forward in reviving the stalled peace talks. We urge
the parties to the conflict in Syria to lay down their
arms and embrace dialogue and negotiation within the
framework of the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex) of June 2012. There cannot be a military solution
to the conflict in Syria.
With regard to Lebanon, we are deeply concerned
by the challenge posed by the presence of armed
militias to the security and sovereignty of the country.
There seems to be no indication of progress towards the
disbanding and disarming of the militias, as called for
in resolution 1559 (2004). By their very nature, armed
militias weaken the legitimate authority of the State
and foster an atmosphere of lawlessness. They have
no place in a system of democratic governance and,
indeed, their presence fuels sectarian tensions. Nigeria
would like to see all militias active in Lebanon disarm
and disband, in line with their commitments under the
Taif Agreement of 1989. As long as militias continue to
operate unimpeded in Lebanon, the peace, stability and
sovereignty of the country will remain under threat.
We urge the political leaders of Lebanon to
demonstrate the political will necessary to break the
impasse caused by the inability to reach a consensus
on a president to fill the vacuum left since President
Suleiman’s term ended in May. As one of the three
principle offices in Lebanon’s political establishment,
the presidency is a crucial component of the country’s
power equation. An early consensus in choosing a

14-5809127/72

S/PV.7281

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

successor to President Suleiman will, in great measure,
help to stabilize Lebanon.
Mrs. Jakubonė (Lithuania): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this open debate and I also
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
Lithuania aligns itself with the statement to be
made on behalf of the European Union.
The surge of violent extremism has reached an
unprecedented scope. The Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) and other terrorist groups ruthlessly
hijack religion to control territory and vital economic
resources. They callously brutalize, kill and expel all
those who do not accept their rules and beliefs. They
abduct, rape and sell to slavery women and children.
They target and slaughter minorities. Only a coherent
and coordinated response can tackle what is truly
a global and indiscriminate threat. We must all act
together to dismantle and destroy ISIL and the likes of
it, working in tandem with the countries affected by
that plague and in support of the local populations.
We call for a thorough and comprehensive
implementation of recent resolutions 2170 (2014) and
2178 (2014). ISIL and other terrorist groups in the
region must be denied safe havens. All channels of their
financing, arming and recruiting must be disrupted.
Factors conducive to their radicalization and grievances
that drive support for such terrorist groups must be
addressed with all due urgency.
The phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters
exacerbates the threat by adding a new dimension to it.
Thousands traveled from abroad to fuel the conflicts.
They have little to do with the local communities, and
they also become tools for the most reprehensible and
barbaric acts of terror. The Security Council has two
powerful tools at its disposal: the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, and
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism. They were
both given strategic and practical tasks, within their
respective mandates, to tackle that scourge. We look
forward to regular updates on their work in that regard.
Iraq has been badly affected by the onslaught of
ISIL. The newly elected Government of Iraq needs
to consolidate and sustain efforts seeking a credible
process of reconciliation, overcome past sectarianism
and divisiveness. Lessons from previous leaders’
mistakes must be learned quickly. There is no time to
28/72

21/10/2014

lose. The humanitarian situation is dire. We encourage
all parties to the conflict to ensure the safe, unhindered
passage of civilians fleeing the violence and safe access
for humanitarian actors to all affected populations.
The fierce fighting over Kobane has become
a symbol of resistance, but also recalls the Syrian
Government’s refusal to fight ISIL. In the face of ISIL’s
expansion, Al-Assad continues to fight his own people,
not terrorism. The humanitarian situation in and
around Syria, extreme violence and grave violations of
basic norms of international humanitarian law by all
parties to the conflict remain our biggest concern. The
denial of access, starvation as a method of war, the use
of chemical weapons and continued barrel bombings of
civilian areas constitute war crimes and crimes against
humanity. We must make sure that all perpetrators of
such crimes be brought to account. At the same time
we note that, without an inclusive political negotiation
urgently addressing all the legitimate aspirations
and grievances of all Syrian people, the situation
will continue to deteriorate. We fully support United
Nations Special Envoy Mr. Staffan de Mistura in his
efforts and look forward to his briefing in the Council.
Lebanon, too, is increasingly affected by the
situation in the region. In August, the attacks in Arsal
recalled the looming threat of expansionist extremism
to that country. Strong democratic institutions are
essential to withstand that threat, which is affecting
the fragile balance among communities in Lebanon.
We express our full support to Lebanon, including its
Armed Forces, and call on all parties to put aside their
differences and urgently elect a new president. The
political vacuum must be filled in order to strengthen
Lebanon’s resilience to the dramatic challenges it faces.
In Yemen, the use of force by the Houthis, in
disregard of the National Dialogue Conference
outcomes and the Peace and National Partnership
Agreement, is a significant blow to Yemen’s peaceful
transition. The occupation of civilian and government
buildings must stop. Heavy military equipment must
be handed over to the Government. The unity and
territorial integrity of Yemen must be preserved and all
political forces should unite behind crucial economic
reforms, as further fragmentation will threaten the
very survival of Yemen as a State. The Council should
no longer hesitate to use the tools at its disposal under
resolution 2140 (2014) and impose sanctions on those
who are behind the attempts to undermine the peace,
security and stability of Yemen.

14-58091

21/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7281

Turning to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, we
commend Egypt and Norway for convening a conference
on the reconstruction of Gaza. Let us hope that this was
the last time the international community is called upon
to rebuild Gaza. There cannot be a return to the status
quo ante. We need to see a fundamental and durable
change in Gaza, within the framework of a two-State
solution. The Palestinian Authority must assume its full
responsibilities in the Gaza Strip. We are encouraged
by the recent Palestinian Cabinet meeting in Gaza. The
understanding reached on 25 September was a positive
step and should be implemented swiftly and fully.

While the world’s attention is focused on the
military campaign against the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) in Iraq and Syria, efforts to reach a
political solution to the Syrian crisis tragically seem
to have been relegated to second or even third place.
We must therefore bear in mind that the expansion
and consolidation of ISIL and the spread of sectarian
violence throughout the region are the result of the
prolonged and uncontrolled militarization of the
Syrian conflict, which is rooted in the inability and
unwillingness of local, regional and international
actors to reconcile their differences by peaceful means.

The Government of Israel needs to lift restrictions
on the socioeconomic development of the Gaza Strip,
in particular in the field of movement and access. We
welcome the adoption of the trilateral agreement on the
reconstruction mechanism. At the same time, we remain
concerned by the recent tensions in the West Bank and
East Jerusalem, including in the Temple Mount-Haram
Al-Sharif complex, and the price tag attack on a mosque
in the West Bank. The Israeli decision to approve a plan
for new settlement activity in the area of Givat Hamatos
is another worrying development. We call on all parties
to refrain from any actions heightening tensions and
risking a reversal to open conflict. We call on the
Government of Israel to put an end to its settlement
policy in East Jerusalem and the West Bank. We also
call on the Palestinian leadership to use its United
Nations status constructively.

Therefore, just as in Iraq the formation of an
inclusive new Government is a central component
of the strategy to help stop the spread of extremism,
so in Syria must the resolution of the conflict by
peaceful means be at the centre of the priorities of the
international community. Without peace in Syria there
will be no peace in the region and the expansion of ISIL
and other extremist groups will continue.

In conclusion, only a credible resumption of the
peace negotiations can lead to a durable solution. Our
ultimate objective remains a two-State solution, with
the State of Israel and an independent, democratic,
contiguous, sovereign and viable State of Palestine
living side by side in peace and security, and mutual
recognition. Lithuania is fully committed to working
towards that end.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as representative of
Argentina.
I thank the Secretary-General for participating in
this open debate. I also thank the Permanent Observer
of the State of Palestine for his statement. I also thank
the representative of Israel.
At the outset, I will briefly address the situations in
Syria and Iraq, before turning to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, as the central focus of our quarterly debates.

We therefore hope to be able to start working soon
with the new Special Envoy, Mr. De Mistura, to begin
to forge the consensus needed for effective action by
the Security Council. At the same time, we take this
opportunity to reaffirm our demand that all actions
in the fight against ISIL be framed with respect for
international law and for human rights, including the
Charter of the United Nations and relevant resolutions
of the Security Council, and observe the highest
standards for the protection of civilians.
Regarding the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, on
12 October Argentina added its contribution to
the efforts of the international community for the
reconstruction of Gaza. After 50 days of extreme
violence and unprecedented devastation, rebuilding
Gaza and meeting the vast needs of the victims is a
humanitarian, political and moral imperative. It is an
urgent task. The cooperation of all stakeholders under
the leadership of the Palestinian Government of national
consensus will be essential for turning promises into
tangible results.
While reconstruction work begins, and the work of
rebuilding from previous years continues, it is crucial to
bear in mind the message that resonated with such force
in Cairo: we must bring to an end this destructive cycle
through a durable solution that goes beyond the sort of
short-term assistance that leaves the underlying causes
of violence intact. The people of Gaza do not need only

14-5809129/72

S/PV.7281

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

humanitarian assistance. The people of Gaza do not
need only cement, bricks and wood. What they need
ultimately is freedom. Reconstruction must therefore be
accompanied by a process of genuine political change
to end the 47 years of illegal occupation. Otherwise,
we are volunteering to continue managing the conflict
by accepting the fallacy that, with sufficient resources,
the occupation can be more dignified. Let us make no
mistake: that is impossible! Dignity and occupation are
absolutely incompatible concepts.
We believe, therefore, that it is necessary to do
more than where we have done to date. It is not enough
to condemn the excessive use of force by Israel or
the launching of rockets by Hamas; to be horrified at
the killing of civilians; to weep when we witness the
murder of women and children; to repeat time and
again that the building of settlements is illegal and
hinders peace; or to express our deep concern about
the impunity enjoyed by extremist settlers and their
acts of incitement and violence in the holy places of
Jerusalem. This is not enough. We have had enough of
such repetitive rhetoric. We have had enough, above all,
of such unnecessary violence.
Over the past 20 years, various negotiating formats
and initiatives have been tried and have failed. Far
from resolving the conflict, they have perpetuated the
status quo at the expense of the rights of the Palestinian
people. But these 20 years have not been useless; they
have served to crystallize within the international
community a set of principles and parametres that
outline a two-State solution, contained in the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly. It is crucial that progress be made in its
implementation before it is too late. We believe that
the Security Council should assume its political and
institutional responsibilities, acting as a key player in
this task by helping to create the conditions necessary
for this to be occur.
That is why we support, and will continue to
support, all proposals containing the elements which
enjoy the overwhelming acceptance of the international
community to resolve the conflict, which are based
on international law and inspired by justice, seek the
full independence of Palestine, and guarantee the
right of Israel to live in peace and security. From this
perspective, we have determined and supported from
the beginning the initiative launched by President
Abbas and endorsed by the League of Arab States for
the Security Council to adopt a resolution containing

30/72

21/10/2014

parametres, targets and clear deadlines for ending
the occupation. The fact is that for too long, using the
excuse that the peace process must be protected, the
Security Council has tacitly consented to practices
that have actually undermined the recognition of the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian people, which are
one of the main objectives of the negotiations.
We are not naive. While peace can be achieved
overnight, violence, too, can happen overnight. We
are not naive. The interests and reasons that continue
to block effective action by the Security Council are
known to all. We must decide whether we want to
continue to be part of the problem or to begin to be
part of the solution. My country believes firmly that the
Council cannot continue to look the other way, since
it is clear that every time it has failed in its mission
the human cost has been intolerable. And in a region
where extremists are imposing an agenda of more and
more violence and more and more hatred, it is our duty
to support those who strive to build peace, not merely
infrastructure. It is our duty to those who wish to build
peace through peaceful and legitimate means. Argentina
continues to be ready to support those efforts.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I would like to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and deliver a
condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.
I wish to inform all concerned that we will be
carrying on this open debate right through the lunch
hour, as we have a very large number of speakers.
Mr. Oyarzábal took the Chair.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lebanon.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon): I would like to thank
Argentina for organizing this timely meeting, and the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing as
well as his efforts to address the situation in the Middle
East.
Three months ago, Israel launched its third major
campaign of collective punishment against the 1,800,000
people of Gaza in less than six years. In July and August
Israel’s air force launched more than 6,000 attacks,

14-58091

21/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and its army and navy fired about 50,000 artillery and
tank shells, killing more than 2,100 Palestinians and
wounding more than 11,000. The majority of those
casualties were, as we all know, defenceless civilians,
and it is estimated that more than half of them were
children, women, the disabled and old people. More
than 450,000 inhabitants of Gaza were forced to leave
their homes, and 277 schools, 17 hospitals and clinics
and more than 40,000 other buildings were damaged.
All those who stood against the savage Israeli assault
on Gaza and its dreadful methods of indiscriminate
killing and wanton destruction of homes and property
deserve to be commended. I should also add that it was
particularly heartening to see an open letter published
on 23 August in The New York Times in which 327
signatories from 26 countries, representing four
generations of survivors and descendants of survivors
and victims of the Holocaust, stated:
“As Jewish survivors and descendants of survivors
and victims of the Nazi genocide we unequivocally
condemn the massacre of Palestinians in Gaza and
the ongoing occupation and colonization of historic
Palestine. ... Nothing can justify bombing United
Nations shelters, homes, hospitals and universities.
Nothing can justify depriving people of electricity
and water.”
Realizing the enormity of the destruction, the
international community pledged $5.4 billion at a Cairo
Conference for the reconstruction of Gaza, and that
generosity is indeed to be commended as well. No less
important, however, is the fact that all participants in
the Conference stressed the unavoidable importance
of addressing the root causes of the conflict. The
Secretary-General summed it up by saying that it was
time to chart a course to a just and final peace between
Israelis and Palestinians, one that addresses all the
outstanding issues.
More than 20 years ago, more than 20 years after
the Oslo Accords and two years after United States
Secretary of State John Kerry’s renewed efforts to
relaunch the peace talks, it is heart-wrenching to witness
not only the drastic humanitarian situation in Gaza but
how this body, which is entrusted with the maintenance
of international peace and security, can still stand idle
before the continued and repeated violations by Israel
of its obligations under international law, from the
rampant illegal settlement activities and evictions of
Palestinians from their homes to the provocations and

S/PV.7281

incitement by Israeli soldiers and settlers, in particular
at Al-Haram Al-Sharif in occupied East Jerusalem. Let
the lessons of Gaza spark a new beginning for the peace
process, to bring a clear end to the Israeli occupation,
help the State of Palestine achieve full independence
and meanwhile ensure that its people have international
protection. In that context, we applaud the decision by
the Government of Sweden to recognize the State of
Palestine, as well as the motion of the Parliament of the
United Kingdom to that effect.
Time and again, my Government has reiterated its
commitment to the full implementation of resolution 1701
(2006) and has called on the international community
to compel Israel to abide by its obligations under that
resolution, withdraw from the remaining occupied
Lebanese territories and end its violations of Lebanese
sovereignty by land, air and sea. Today we would like
to renew that call and to underline that it is only by
reinforcing its capacities that the Lebanese army will
be able to fulfil its tasks in cooperation with the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon in southern Lebanon,
combat terrorism and maintain security and stability
throughout the country. The events in Arsal are only
the latest chapter in the Lebanese army’s fight against
terrorism. In that regard, my delegation is very grateful
for the continued support that has been expressed for
our army, particularly during the International Support
Group for Lebanon’s meetings in Paris, Rome and here
in New York, on the margins of the General Assembly.
Since the beginning of the conflict in Syria, the
flow of refugees into Lebanon has continued unabated.
The staff of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees register an average of
2,500 new refugees every day. Indeed, with more
than 1,145,000 refugees now registered, the impact
is affecting every aspect of life in my country. For
example, the number of student refugees is expected to
exceed 140,000 this year, amounting to 57 per cent of
public-school students in Lebanon. Clearly, the stability
of my country is being threatened by the fallout from
the Syrian conflict.
As the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees said, preserving Lebanon’s stability is
everybody’s business. Burden-sharing is a fundamental
prerequisite for the success of our collective endeavours
to address the dire humanitarian situation of Syrian
refugees and their host communities. In that context, and
on the eve of the Berlin conference on Syrian refugees,
let me underline how important it is to include a greater

14-5809131/72

S/PV.7281

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

number of those refugees currently in Lebanon in any
resettlement programmes.
Finally, the dire humanitarian situation of Syrians,
whether displaced in their own country or now refugees
in Lebanon, Jordan or Turkey, should be enough in itself
for the international community to redouble its efforts
to help reach a political settlement to the Syrian crisis.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
Palestinian question is a recurring item on the
agenda of the Security Council, and has been since
the establishment of the Organization following the
Second World War. Today, we are discussing this item
once again following the tragic events in the Gaza Strip
last summer, in which a large part of the Palestinian
State was involved and which proved to everyone that
the failure to reach a lasting and just settlement of the
Palestinian question remains a threat to international
and regional peace and security. The events in Gaza
have revealed a few realities that we should highlight
today.
First, the solution to the Palestinian question is
well known and has been unanimously welcomed at
the international level — the establishment of a viable,
independent Palestinian State within the pre-1967
borders, with Jerusalem as its capital. That vision
remains elusive, primarily owing to the ongoing Israeli
occupation and the other illegitimate expansionary
practices, which flagrantly violate resolution 242
(1967).
Secondly, and in that respect, I would like to stress
Egypt’s total rejection of the recent Israeli decision to
seize Palestinian territory in the West Bank.
Thirdly, the pretexts and justifications for the war
in Gaza — the right to legitimate self-defence and the
need for a deterrant factor — do not hold water, as
evidenced by the three wars waged against Gaza in the
past decade. Those wars refute the allegations that a
blockade of Gaza could ever achieve security for the
Israeli State, as does the significant humanitarian cost
to the people that those conflicts entailed.
Fourthly, since the 1990s the Palestinians have
opted for the political path, which is the only viable
way to settle the Palestinian issue and which must lead
to the establishment of an independent Palestinian
State. However, the difficulties that this process has

32/72

21/10/2014

encountered, including the continued illegitimate and
illegal practices aimed at establishing new settlements
and a new reality in occupied Palestinian land over a
fairly short period of time, has placed the Palestinian
leadership in a very difficult situation when it comes to
its own people.
The Palestinian people place great hopes in their
leaders’ ability to secure their freedom and dignity
and the establishment of an independent State on their
behalf, especially since the uninterrupted expansion
of settlements threatens to dismember the Palestinian
State’s territory by undermining in practice the twoState solution that was agreed on internationally. That
has led the Palestinian leadership to request a timeline
for an end to the occupation in order to preserve the
rights of the Palestinian people. In that respect, I wish
to quote the words of the President of the Arab Republic
of Egypt during the International Conference on the
reconstruction of Gaza on 12 October:
“Egypt, on the basis of its historic and
regional role and its vision, which stems from
its longstanding principles and values, calls for
an end to this conflict and the achievement of a
comprehensive and just settlement. I launch this
appeal not only to heads of State, but to the peoples
of the entire region, peoples who have suffered from
the throes of war and who continue to be wounded
by this war. I launch a vibrant appeal to the people
and Government of Israel. It is high time to put an
end to this conflict as soon as possible in order to
respect people’s rights and restore security.”
Egypt, on the basis of its historic responsibility with
respect to the Palestinian question, has consistently
supported the aspirations of the Palestinian people
in order to enable the Palestinian Authority, under
the leadership of Mahmoud Abbas, to achieve its
aspirations. In that respect, I would like to stress the
important achievements that have taken place since
the Cairo Conference. Through that Conference, under
the joint chairmanship of Norway and Egypt, the
international community was able to provide assistance
that would allow the Government of national consensus
to rebuild Gaza. I would like to pay tribute to all of
the States that made a commitment to provide generous
assistance to the reconstruction of Gaza.
Egypt has contributed to understandings that
allowed for the formation of a Government of national
consensus in Palestine. Egypt calls upon the Security
Council and its member States to fully shoulder their
14-58091

21/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

responsibilities through effective action that is free of
any consideration other than maintaining international
peace and security by taking the measures that are
necessary to bring an end to the occupation as a prelude
to the establishment of an independent Palestinian
State.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Algeria.
Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): First of all, I would like
to thank the Argentine presidency for the programme
of work they have scheduled for this month and for
organizing today’s special meeting on the situation in
the Middle East. I thank the Secretary-General as well.
There is no need to recall the consequences and the
profound impact of 50 continuous days of the Israeli
pounding of Gaza. The killing of 500 children is the
most appalling fact, but we must also mention the
100,000 displaced, with the tragic irony of Palestinian
sons of refugees being displaced once again within their
own land. I would like to quote the Secretary-General’s
statement, made just 10 days ago in the Gaza Strip: “I
am here with a very heavy heart. The destruction which
I have seen coming here is beyond description.”
No further words are needed. Let us leave it to
the independent commission of inquiry established by
the Human Rights Council pursuant to its resolution
adopted on 23 July for the investigation of all violations
of international humanitarian and human rights law.
Let us just say that accountability and justice are
essential for the international system. We have also
witnessed the formidable international response for the
reconstruction of Gaza. The successful convening and
conclusion of the International Conference convened
in Cairo and hosted by Egypt and Norway resulted in
pledges of $5.4 billion, and it is a good omen that the
Palestinian Government of national consensus will
carry out the reconstruction plan in coordination with
the United Nations. Algeria will obviously continue to
provide its full support for the Palestinian cause in that
regard. During the Cairo conference, my Government
pledged $25 million in financial aid, which is in
addition to humanitarian aid, food and medical supplies
totalling more than $22 million.
It is obvious that the international community,
States, international organizations and civil society have
been responsive to the situation. There is a strong and
urgent need that must be fulfilled. But it is legitimate
to ask ourselves: are we going to reconstruct and simply
write off the damages, destruction and death, with

S/PV.7281

no hint of a peace process in sight? Are we not just
paving the way for the next Gaza destruction? Are we
going to endlessly continue to act as the — obviously
necessary — fireman, while never addressing or facing
the arsonists?
The current status quo is destructive. While we still
evoke the need for a resumption of the peace talks, Israel
has chosen not only to renege on its past commitments
but also to blatantly continue its illegal settlement
policy and practices. The most recent decision on the
construction of more than 2,600 new units in occupied
East Jerusalem is not only a blatant violation of all
norms of international law but also another stumbling
block on the already uncertain road to peace. We repeat
and underline that such a situation needs the effective
and genuine response of the international community,
in particular the Security Council. That is an obligation
that cannot be evaded or ignored.
Concerning another important issue with regard to
the extremely volatile situation throughout the region,
let me mention that, with respect to Syria, the window
of opportunity is narrowing daily. It would be extremely
short-sighted to think that anyone would ever benefit
from the current situation. Destroying houses and souls
goes with the building of incessant hatred, terrorism
and war.
Let me just recall simple facts. Palestine is illegally
occupied. There must be an end to the occupation
for the sake of justice and peace for the people of the
entire region. There are international principles for
the establishment of a just settlement of the issue.
Otherwise, it will continue for another generation. The
prospective settlement is being completely destroyed
by Israeli policies and practices, which are making it
progressively impossible to achieve peace. That is why
my country fully supports the initiative of President
Abbas to set a time frame for the end of the occupation.
That is also why my country fully supports the urgent
need to protect the Palestinian population in accordance
with international humanitarian law.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Ms. Bolaños Pérez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to congratulate you, Sir, and your team
on your country’s leadership and work as President of
the Security Council this month, which is a particularly
busy one. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his informative briefing.

14-5809133/72

S/PV.7281

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Guatemala remains steadfast in its belief that
diplomacy and dialogue are the best way to achieve
a long-term solution in each of the conflicts that
undermine the Middle East region. Although the extent
of the existing intransigence and hostilities could
suggest that such a view is naive, we continue to believe
that political solutions to the disputes that have divided
the region for years are the only path that offers lasting
stability and the possibility of returning to the path of
progress and development.
The recent events between Israel and Palestine
have not been encouraging. The 51 days of conflict had
disastrous consequences. More than 2,100 Palestinians
died, along with more than 70 Israelis. Almost one third
of the population of the Gaza Strip was expelled from
their homes. Many of them lost all their belongings.
Whole neighbourhoods, including basic public
infrastructure, were devastated. Dozens of schools,
hospitals and clinics were destroyed or damaged.
United Nations facilities were affected and United
Nations staff lost their lives. The Secretary-General
called the destruction indescribable. The successful
reconstruction of Gaza requires a strong political basis.
In that regard, we deem the reconciliation agreement
reached on 25 September in Cairo to be positive. We
hope that all stakeholders will strive to ensure that it is
fully implemented. We also believe that the Conference
on Palestine and the reconstruction of Gaza that took
place in Cairo on 12 October is a step in the right
direction. It is encouraging that the reconstruction
work has begun. We hope that such work helps the
civilian population most affected by the conflict. In
that regard, we recognize the success of the temporary
tripartite agreement negotiated by the United Nations
in ensuring the entry of reconstruction materials into
the Gaza Strip.
However, the peace process must continue. It
is therefore necessary to promote an environment
conducive to peace, mutual understanding and respect
for human rights. That should include an investigation
into all possible violations of international humanitarian
law committed by all sides during the conflict. We
also believe that it will be important to strengthen
the ceasefire agreement for the resumption of any
kind of peace talks. Along the same lines, it is vital
that all parties refrain from any unilateral action and
provocations that could contribute to increased tension.
It is essential not to lose sight of the root causes of
the recent hostilities: a restrictive occupation that has
34/72

21/10/2014

continued for nearly half a century, the ongoing denial
of Palestinian rights and a lack of tangible progress in
the peace negotiations. The parties must make a true
and renewed effort to chart a clear path towards a just
and lasting negotiated peace that includes, among
other things, the lifting of the embargo, the cessation
of settlement construction, taking Israel’s legitimate
security concerns into account and the establishment
of two States living side by side in peace and security.
We are aware of the enormous challenges that the
pursuit of a political solution at both the national and the
international levels may mean for the parties. However,
we insist that it is the only way left. Continuing along
the current course will only deepen the divisions,
thereby hampering the desired goal of peace. The status
quo is not an option.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Allow me to start by congratulating you, Sir,
your country, Argentina, and its delegation on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. Allow me to begin with a number of
questions.
How long are we going to continue meeting here
simply to make statements that express concern about
and the condemnation of Israel’s continued occupation
of Arab territories in Palestine, the Golan and southern
Lebanon? That occupation, unprecedented in its
duration, violation of international law and settlement
policies, has destroyed any glimmer of hope for the
establishment of a Palestinian State, for which we all
yearn, and for a comprehensive, just and lasting peace.
The occupying Power has always flouted all the
meetings of this international Organization and the
resolutions adopted, even though Israel itself was
established as a result of a United Nations resolution.
Everyone knows that such Israeli disregard for
the United Nations, its ongoing persecution of the
Palestinian people and its occupation of Arab lands,
including the Syrian Golan, are primarily due to a
number of influential States that are Council members
irresponsibly supporting Israel at the political, military,
economic and media levels.
Some people claim day and night that they are
concerned about preserving the rights of the Syrian
people. However, their true intentions and misleading
words are now known to all, in particular with regard to
14-58091

21/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the condemnation of the Israeli occupation of the Syrian
Golan since 1967. That almost leads us to believe that
reacquiring the Syrian Golan is not a natural right of the
Syrian people, that the Golan is not an occupied Syrian
land or that Syrian citizens who suffer under the Israeli
occupation are not a part of the Syrian population.
Where are those representatives who laud human rights
and international humanitarian law when it comes to
putting an end to the Israeli settlement campaigns and
the suffering of Syrian citizens, which has continued for
nearly half a century. Where are their noble words and
intentions when those citizens suffer from policies of
repression, racial discrimination and torture, and when
they are deprived of their natural resources, including
oil, gas and water?
The most recent developments in the region,
which have pushed the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF) to temporarily evacuate
some of its positions, are not jut coincidence. They
have come at the right time to reaffirm what we had
warned against, that the support led by certain regimes,
including Israel, to Al-Qaida-related groups in the
area of separation is not only a flagrant violation of
the Disengagement Agreement, international law and
all Security Council resolutions, but it also exposes
the United Nations forces to danger, thereby making
them unable to discharge their mandate. That is what
happened when these terrorist groups repeatedly
kidnapped peacekeepers, members of UNDOF, and
fired against those soldiers or their positions, which
prompted them to evacuate some of those positions
under threat of fire. That occurred under a process of
coordination with a regime that sponsors terrorism and
claims that it is a mediator, but it does that to cover
up the fact that it pays bribes and ransom money to
terrorists. That is inadmissible.
What we cannot understand is that every single
warning, all the information that we have communicated
repeatedly to all the parties — the United Nations and
others — including about Israeli support to terrorist
groups and about the fact that Syrian positions were
being directly targeted, was all disregarded. That is
done to help those groups to achieve their ends. What
about the request we officially submitteed calling for an
investigation of the possible collusion between Qatari
intelligence services and the kidnapping of UNDOF
peacekeepers, especially members of the Filippino
contingents?
Those terrorist groups continue to act on the basis
of their conviction that the United Nations is not even

S/PV.7281

going to lift a little finger to intervene, that Israel will
continue to lend them all logistical military support
and that Qatar will keep paying millions of dollars in
ransom money to release those who have been detained.
That is taking place in the framework of what is nothing
more than a masquerade to justify the financing of
the Nusra Front, after the adoption of resolution 2170
(2014), regarding the prohibition on the financing of
the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant and the Nusra
Front, caused new constraints and limitations to be
imposed upon them. That does not, however, exempt
Qatar of its legal responsibility — it is a flagrant
violation of resolution 2133 (2014), which bans the
payment of ransoms to terrorist outfits. It is high time
for the United Nations to come into play, to end the
Turko-Saudi collusion aimed at shedding Syrian blood
and that promotes the Judaization of Jerusalem.
We would like to reaffirm our ongoing position in
support of the right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination, and the building of an independent
State throughout its whole territory, with Jerusalem as
its capital, while guaranteeing the right of refugees to
return to their lands, to their homes, in keeping with
General Assembly resolution 194 (III) of 1948. That
is a non-negotiable right. It is a right that will never
disappear or evaporate. It is reaffirmed by international
law and United Nations resolutions and all the relevant
international instruments.
Syria condemns the Israeli violence against the
Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip. That is yet another
new chapter in the overall plot and the overall aggression
against the Palestinian people. Israel’s continuation of
such acts of aggression has exacerbated tension in the
region. They have reached an unprecedented level, one
that will have very heavy consequences and will not be
limited to the region alone. That is why we call upon
the United Nations, including the Security Council,
to bear its responsibilities by putting an end to the
Israeli occupation and the barbaric policy of continued
aggression and by forcing Israel to withdraw from
all occupied Arab lands to the line of 4 June 1967, in
keeping with the relevant United Nations resolutions,
including resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 497
(1981).
We are again today witnessing repeated attempts
by the United States of America and its allies aimed
at killing off the very hope embedded in the agenda
item under consideration, “The situation in the Middle
East”. That is being done to cover up Israel’s crimes and

14-5809135/72

S/PV.7281

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

its ongoing violations of international law by deflecting
attention from those very facts. The policies of those
States — headed by the United States, the United
Kingdom, Saudi Arabia, Qatar and others — violate
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and
the rules of international law by resorting to the use of
terrorism and defamation as tools to combat the Syrian
State, including through the building — or should I
say, the creation — of training camps for terrorists and
mercenaries by claiming that they are the moderate
opposition. Then they send them into the Syrian interior,
crossing our borders with neighbouring countries, in
violation of all the Security Council resolutions on
counter-terrorism.
The statements made by delegations have revealed
that the very same States that back terrorism in my
country, Syria, are also working to protect Israel,
attempting to ensure that it never faces embarrassment
and covering up its crimes. The United States of America
has not just used the right of veto 61 times to protect
Israel, to prolong its occupation of our territories that
suffer under its occupation. No, the United States has
even disregarded Security Council resolutions in the
past to forge illegal alliances targeting the sovereignty
of a great many States Members of this Organization.
Those are illegitimate alliances that were forged by
the United States and the United Kingdom outside
the confines of the Security Council, and they have
resulted in nothing but violence, destruction, anarchy
and terrorism throughout the world, and that came at
the cost of respect for the rules of international law and
human rights.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank the brotherly Argentine Republic
for having organized this meeting.
(spoke in English)
I also thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
Brazil also wishes to acknowledge the interventions by
the Deputy Permanent Representative of Israel and by
the Permanent Observer of the State of Palestine.
This quarterly exercise of reviewing the situation
in the Middle East is once again happening against
the backdrop of increasing tensions and threats to
international peace and security in different parts of
the region.

36/72

21/10/2014

In Gaza, almost two months of conflict — the
third in six years — left us with a legacy of extensive
destruction and exacerbated distrust. The appalling
number of Palestinian civilians dead, injured and
displaced and the scale of destruction of homes, basic
infrastructure and even United Nations facilities are no
less shocking. It is time to break the cycle of violence
and to ensure that both Israel and Palestine live side
by side in peace and security. We must confront the
recurring dramatic consequences of our collective
failure to deal with the fundamental aspects of the
Palestine question, including the settlement policies
pursued by Israel in the occupied State of Palestine. A
clear, united message against business as usual in the
aftermath of conflict is urgently needed. We believe
that there should be a fundamental change in the way
we approach the question of Palestine, including in
the Council. As President Dilma Rousseff stated on
24 September at the opening of the general debate of
the General Assembly, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
“must be properly resolved, not precariously managed”
(A/69/PV.6, p. 8). If the international community can
be convened to help rebuild Gaza after each conflict,
why not help devise a political solution to prevent new
episodes of destruction so as to make peace much more
than the mere absence of war?
There is some solace in the fact that the ceasefire
agreed under Egyptian auspices is currently being
maintained. We strongly encourage the parties to
consolidate the basic agreement so that they can resume
substantial talks aimed at resolving the underlying causes
of the conflict. The trilateral agreement between Israel,
Palestine and the United Nations for the reconstruction
of Gaza is important and commendable, but it is not
sufficient. The blockade should be completely lifted,
allowing for the urgently needed humanitarian aid to
enter the Strip and granting the people of Gaza their
right to start rebuilding their lives.
At the international donors Conference held in Cairo
on 12 October, another significant measure aimed at
mitigating the effects of the destruction in Gaza, Brazil
recalled its recent efforts to contribute to the objective
of a viable, peaceful and sustainable State of Palestine.
We also pledged an additional contribution of 6,000 tons
of rice and 4,000 tons of beans to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East to be distributed in Gaza. While supporting
the reconstruction of Gaza, this must be the last
occasion on which Gazans need to rebuild. All efforts

14-58091

21/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7281

should be undertaken to ensure accountability on both
sides for the human rights violations and violations
of international law and humanitarian law committed
during the conflict. Fighting impunity is another way
of preventing the recurrence of abuses and violations.

Jordan, Turkey and Egypt, in receiving Syrian refugees.
The international community should support that
honourable effort. Brazil has also contributed to that
effort by receiving more than 1,500 refugees from the
Syrian conflict.

Brazil is increasingly concerned with the
deteriorating security and humanitarian situation in
Iraq. We condemn in the strongest terms the attacks and
heinous executions perpetrated by the so-called Islamic
State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS), which seeks to destabilize
the region and spread extremist ideologies. The steps
taken by Iraqi leaders in forming a new Government and
declaring their commitment to stay united against the
threats posed by ISIS are commendable. We encourage
the new Government to ensure inclusiveness and to
work to meet the needs of all Iraqi citizens, irrespective
of their ethnicity, religion or sect. The international
community should support Iraq in combating terrorism
in a way that is fully and strictly compatible with the
Charter of the United Nations.

Brazil is also concerned about security and stability
in Lebanon. We strongly condemn the terrorist acts
perpetrated by extremist groups in the Beqaa Valley
and surrounding areas, including the towns of Aarsal
and Brital. We stand by the Lebanese Government in
its fight against terrorism. Our participation at the
Ministerial Conference on International Support for
the Lebanese Armed Forces, held in June in Rome,
derives from our firm solidarity with Lebanon’s State
institutions. We would like to underline once again our
support for the policy of dissociation from regional
crises agreed in the Baabda Declaration of June 2012.
Brazil’s participation in the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon, whose Interim Maritime Task
Force has been led by Brazilian officials since 2011,
plays a prominent role in translating our commitment
into practical actions. In addition, the Brazilian Navy
School in Rio de Janeiro trains Lebanese Navy cadets.

Turning to Syria, it is greatly disturbing that violence
continues unabated and the humanitarian situation is
deteriorating further, despite the adoption of resolutions
2139 (2014) and 2165 (2014) and the United Nations
efforts to implement them. We strongly condemn the
continued violations of human rights committed by
all sides, as has consistently been denounced by the
Human Rights Council’s Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic.
As the Commission’s Chair, Mr. Paulo Sérgio Pinheiro,
stated during the presentation of the Commission’s
latest report in August 2014 (A/HRC/27/60), the
number of innocent Syrians killed, including at the
hands of terrorist groups, is climbing even higher, and
their stories and their pain seem increasingly obscured
by the extent of the tragedy.
It is as clear as ever that there is no military
solution for the crisis. It is, however, dismaying to
learn that there continues to be a belief in the merits
of putting more weapons in the hands of armed groups.
Brazil commends the work of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Mission, which concluded its activities in September
and whose efforts led to the successful removal and
destruction of the chemical weapons declared by
Syria. We expect the destruction of the 12 remaining
production facilities on Syrian territory to start as soon
as possible.
We applaud the outstanding generosity shown
by many countries in the region, including Lebanon,

The Security Council has a paramount legal and
political responsibility and cannot abstain from its
duties. Brazil expects the current situation in the Middle
East to prompt the Council into a new phase of active
diplomatic engagement to resolve those questions to the
direct benefit of Palestinians, Israelis, Iraqis, Syrians,
Lebanese, Libyans and other peoples in the region.
Brazil is ready to offer assistance and support.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries (NAM). I wish to convey the
Movement’s appreciation to your delegation, Sir, for
convening this open debate on the situation in the
Middle East, including the question of Palestine, at this
crucial time. We also wish to thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his briefing to the Council today and
to express the Movement’s appreciation for his tireless
efforts to uphold the Charter of the United Nations
and promote peace, including his recent participation
in the Cairo Conference and his visit to the occupied
Palestinian territory, where he visited the Gaza Strip
and witnessed at first hand the horrific tragedy and
massive destruction inflicted on the Palestinian people
during the Israeli military aggression of July and

14-5809137/72

S/PV.7281

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

21/10/2014

August. I must also not fail to say that NAM strongly
welcomes the convening and the success of Cairo
International Conference on Palestine “Reconstructing
Gaza”, co-hosted by Egypt and Norway on 12 October.

occupying Power, end the blockade and all illegal actions
against the Palestinian people under its occupation and
abide by international law, including humanitarian and
human rights law.

The Non-Aligned Movement takes this opportunity
to reaffirm its long-standing solidarity with the
Palestinian people and to reiterate its support for the
realization of their legitimate national aspirations
and inalienable rights, including their rights to selfdetermination and freedom in their independent State
of Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital, as well
as for a just solution for the plight of the Palestinian
refugees in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 194 (III) of 1948.

In that regard, NAM expresses its strong
condemnation of Israel’s continuing and escalating
settlement construction throughout the occupied
Palestinian territory, in violation of the Fourth Geneva
Convention and United Nations resolutions, including
those of the Council. We especially condemn the series
of illegal actions in recent weeks, including the seizure
of 1,000 acres of land near the Palestinian town of
Bethlehem and the advancement of plans to build 2,600
settler units in and around occupied East Jerusalem.
Those and other ongoing violations, including the
demolition of homes, forced displacement of Palestinian
civilians, the arrest and detention of Palestinians,
including children, and incessant violence, terror
and provocations by Israeli settlers and extremists,
including vis-à-vis sensitive religious sites, particularly
Al-Aqsa Mosque, have worsened conditions on the
ground, deepening already grave doubts regarding
Israel’s claimed commitment to the two-State solution
and peace.

In this International Year of Solidarity with
the Palestinian People, NAM reiterates its call for
intensifying international efforts to actively advance a
peaceful, just and lasting solution based on the longstanding parameters rooted in the relevant United
Nations resolutions and major initiatives undertaken in
the past decades. There is international consensus that
the status quo is unsustainable and that the realization
by the Palestinian people of their freedom and human
rights is long overdue, and all efforts must be exerted to
end the Israeli occupation and the prolonged conflict.
We meet at a time when our memories are still
freshly filled with images from the Israelis’ latest
onslaught in Gaza. NAM strongly condemned the
military aggression by Israel that traumatized the entire
Palestinian population and shocked the whole world.
The international community witnessed with horror the
more than 50 days of criminal military aggression that
caused massive human devastation, with thousands of
injured and lives that perished and widespread physical
destruction throughout Gaza.
The humanitarian disaster persists today as urgent
and comprehensive recovery and reconstruction efforts
continue to be delayed due to the ongoing Israeli
blockade. Homes and entire neighbourhoods remain in
ruins. More than 100,000 people remain homeless. Food
insecurity is rampant. And injured civilians continue to
die due to the severity of the wounds they sustained
and the lack of lifesaving medical treatment and basic
medicines in Gaza.
NAM condemns the Israeli blockade, which
constitutes gross and systematic collective punishment
of the Palestinian people, and urges the international
community to persist in demanding that Israel, the

38/72

Despite serious international efforts and repeated
calls for a peaceful and comprehensive solution in
conformity with international law and the relevant
United Nations resolutions, Israel’s military occupation
of Palestinian and Arab lands continues, as does
the denial and violation of the inalienable rights
and freedoms of the Palestinian people by Israel,
the occupying Power. The failure to resolve the
question continues to undermine the credibility of
our international system and the rule of law at the
international level.
The Security Council cannot remain on the sidelines
in the quest to find a just and peaceful solution to the
question of Palestine, especially while the situation
continues to deteriorate dramatically. The Security
Council must play its rightful role in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations. NAM therefore urges
the Council to act forthwith to put an end to the plight of
the Palestinian people and to undertake resolute action
towards bringing an end to the Israeli occupation and
the decades-long injustice.
The question of Palestine has been on the United
Nations agenda now for more than 66 years, yet there is
not a glimmer of hope among the Palestinian people in

14-58091

21/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

realizing their right to self-determination and freedom.
Despite their decades of good-faith participation
in peace efforts, the plight and predicament of the
Palestinians has worsened on all fronts due to Israel’s
illegal policies and practices that have entrenched the
occupation and undermined all peace efforts.
It is time for the Council to take a historic step
towards putting an end to the occupation of the
Palestinian land and paving the ground for peaceful
resolution of the conflict. In doing so, the Council
would fulfil its Charter duty for the maintenance
of international peace and security and genuinely
contribute to a solution of the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict, the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict, which
remains a source of grave concern for the region and
for the international community as a whole and for the
prospects of global peace and stability.
Lebanon continues to suffer from consecutive
Israeli violations of its borders and incursions against
its territory, followed by subsequent years of occupation
and aggression. Unfortunately, Israel continues to
violate Lebanese airspace, intensifying its incursions
over Lebanon. Such activities are blatant violations of
Lebanese sovereignty and the relevant international
resolutions, in particular resolution 1701 (2006), whose
provisions should be implemented in a manner that
guarantees the consolidation of the foundations of
stability and security in Lebanon and that will prevent
Israel from carrying out its daily violations of Lebanese
sovereignty.
With regard to the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Movement condemns all measures taken by Israel,
the occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan, which
have intensified after the outbreak of the Syrian crisis.
The Non-Aligned Movement demands once again that
Israel abide by resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw fully
from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of 4 June
1967, in implementation of resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973).
Let me say a few words in my national capacity,
in response to the statement made by the Israeli
representative today in the Council. He once more
repeated the nonsense and baseless rhetoric along the
same lines as that which was recently stated before the
General Assembly and then refuted, derided or ignored
by those present.

S/PV.7281

The words stated by the Israeli representative today
were objectively wrong at the core. It has not been Iran,
but the Israeli regime that has been the root cause of
every crisis and predicament in the Middle East in the
past seven decades. That regime’s continued occupation
of other people’s lands and its periodic aggressions
to support that policy lie at the heart of the current
situation in the region. Displacing and imprisoning
people, besieging Gaza, creating terror networks, target
murdering and terrorist acts in the region and beyond,
including in Iran, stockpiling nuclear weapons, using
prohibited weapons against children and women in
Gaza, et cetera, are all consequences of the policy of
occupation and aggression pursued by that regime.
There should be no doubt that such Israeli policies
are the most important factor in creating a space for
terrorist groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq and
Syria, Al-Qaida and Jabhat Al-Nusra in the region.
The statements replete with baseless allegations
against my country that the representatives of that
regime read out from time to time are designed only
to justify the aggression and atrocities they commit
against other people in the region and the apartheid
policy they implement within their borders on a
continuing basis. While my Government is trying to
resolve the misunderstanding about its peaceful nuclear
programme, it is preposterous that the same regime
with a highly known record of stockpiling hundreds of
nuclear weapons ventures to falsely accuse others of
trying to acquire similar weapons.
It is also well known that this regime has always
done its best to sabotage and disrupt earnest and
serious negotiations between Iran and the P5+1 group,
as the negotiations could deprive them of an excuse to
continue the occupation and aggression.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malaysia.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): Allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, on your country’s assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month. I thank you for
convening this open debate. I also wish to express my
delegation’s appreciation to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his comprehensive briefing.
Malaysia associates itself with the statement made
by the representative of Iran on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries and with the statement made

14-5809139/72

S/PV.7281

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

by the representative of Saudi Arabia on behalf of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
Malaysia welcomes the Secretary-General’s visit to
the Middle East last week, which helped to maintain the
attention of the international community on the urgent
need to address the root causes of the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict. Malaysia fully concurs with the SecretaryGeneral in that the status quo is neither sustainable nor
desirable.
Last month, the Russell Tribunal on Palestine
convened in Brussels to examine violations of
international law during the recent conflict in Gaza.
Based on the findings made by 12 renowned experts
from various fields and countries, the Tribunal found
Israel to have committed crimes against humanity and
genocide. The Tribunal also stated that Israel, as the
occupying power in the Gaza Strip, could not justify
its military aggression in Gaza as self-defence. Under
international law, people living under colonial rule or
foreign occupation are entitled to resist occupation.
Thus, Israel’s actions were aimed at perpetuating its
occupation and suppressing resistance rather than
resorting to force in lawful self-defence. Israel was
also found to have violated two cardinal principals of
international humanitarian law, namely, proportionality
and the need to clearly distinguish between civilian and
military targets.
In recent months, Israel announced a new expansion
of illegal settlements in occupied Palestinian territory in
the West Bank, including in East Jerusalem. Palestinians
continue to be subject to forced displacement as their
houses and property are demolished by the occupying
Power. Those Israeli settlements are without a doubt
illegal under international law and an obstacle to the
creation of a Palestinian State.
Malaysia is also deeply concerned about increasing
attacks and provocations by Israel on various holy
sites in Jerusalem, including the Al-Aqsa Mosque
compound. We strongly condemn attempts by Israeli
authorities to change the status and identity of the
holy sites in Jerusalem. We call for such provocations
to cease before the situation escalates and turns into
another senseless and tragic incident.
The international community has repeatedly urged
the Security Council to shoulder its responsibilities
in view of persistent and flagrant violations by Israel
of international law, international humanitarian law,
United Nations resolutions and the advisory opinion of

40/72

21/10/2014

the International Court of Justice. And yet the Security
Council remains in paralysis, and Israel carries on its
illegal actions with impunity.
Since the Security Council continues to shut its door
on Palestine, it should not blame or punish Palestine for
trying to open other doors in reliance on international
law and multilateralism in order to attain the fulfilment
of its long denied right to self-determination. The
Palestinian decision to accede to various international
conventions and treaties earlier this year, including
the four Geneva Conventions, should be welcomed.
The move is a step in the right direction, that is,
towards making Palestine a responsible member of the
international community, bound by the rules and norms
of international law.
While Malaysia agrees that the final solution
of the conflict remains in bilateral negotiations, it is
not acceptable to allow negotiations to go on forever,
as the Palestinian people continue to suffer. We
are perpetuating the historic injustice against the
Palestinian people if we insist that their only hope for a
Palestinian State depends on endless negotiations with
Israel, while at the same time, we allow Israel to move
further and further away from a two-State solution.
Malaysia therefore strongly supports the Palestinian
effort to set a time frame to end the Israeli occupation.
We call on the international community, especially
the Security Council, not to shut its door again but to
back the endeavour to end colonialism and apartheid
against Palestine for the sake of peace and stability in
the region.
Malaysia welcomes the outcome of the recent
donors Conference in Cairo. We commend the
Governments of Egypt and Norway for convening
the conference. Malaysia remains committed to
providing and facilitating the delivery of assistance
to the Palestinian people. As part of our contribution
to the reconstruction of Gaza, Malaysia contributed a
sum of $1.35 million to Palestine, both bilaterally and
multilaterally. That includes $100,000 to the Gaza Flash
Appeal launched by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and
$100,000 to the Organization of Islamic Cooperation’s
Islamic Solidarity Fund from the Palestine People’s
Humanitarian Trust Fund set up by the Malaysian
Ministry of Foreign Affairs. During the recent clashes
in Gaza this summer, Malaysian non-governmental
organizations also delivered 40 tonnes of humanitarian
and medical supplies to the Palestinians in Gaza to help
ease their suffering.
14-58091

21/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The international community needs to do
more than just rebuild Gaza. As emphasized by the
Secretary-General during his visit to Gaza this week,
the build-destroy/build-destroy cycle must be broken.
The 50-day conflict in the summer of 2014 was Israel’s
heaviest assault on the Gaza Strip since the beginning
of its occupation of Gaza in 1967. We pray that it will
be the last.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The candidate
countries the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the country of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine
and the Republic of Moldova, align themselves with
this statement.
In the interests of time, I will deliver a substantially
shortened version of my statement. The complete text
will be distributed.
The European Union welcomes the successful
outcome of the Cairo Conference on Palestine,
“Reconstructing Gaza”. It is now essential that the
Palestinian Authority assume its full Governmental
responsibilities in Gaza and that the Israel lift restrictions
to socioeconomic development, particularly in the
field of movement and access. It is also essential that
the threat to Israel posed by Hamas and other militant
groups in Gaza as demonstrated by rocket attacks and
tunnel construction is brought to an end. All terrorist
groups must disarm and be prevented from rearming.
The 25 September understanding reached by the
Palestinian parties and the 9 October meeting of the
Palestinian Government of national consensus in Gaza
are positive steps in the right direction which should
be pursued further. The European Union welcomes the
temporary monitoring mechanism negotiated by the
United Nations, Israel and the Palestinian Authority,
as a first step towards the necessary opening of all
crossing points, as well as initial measures announced
by Israel on movement and access, which should be
implemented and expanded.
We remain ready to further develop our efforts
to build the capacities of the Palestinian Authority,
particularly with a view to its swift deployment at the
border crossings and to support an effective and secure

S/PV.7281

lifting of the closure through an EU presence at Gaza
crossing points. Furthermore, we are ready to explore
ways to support the creation of a land link between the
West Bank and Gaza and to analyse the feasibility of a
maritime link between Cyprus and Gaza.
We remain convinced that clear parameters
defining the basis for negotiations are key elements for
a successful outcome. As it is urgent to make tangible
progress towards a two-State solution, the European
Union will continue to actively promote its position
with regard to parameters and is willing to work with
the United States and other partners on an initiative to
relaunch the peace negotiations, based on the following
principles.
There must be an agreement as to the borders of
the two States based on the 4 June 1967 lines, with
equivalent land swaps as may be agreed between the
parties. The European Union will recognize changes
to the pre-1967 borders, including with regard to
Jerusalem, only when agreed by the parties. There must
be security arrangements that, for Palestinians, respect
their sovereignty and show that the occupation is over,
and that, for Israelis, protect their security, prevent
the resurgence of terrorism and deal effectively with
security threats, including with new and vital threats
in the region. There must be a just, fair, agreed and
realistic solution to the refugee question. Both parties’
aspirations for Jerusalem must be fulfilled. A way must
be found through negotiations to resolve the status of
Jerusalem as the future capital of both States.
We urge all parties to refrain from actions that
could undermine a resumption of negotiations and the
prospects for peace. We also reiterate our call on the
Palestinian leadership to use its United Nations status
in a constructive manner.
The developments on the ground make the prospects
for a two-State solution increasingly unattainable, and
a one-State reality would not be compatible with the
aspirations of both parties. In that regard, we strongly
deplore the recent Israeli decisions to approve a plan
for new settlement activity in Givat Hamatos and to
allow for further settlement expansion in Silwan in East
Jerusalem. That represents a further highly detrimental
step that undermines prospects for a two-State solution
and calls into question Israel’s commitment to a
peaceful negotiated settlement with the Palestinians.
Settlements are illegal under international law. We
call on the Government of Israel to urgently reverse its

14-5809141/72

S/PV.7281

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

decisions and put an end to its settlement policy in the
West Bank, including in East Jerusalem; to put an end
to settler violence, to the worsening of living conditions
for Palestinians in Area C, to demolitions — including
of EU-funded projects — evictions and forced
transfers, including of the Bedouin communities in
Area C, and to increasing tensions and challenges to
the status quo on the Temple Mount/Haram Al-Sharif.
We reiterate our offer to both parties of a package of
European political, economic and security support and
of a special privileged partnership with the European
Union in the event of a final peace settlement.
We are committed to tackling in a comprehensive
and coordinated manner the regional threat posed by
terrorism and violent extremism and addressing the
underlying instability and violence which has given the
Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)/Daesh and
other terrorist groups a foothold. We support the efforts
made by more than 60 States to tackle this threat. The
European Union calls on all partners to enforce the
relevant Security Council resolutions, including 2170
(2014) and 2178 (2014). Non-inclusive policies in Iraq
and the instability in Syria caused by the Al-Assad
regime’s brutal war against its own people, massive
human rights violations and systematic obstruction
against democratic reforms have allowed ISIL to
flourish. As a consequence of its policies and actions,
the Al-Assad regime cannot be a partner in the fight
against ISIL. We reiterate our firm commitment to
counter the serious problem of foreign fighters.
International efforts to achieve a Syrian-led
transition remain a priority. We will continue to
provide political and practical support to the moderate
opposition. The European Union is determined to
support all efforts for a political solution by mutual
consent based on the Geneva communiqué and in line
with the relevant Security Council resolutions. We call
on all parties to engage constructively in negotiations,
and we express our full support to the United Nations
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura. The active
engagement of regional and international actors will be
required to deliver a viable transition.
The European Union firmly condemns the
indiscriminate killings and human rights abuses,
including systematic sexual and gender-based violence,
perpetrated in Syria and Iraq by ISIL and other terrorist
organizations, in particular against Christian and other
religious and ethnic groups, women and children.
The European Union reiterates also its condemnation
of the gross, widespread and systematic violations of
42/72

21/10/2014

human rights and international humanitarian law by
the Al-Assad regime. The European Union is seriously
concerned about the human rights abuses and sectarian
violence that are being committed in Iraq.
All responsible for abuses and violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law must be held
accountable, and there can be no impunity for them. We
reiterate our call on the Security Council to refer the
situation in Syria to the International Criminal Court
and our call on Iraq to accede to the Rome Statute.
We reiterate our firm commitment to Iraq’s unity,
sovereignty and territorial integrity. We welcome the
coalition’s efforts, including the decision by individual
Member States to provide military material and
expertise to Iraq to reduce ISIL’s capacity to attack
civilian populations, which come in response to an
explicit request for support by the Iraqi Government.
Ultimately, however, the solution to the crisis can only
be political. We call on the Iraqi Government, whose
formation we welcomed, to reach out to all components
of Iraqi society and to pursue, without delay, a process
of national reconciliation. We urge all components of
Iraqi society to unite in the fight against ISIL and to
support a process of national reconciliation.
The EU is deeply concerned by the humanitarian
predicament of millions of Syrians and Iraqis. We will
continue to support humanitarian relief efforts and
provide assistance to support the resilience of refugees
and host communities. We condemn the Al-Assad
regime’s continued intransigence on humanitarian
access and the use of administrative procedures to
hinder the rapid and sustained delivery of aid. We
reiterate our call on all parties, in particular the
Al-Assad regime, to implement in full the provisions
of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014) and 2165
(2014). We will continue to implement those resolutions
to deliver cross-border and cross-line assistance. We
are also deeply concerned that ISIL has significantly
affected the presence and operation of humanitarian
agencies and actors in northern Syria. We call on the
Government of Iraq to do more to contribute to the
humanitarian relief efforts across the country.
We are fully aware of the immense challenges that
the current developments in Syria and Iraq pose in
particular to Lebanon and Jordan. We are determined
to seek ways to further enhance our support to both
countries. The European Union looks forward to the
Berlin conference on 28 October.

14-58091

21/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We understand the extraordinary security,
humanitarian, social, economic and political challenges
that Lebanon is facing. We strongly condemn the
repeated attacks by violent extremist groups on
Lebanon’s territory and commend the Lebanese
security agencies for their joint efforts in responding to
the numerous security threats. We stress the importance
of strong institutions in preserving the stability and
internal unity of Lebanon. The European Union
encourages Lebanon’s leaders to open the way for the
election of a new President without further delay.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Atlassi (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on having
assumed the presidency of the Council for this month,
and I thank you for having taken the initiative to put
this item on our agenda, given its importance at the
Arab and Islamic levels. My delegation would like
also to associate itself with the statement made by the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and to make the
following comments in our national capacity.
We are meeting today at a very sensitive time and
at a turning point for the Middle East and the world as a
whole. We have witnessed unprecedented developments
with negative consequences for international peace
and security and the economic and social fabric. The
persistence of the Israeli occupation of the Arab and
Palestinian territories and the spread of extremism
and terrorism has sounded the alarm today, and it is
necessary to intervene before it is too late.
The unjustified and unacceptable Israeli aggression
against Gaza has had and will have dire consequences
that have jeopardized all the efforts deployed so far in
order to push forward the peace process. It has pushed
the region as a whole into the unknown and has ignited
hatred.
His Majesty the King has strongly condemned this
aggression since it began. It was also condemned by the
various social groups, parties and unions in Morocco.
Upon the directives of His Majesty, Morocco, since
the onset of the aggression in Gaza, has provided
humanitarian and financial assistance to our Palestinian
brothers in a show of solidarity.
Morocco and other supporters of peace were
relieved that on 26 August the ceasefire was signed
thanks to the Egyptian mediation. We welcome once

S/PV.7281

again this ceasefire and hope that it will be a lasting
one and pave the way to putting an end to the Israeli
occupation of the Palestinian territories.
The Kingdom of Morocco took part in the donors
conference organized by Egypt in collaboration with the
Norwegian Government and held on 12 October, and we
will contribute to the plan for rebuilding Gaza through
several projects that will be defined and implemented in
coordination with the Palestinian Authority and in the
framework of the relevant United Nations mechanism.
This will be in addition to the technical support that we
will be providing through the training of the Palestinian
personnel undertaking the reconstruction.
The plan to rebuild Gaza prepared by the Palestinian
Authority reflects the seriousness of our Palestinian
brothers, their love for peace and their aspiration to live
in peace and security as part of a two-State solution. It
is indeed an opportunity to encourage the Palestinian
private sector by building new partnerships between
with other stakeholders and countries. To that end,
the first step will be to lift the blockade and allow
access for the provision of assistance in all its forms, in
collaboration with the Palestinian National Authority
and in the framework of the relevant United Nations
mechanisms.
His Majesty the King, as Chair of the Jerusalem
Committee, has condemned all the provocative
measures in Jerusalem and the Judaization efforts
and has been calling for respect for the demographic
and legal specificities of Jerusalem, as a land for the
coexistence of all religions. We would like to remind
the Council of the outcome of the twentieth session
of the Jerusalem Committee, hosted by Morocco in
January under the chairmanship of His Majesty the
King, which emphasized that Jerusalem was at the core
of any political settlement for the Islamic nation.
The sufferings of the Palestinian people since 1948
will end only through a just and permanent settlement
that includes the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State with Jerusalem as its capital, based
on the June 1967 borders and in accordance with the
relevant international resolutions, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Madrid principles, with both States
living side by side in peace, security, coexistence and
collaboration. That is the only legitimate formula that
is accepted by the international community and can put
an end to the conflict. The international community
must therefore give that issue the utmost priority in

14-5809143/72

S/PV.7281

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

order to find a speedy settlement to the conflict, so that
the region can enjoy peace, security, prosperity and
coexistence.
The Syrian crisis, which has been growing daily at
all levels, must also be brought to an end. The Syrian
people have paid a high price as a result of the killing
and displacement of millions of Syrians, famine and
the degradation of their living conditions. In that
connection, we welcome the appointment of Mr. Steffan
de Mistura as the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Syria. We support his efforts at finding a
political solution and initiating a democratic transition
based on the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex)
of 2012, with a view to avoiding further destruction and
human suffering. We also call for the provision of more
medical and humanitarian assistance to the victims of
the bombing and the blockade. Morocco is ready to
provide more humanitarian assistance to the Syrian
people and to alleviate the burdens of displaced persons
and refugees. My delegation would like to reiterate the
need to safeguard Syria’s sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity.
I reiterate once again my delegation’s commitment
to Lebanon’s independence and territorial integrity. I
commend the national spirit and great responsibility
shown by the various segments of the Lebanese
population in safeguarding the country’s security,
stability and sovereignty.
The deterioration of the situation in Yemen is also
a source of concern for us. After the important strides
that were made in the peace process the consensus
reached under the auspices of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, the situation has deteriorated once
again and could jeopardize what has been achieved
so far. We therefore call upon all the stakeholders
in Yemen to show wisdom and give priority to the
common interests of Yemen, including its sovereignty
and territorial integrity.
I began by saying that we should sound the alarm.
We should indeed, because the scourge of terrorism has
taken a very worrisome turn and is today threatening
not only the Middle East, but the entire world. It is
jeopardizing our safety and security. The best proof
of that is the expansion of the so-called Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant and the killing and degrading
treatment in which that group is engaged. The use of
religion by terrorist groups to justify their ideological,
political, expansionist and destructive goals has

44/72

21/10/2014

nothing to do with Islam and harms the teachings
of Islam, which calls for coexistence, tolerance and
peace. In that context, we reiterate our condemnation
of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. We
must not link terrorism to any religion, race, nation
or civilization. Terrorism must be fought relentlessly,
and the phenomenon of the foreign terrorist fighters
must also be fought and eliminated. In that regard,
the Kingdom of Morocco commends resolution 2178
(2014), adopted in September, to address that scourge.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Mr. Pedersen (Norway): The war in Gaza this
summer took a terrible toll on civilians and left the Gaza
Strip in ruins. The rockets fired out of Gaza terrorized
people all over Israel. Once again, for the third time in
less than six years, the international community was
reminded that the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is a threat
to international peace and security.
Norway commends Egypt for its role in brokering a
temporary cessation of hostilities. Absent a permanent
ceasefire between the parties, however, all attempts
at stabilizing the situation in and around Gaza are
doomed to fail. Therefore, Norway urges the Israeli and
Palestinian negotiators to take courageous steps when
they meet again in Cairo later this month.
On 12 October, Norway, Egypt and Palestine
co-hosted the Cairo International Conference on
Palestine “Reconstructing Gaza”. Representatives of
more than 90 countries and organizations participated
and pledged an impressive $5.4 billion dollars — half of
which will be allocated to recovery and reconstruction
in Gaza. Just as important as the money pledged were
the clear political messages given.
First, the Gaza Strip constitutes an integral part of
the territory occupied in 1967 and is part of a future
State of Palestine. Efforts to benefit Gaza will be
successful only if placed within the overall framework
of support to Palestine. The donors emphasized the need
for one single and legitimate recipient Government for
Palestine. They made clear that reconstruction was
not possible without conducive political and security
environments in Gaza. Security must be ensured for
all civilians. Therefore, the participants called on all
parties involved to support a process that results in
the Palestinian Authority regaining all its functions
and effective control in Gaza. Norway calls on all

14-58091

21/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestinian factions to cooperate for Palestinian unity
under the leadership of President Abbas.
Secondly, the reconstruction of Gaza will simply
not be possible unless border crossings to Israel are
opened, socioeconomic development is facilitated
and economic recovery accelerated. The Palestinian
private sector plays a key role in that regard. Norway
welcomes the announcement made by a representative
of Israel of decisive changes in the current restrictions,
as the people of Gaza cannot live under blockade and
in poverty and misery. Norway calls on Israel to make
significant contributions to the reconstruction efforts.
Thirdly, the challenges faced in Gaza and the West
Bank can be fully addressed only in a final status
agreement that resolves all core issues between the
Israelis and the Palestinians. Norway deplores recent
announcements of settlement building, including in
occupied East Jerusalem, and calls for a resumption
of serious, committed and productive negotiations that
can bring an end to the conflict and the occupation that
began in 1967. Norway reiterates its call on the Security
Council to give leadership and guidance both to the
stabilization efforts after the military confrontations
this summer and to the resumption of the peace process.
Extremist forces bent on death and destruction in
Iraq, Syria and beyond must be confronted head-on. In
the face of brutal and criminal acts by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant and other terrorist groups, the
international community must unite against the threat
they pose.
At the same time, it is necessary to reach political
solutions in both Iraq and Syria. Those conflicts, which
kill and maim people and tear apart the social fabrics of
both countries, cannot be brought to an end by military
means alone.
With respect to Syria, it is crucial that the United
Nations and Special Envoy de Mistura succeed in
engaging the parties and the region in a political
process underpinned by the emerging convergence of
interests among a broad spectrum of Syrians, as well as
key regional powers. Norway fully supports his efforts.
Norway is doing its part in the fight against violent
extremism and terrorism, including through active
support for the international humanitarian and military
efforts in Iraq.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.

S/PV.7281

Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate Argentina on its
presidency of the Security Council and to express our
thanks and appreciation to its Government for having
convened today’s meeting. We would also like to thank
the Secretary-General for his presence here this morning
and his personal commitment to the Palestinian cause,
including through his recent visit to the Gaza Strip.
We agree that the Security Council and the entire
membership of the United Nations should proceed to
consider the best means for achieving a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East, in particular a two-State
solution. The recent escalation in Gaza is a reminder of
the need to reach a lasting solution to the situation there
and in the entire occupied Palestinian territory. We have
come to the conclusion that temporary solutions or a
piecemeal settlement are neither viable nor acceptable.
As we express our condolences to the brotherly
people of Palestine following the catastrophic tragedy
caused by the military aggression against Gaza, we
stress that it is high time for the Security Council to
assume its legal and moral responsibilities and take
action to ensure that such an escalation does not
recur — an escalation that had negative consequences
on both sides, especially the Palestinian one.
We call on the Council once again to adopt a
resolution to oblige Israel to end its occupation of the
Palestinian territories, cease its construction of illegal
settlements and put an end to all other practices that go
against international humanitarian law. We also call on
the Council to adopt a time-bound and clearly defined
political plan for the realization of the two-State
solution. Security, stability and peace in the region,
including that of Israel, require daring steps towards
such a solution — that is, the establishment of the State
of Palestine on the basis of the 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side with Israel.
The solution should include the withdrawal from all
of the occupied Arab territories, including the Syrian
Golan, the Sheba’a farms and the Lebanese villages.
The desecration of holy sites and the denial of the
freedom to worship in Palestine must be stopped, as
must Israel’s policy regarding Al-Haram Al-Sharif,
including the attacks and the denial of the right to
prayer.
Qatar is among the States that have sought, and
continue to seek, to play a genuine and positive role
in working towards a lasting and fair solution to the

14-5809145/72

S/PV.7281

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

question of Palestine. We were among the first States
to take audacious steps to support means to reach
a peaceful settlement to the Palestinian question.
However, at the time of the recent military aggression in
Gaza, Qatar took diplomatic measures to bring an end
to the violence, which contributed to the agreement that
ended the aggression. In that respect, Qatar welcomes
the agreement reached in Cairo, brokered by Egypt.
On the humanitarian front, Qatar responded to
the humanitarian needs in the Gaza Strip, announcing
at the Gaza reconstruction Conference held recently
in Cairo that it would contribute $1 billion for the
reconstruction of the Strip, representing half of the
financial contributions needed according to the United
Nations plan for the reconstruction of Gaza.
Qatar, through collaboration with the relevant
agencies of the United Nations, has contributed in
many other ways to strengthening stability in Gaza and
supports the efforts of the national unity Government in
Palestine to benefit the Palestinian people and enhance
their national unity. We welcome the convening by the
Government of Palestine of its first meeting in Gaza.
The recent developments in Syria and the broader
region call for a coordinated international response in
keeping with the principles enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations. The crimes committed by terrorist
groups have recently reached an indescribable level, and
they share characteristics with the crimes committed
by the Syrian regime against its people. The regime’s
continued mistreatment of its people led to the conflict,
which has had such a negative impact on Syria and the
broader region and has created the breeding ground for
the terrorism we are witnessing. Qatar warned against
such developments at the Security Council in January
2012 (see S/PV.6710).
The humanitarian situation in Syria has become
one of the worst in the world, including the situation
of the internally displaced persons and refugees. As
made clear by the remarks of the Secretary-General,
the repercussions of the crisis on Syrian infrastructure,
especially in areas that are hard to reach, are
extremely significant. The Syrian refugee crisis is
the most serious situation in the world, calling for
an international response in line with the magnitude
of the burden now being borne by the host countries.
Qatar continues to provide humanitarian assistance
for the Syrian people affected by the crisis, pursuant
to the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly

46/72

21/10/2014

and Security Council, including resolution 2139
(2014). We contributed $20 million to the consolidated
humanitarian appeal to enable Syrians in hard-to-reach
areas to rebuild their lives.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): Current developments in the
Middle East affect Turkey in many ways. The situation
in Palestine remains a source of concern to us, for
humanitarian and political reasons. The immediate
needs of Palestine in general and Gaza in particular
constitute a priority for the international community.
With that understanding, the total amount of our official
development assistance to Palestine over the past decade
has reached $350 million. More recently, we announced
at the Cairo Conference an additional $200 million for
the reconstruction of Gaza from 2014 to 2017. In addition
to the aid that we channel through the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East, the transfer of wounded Palestinians to
Turkey — 123 to date — the construction of a hospital
in Gaza, our projects to supply humanitarian aid, fuel,
electricity and water will continue. We also welcome the
trilateral agreement brokered by the United Nations on
a temporary mechanism involving Israel, Palestine and
the United Nations to secure the entry of reconstruction
materials to Gaza.
Following the tremendous humanitarian suffering,
death and destruction inflicted by the Israeli attacks,
we should focus on preventing the recurrence of such a
catastrophe in the future. Returning to the status quo is
not an option.
The need to find a negotiated political settlement
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, based on two States
living side by side in peace and security, within the
pre-1967 borders and in accordance with the relevant
United Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace
Initiative, remains an urgent priority. Any negotiations
should take place on an equal footing. Although the
Israeli side has been enjoying its statehood since 1948,
the Palestinians have been denied that inherent right.
That is unacceptable, and we urge all members of the
international community to recognize the State of
Palestine. We reiterate that negotiations cannot take
place while one party is unilaterally claiming and
confiscating the other’s land. Israel should therefore
end its occupation and illegal settlement activities.
With that understanding, we support President Abbas’s

14-58091

21/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

initiative, announced during this year’s general debate
in the General Assembly, regarding the introduction of
a draft resolution on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict for
adoption by the Security Council (see A/69/PV.12).
Palestinian unity is crucial to reaching a lasting
solution. We should all support President Abbas and the
Palestinian Government of national unity. Turkey, in
cooperation with international partners, will continue
its efforts to find a just, comprehensive and lasting
solution to the conflict. We remain committed to
supporting our Palestinian brothers and sisters in their
quest to live in peace, prosperity and dignity.
Turkey shares 1,295 kilometres of borders with
Syria and Iraq. The instability in the region, particularly
as represented by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), is a national security threat for us. In the
light of that situation, our Government has obtained the
necessary authority of Parliament to enable it to respond
to potential security challenges. We are increasingly
feeling the strain of the current state of chaos on our
doorstep resulting from the serious humanitarian and
security situation on the ground. The combination of
the non-inclusive policies of the former Government
in Iraq and the crisis in Syria caused by the regime’s
brutal war on its own people and massive violations of
human rights have allowed ISIL to flourish.
We welcome the Iraqi Government’s appointments
on 18 October to Iraq’s Ministries of Defence and the
Interior, and to other vacant ministries. A new, inclusive
political start is essential to solving Iraq’s problems.
That significant development is an important step in
the process and will help the new Government take the
measures necessary to overcome the threat of terrorism.
For our part, we are taking necessary measures to
combat the activities of the extremist groups. Full
compliance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions, including 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014),
is important. Preventing the illegal transportation of
logistics and manpower across the Turkish-Syrian
border is a high priority. Such transnational threats
require full and efficient international cooperation,
with a comprehensive, coordinated strategy. From a
security perspective, I would also like to emphasize that
the destruction of Syria’s chemical stockpiles should
not be considered a closed case, and the international
community and the Security Council should remain
vigilant concerning the matter.
Our cooperation with the international community
in eradicating terrorism and ISIL will continue. In that

S/PV.7281

regard, it is crucial that we address the root causes of
the problem through a comprehensive plan. Taking
steps to ensure that there is a transfer of power to a
representative Government, the result of a genuine
political transition, in accordance with the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex), should be our shared
priority. We have always been in the forefront in
defending the rights and freedoms of the Syrian people,
including the Kurds, with whom we are continuing
our dialogue. Any group in Syria must work for the
common goal of a democratic and prosperous Syria
and refrain from taking unilateral steps. The future
constitutional structure of a new Syria can be decided
only by a parliament formed as the result of free and
fair elections. The territorial integrity and unity of
Syria must be preserved.
With the recent influx of nearly 200,000 people
from the Ayn al-Arab/Kobani region, the total number of
Syrians in Turkey is more than 1.5 million. In the face of
that enormous challenge, we must reiterate that sharing
burdens actively and meaningfully is the collective
responsibility of the international community. In the
context of the cross-border operations by the United
Nations agencies being conducted under resolution 2165
(2014), 155 trucks transporting humanitarian assistance
have entered Syria so far.
I would like to conclude by reiterating that our
strong commitment to peace and security in the region
and our full solidarity with the Palestinian people will
continue.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, on
Argentina’s assumption to the presidency of the Council
this month. We wish you every success in managing the
Council’s work, and we also pay tribute to the United
States for its presidency last month.
We should recall the deeply troubled circumstances
in whose shadow the recent debate on the Middle East
has been taking place, specifically those of 22 July,
when Gaza became the target of the worst kind of attacks
under the hateful Israeli aggression, which lasted for
15 days, resulting in thousands of dead and wounded
and indescribable destruction, worse than in Gaza in
2009. Israel, the occupying Power, has also perpetrated
horrendous violations of human rights and international
law, including of the Fourth Geneva Convention, on the
protection of civilians in time of war.

14-5809147/72

S/PV.7281

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Israel continues to pursue its policies of provocation
and aggression, risking undermining the foundations of
peace and paving the way for a serious period in the
Middle East that represents the antithesis of peace and
security, owing to Israel’s intransigence in the face
of every genuine effort to establish a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace between the two parties. In that
regard, we welcome the efforts of the Arab Republic
of Egypt to reach a ceasefire agreement between Israel
and Palestine on 26 August.
At the same time, we affirm the inalienable rights
of the Palestinians and the legitimate fulfilment of their
aspirations for a independent State within the borders of
4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital. We also
reiterate our request that the Security Council shoulder
the responsibility conferred on it by the Charter of the
United Nations to work for and maintain international
peace and security by taking the necessary measures
to address such problematic issues relating to peace
by adopting the draft resolution that the Arab Group
proposes to introduce in the Council. I should like to
make the following points.
We must set a deadline for ending Israel’s
occupation of the Palestinian territories. We must urge
the Government of Israel, the occupying Power, to end
its policies of settling and confiscating land, as well
as those designed to evict Palestinian from their lands,
farms and property and detain them in Israeli jails. Israel
must renounce its racist, extremist and systematic plans
aimed at the total Judaization of Jerusalem, and end its
attacks on the city’s holy sites. It must lift the blockade
of the Gaza Strip and guarantee open border crossings
to ensure that humanitarian aid can pass through them
and thus meet the basic needs of the people of Gaza. We
must support the Palestinian demands for international
protection of their people and the occupied territories
and for that occupation to end.
While very positive, the results of the recent Cairo
International Conference on Palestine “Reconstructing
Gaza”, which collected pledges of $5.4 billion for those
efforts, must lead to concrete, practical steps that can
ensure that we will really be able to rebuild Gaza. We
should use all possible means and resources to achieve a
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East. We
also welcome the decision of the Kingdom of Sweden to
recognize the State of Palestine, and I reiterate the call
to States that have not yet done so to follow Sweden’s
example and thus contribute to the implementation of
the relevant Security Council resolutions and the Arab

48/72

21/10/2014

Peace Initiative, with the goal of two States living side
by side in peace.
The State of Kuwait reiterates its call on Israel to
implement resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw from
the occupied Syrian Golan to the 4 June 1967 lines.
Kuwait also reiterates its commitment to stand shoulder
to shoulder with the brotherly country of Lebanon by
supporting all measures to protect and safeguard its
security and sovereignty.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Fodé Seck, Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People.
Mr. Seck (spoke in French): I would first of all like
to express our deep appreciation for the able manner
in which you, Mr. President, have guided the work of
the Security Council in October. I would also like to
pay special tribute to the Secretary-General for his
support for the exercise of the fundamental rights of
the Palestinian people and his constant assistance
during the conflict over the summer. We are grateful
for his detailed briefing on the results of the recent
Cairo Conference and his visit to the region. The
tireless efforts of the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Robert Serry, and of
the Commissioner General for the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East, Mr. Pierre Krähenbühl, together with their
outstanding specialized teams on the ground, must also
be recognized. I also take this opportunity to commend
Ambassador Mansour for his presentation to us this
morning.
The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People has condemned,
in the strongest possible terms, the excessive and
disproportionate use of force during the Israeli assault
on the occupied Gaza Strip, which resulted in the deaths
of more than 2,100 Palestinians. The Committee also
condemned the indiscriminate rocket fire emanating
from Gaza.
We were therefore greatly dismayed to hear, in the
wake of that conflict, Israel’s announcement of new plans
for settlements and for annexing land outside its 1967
borders. The Committee and the entire international
community strongly condemn such actions, which are
not conducive to a peaceful settlement of the IsraeliPalestinian crisis.

14-58091

21/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In Gaza, the Secretary-General expressed the view
of the vast majority of Member States when he said that
there would be no peace in the Middle East, nor security
for Israel, while the crisis in Gaza was not resolved. He
also emphasized that the “build-destroy” cycle must
be broken and that the mindless pattern of blockade,
rockets and destruction must stop. The Committee
shares the conviction of the Secretary-General and
calls for an immediate end to the blockade of Gaza by
the occupying Power.
The Committee would also like to express its
appreciation for the efforts of Egypt and Norway in
organizing last week’s Cairo International Conference.
We welcome the generosity of the international
community in pledging $5.4 billion to support
reconstruction in Gaza and meet the urgent needs of
the Palestinian people. In that connection, the Special
Coordinator must play a particularly important role
in overseeing the delivery of construction materials
through a negotiated, tripartite access regime. The
international community, especially the Security
Council, will need to ensure that the mechanism works
appropriately to meet the needs of those most affected.
Together with the rest of the international
community, the Committee welcomes the establishment
of the Government of national consensus in Gaza. Its
effective work will help to consolidate governance and
secure the importation of equipment that is critical
for the reconstruction efforts. The decision by the
Government of Israel to facilitate access for Palestinian
Ministers from the West Bank to Gaza is a step in the
right direction, and the Committee hopes that Israel
will continue to thus facilitate the efforts of the new
Government to accomplish the immense task before it.
The Committee also welcomes the decision by the
new Government of Sweden to recognize the State of
Palestine, and appreciates the commitments made by
the Government of France. Together with the vote last
Monday by the British Parliament calling for recognition
of the Palestinian State, those separate decisions have
given new impetus to the international momentum in
support of the exercise of the legitimate and inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people.
Along with the rest of the international community,
the Committee hopes that this momentum will breathe
new life into the negotiations between the parties, which
must be restarted as soon as possible, this time with a
specific deadline and a firm commitment to agree on

S/PV.7281

viable borders for both the State of Israel and the state
of Palestine. Moreover, the Committee supports the
proposals made by the state of Palestine at the United
Nations and invites the Security Council and the rest of
the international community to support that initiative.
To the pessimists and extremists on all sides, I
would like to offer a lesson from Professor Noam
Chomsky, an eminent thinker and a public figure
who is emblematic of our universal conscience, who
addressed our Committee a week ago to the day.
Professor Chomsky emphasized that the choice before
the international community, and in particular its organ
that is charged with the maintenance of international
peace and security, the Security Council, was either
a viable two-State solution or a continuation into the
indeterminate future of the status quo, with more
Israeli settlements and a continued siege of Gaza, and
thus a prolonged period of instability for both Palestine
and Israel.
The United Nations Committee for the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People can
certainly not support that second option, which would
guarantee the fait accompli of the occupation and the
denial of the fundamental rights of the Palestinian
people. During this International Year of Solidarity
with the Palestinian People, the Security Council must
not allow the status quo to stand.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belize.
Ms. Young (Belize): On behalf of the delegation
of Belize, please permit me to congratulate Argentina
on assuming the presidency and to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting.
The problem of Palestine has been on the agenda
of the Security Council since the end of the British
Mandate in 1948. It was included in the Council’s
agenda because, on 29 November 1947, in its resolution
181 (II), the General Assembly recommended to the
United Kingdom, as the Mandatory Power for Palestine,
and to all other Members of the United Nations, the
adoption and implementation of a Plan of Partition
with Economic Union for the future Government of
Palestine.
That Plan, set out in resolution 181 (II) B, called
for, inter alia, “Independent Arab and Jewish States
and the Special International Regime for the City of
Jerusalem”, to come into existence “in any case not

14-5809149/72

S/PV.7281

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

later than 1 October 1948”. The boundaries of the Arab
State, the Jewish State and the city of Jerusalem were
settled, and the Security Council was requested to take
the necessary measures to implement the Plan. Bolivia,
Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Panama and the Philippines
were elected to a United Nations Commission on
Palestine to act under the guidance of the Council.
Sixty-six years later, the conflict between the Jews
and Arabs that should have been neutralized with the
implementation of the Plan has become increasingly
contentious. The bombing of Gaza by the Israeli
Defense Forces between June and August of this year,
in a disproportionate use of force that killed more than
2,000 Palestinians and destroyed businesses and key
infrastructure, could be described as the last straw. In
addition to the killing and destruction over the summer,
there was the annexation of approximately another 950
acres of Palestinian territory on the West Bank.
When the response to that bombing is an assertion
that Israel has the right to defend itself, it should also
be remembered that in the same way as the historical
displacement and oppression of Jews by others produced
relentless resistance on the part of the Jewish people,
Israeli oppression and displacement of Palestinians
will produce relentless resistance on the part of the
Palestinian people.
However, the political tide is surely turning. The
new Swedish Government, which came to power
in September, announced its intention to recognize
Palestine as a State. In the week of 13 October, the
House of Commons in Britain passed a non-binding
resolution that endorsed the diplomatic recognition of
the Palestinian State by a vote of 274 to 12.
It is time for those in the Security Council who
habitually block decisive action aimed at redressing
the wrongs perpetrated on the people of Palestine to
seriously consider that the continuation of the death and
destruction of an oppressed people will likely open the
door for extremist philosophies to enter and flourish.
The recent urging of Palestinian President Mahmoud
Abbas for the Security Council to set a specific
deadline for Israel to end the occupation is reasonable
and should be taken onboard by the Council. Measures
should be adopted to achieve the immediate, sustained
and unconditional opening of the crossings for the flow
of humanitarian aid, commercial goods and persons to
and from the Gaza Strip in line with resolution 1860
(2009). Through the negative trade measures that the
European Union brought against us in March, Belize
50/72

21/10/2014

has experienced only too well the ways and means by
which super-Powers can achieve their goals once there
is the will.
In negotiations with Israel, Palestine needs the
support of the Security Council and of individual
powerful countries to help level the negotiating field.
There is no doubt that the United States plays a critical
role in any negotiations on the issue. Members of the
Security Council ought therefore to work with the
United States to relaunch the peace negotiations that
collapsed in April.
We owe it to the people of Palestine and of Israel to
help them return to that time of optimism in 1993 when
the Oslo Peace Accords were signed. At that time, to
quote the words of Amy Marcus, a reporter for The Wall
Street Journal based in Israel from 1991 to 1998, in her
book Jerusalem 1914:
“Everyone, Israelis and Palestinians alike, seemed
to be signing a deal — to sell tomatoes to the
Persian Gulf, to look for oil in the Dead Sea, to
open a casino in Jericho. There was talk of a new
Middle East, the falling of borders, and an era of
open trade.”
My delegation thinks that it is not too much for the
Palestinian and the Jewish people to ask for. We owe
that to them.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Khiari (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
first of all to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month. We thank you for having convened this open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question, at a time when the region is
witnessing unprecedented events. I would also like to
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing
today on his recent visit to the region.
Today, we meet as the occupation forces and the
Israeli settlers continue their aggression against the
Palestinian people, in particular on the West Bank and
in Gaza, in blatant violation of international law and
agreements and with impunity. A few weeks after the
brutal attack on the Gaza Strip, which left thousands
of people dead or wounded, the majority of whom
were women or children, and caused major damage
to homes and infrastructure, the Secretary-General
visited the Gaza Strip and witnessed the occupation

14-58091

21/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

forces continuing their daily violations of Islam’s holy
sites, in particular in Jerusalem. Today, the settlers are
attacking the Al-Aqsa Mosque, preventing believers
from entering it to pray and humiliating them.
Tunisia strongly condemns such practices and
rejects all occupation policies that seek to violate the
Islamic and Christian holy sites on occupied Palestinian
land. The occupying forces continue their settlement
policies despite the international condemnation of such
policies. We all agree that those policies are illegitimate
and a violation of international law.
Mrs. Perceval returned to the Chair.
Such practices, policies and other daily violations
being carried out by the occupying Powers on the West
Bank and in Gaza and Jerusalem, which has been subject
to a blockade for more than eight years, apart from the
humiliation and mistreatment of Palestinian prisoners
and detainees in Israeli prisons, prove undeniably
that Israel persists in imposing the status quo policy,
seeks to buy time so as to change the status quo by
force and obstructs all attempts and initiatives to open
new horizons for peace on the basis of the two-State
solution, the most recent being the mediation efforts
brokered by the United States.
Tunisia would therefore like to reiterate that it is
unacceptable for the current situation to continue. It is
high time for the international community, in particular
the Security Council, to live up to its responsibilities
and put an end to the Israeli occupation of Palestinian
lands and to the illegal practices against the Palestinian
people. It is time to undertake a real change in dealing
with the Palestinian issue within the Security Council,
thereby providing a true opportunity for the achievement
of a peaceful, just and comprehensive solutin on the
basis of the two-State solution and international law
and instruments.
Tunisia would like to reiterate its full support for
the self-determination of the Palestinian people and for
an independent, sovereign, viable and geographically
contiguous State on territory occupied since 1967. That
means a united political entity that encompasses the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem and the Gaza
Strip.
In the same context, we express our support for the
demands of the Palestinian leadership with regard to
the adoption of a time frame for putting an end to the
Israeli occupation, for the declaration of an independent
Palestinian State within the borders that I have just

S/PV.7281

mentioned and for reaching a comprehensive solution to
all final status issues, including that of East Jeruslaem.
We also call for the protection of Palestinian civilians
in the civilian Palestinian territories to be ensured in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
international law, international humanitarian law, the
Geneva Conventions of 1949 and international human
rights law.
Tunisia also reiterates its support for the independent
commission of inquiry established by the Human Rights
Council to investigate the aggression against Gaza.
We look forward to seeing the commission complete
its investigation into the crimes and aggression
perpetrated by Israel against the Palestinian people.
Tunisia calls for the blockade on the Gaza Strip to be
lifted and for all border crossings to be opened for the
free access and movement of people and goods, as well
as humanitarian assistance for the citizens of the Gaza
Strip, in particular following the most recent attacks.
Tunisia welcomes the outcome of the Cairo
Conference on the reconstruction of Gaza. We urge that
all parties to live up to the commitments that they made
at that conference.
Tunisia underscores that a lasting and a just peace
in the Middle East can be achieved only through
the total withdrawal of Israel from all the Arab and
Palestinian occupied territories, including the occupied
Syrian Golan. We express our deep concern about
the deterioration of the situation in Syria and its dire
consequences on both Syria’s future and that of the
whole region. We hope that the efforts of the United
Nations Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura will allow us
to reach a political settlement that meets the aspirations
of the Syrian people for freedom and democracy and
safeguards its sovereignty, territorial integrity and
social unity.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Zimbabwe.
Mr. Shava (Zimbabwe): At the outset, I wish to
congratulate you, Madam President, on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of October. On behalf of the 15 member States of the
South African Development Community (SADC), I
wish to thank you for convening this very important
debate on the Middle East.
SADC aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

14-5809151/72

S/PV.7281

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

21/10/2014

We continue to witness the persecution of the people
of Palestine at the hands of Israel. Recently, the world
witnessed the brutal and indiscriminate bombardment
of the Gaza Strip that resulted in the deaths of over
2,000 civilians, rendered 103,000 homeless and
destroyed social and economic infrastructure. While
Israel perpetrated those heinous acts, some in the
international community who always preach about the
responsibility to protect remained conspicuously silent.
It is unacceptable that Israel violates the territorial
integrity of Gaza and the human rights of the Palestinian
people, and the Security Council fails to intervene
decisively. The Council must uphold its responsibilities
under the Charter of the United Nations and act to
protect innocent Palestinian civilians. The collective
failure of the Security Council and the international
community has fostered Israel’s flagrant violations of
all Security Council resolutions on the Arab-Israeli
conflict.

This tragedy underscores the need for serious
efforts by all concerned to address the root causes
of the conflict, if the international community truly
wants to realize a just and lasting peace between the
Palestinian and Israeli peoples. The core problem,
which is Israel’s belligerent occupation of Palestinian
territory, must be addressed in accordance with the
United Nations resolutions and international law.
While we commend efforts to mobilize resources for
the reconstruction of Gaza, SADC believes it will be an
exercise in futility if a more comprehensive agreement
is not reached that includes the lifting of the illegal
blockade. It is ironic that some Member States leading
the campaign to mobilize funds for the reconstruction
process in Gaza are the same that give tacit approval to
massive destruction by Israel under the so-called right
to self-defence. The international community must act
in unison to compel Israel to comply with international
law.

The pretext by Israel that it acts in self-defence
against victims of its illegal occupation defies all
logic. Israel’s self- defence cannot justify the scale
of violence it perpetrated in its maiming of innocent
women and children. Israel must be held accountable
and perpetrators must be brought to justice. SADC
welcomes the decision by the Human Rights Council
to establish an independent international commission
of inquiry to investigate all violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law in the occupied
Palestinian territory. We call on Israel to lift the
seven-year illegal blockade on Gaza. The international
community must exert the necessary pressure to compel
Israel to end the inhuman blockade by which it has
wilfully inflicted a humanitarian disaster in Gaza that
affects every single dimension of life for every woman,
man and child.

History has shown us that we run the risk of getting
into a cycle of building and destroying if the status quo
is maintained. The key to moving forward is addressing
all issues undermining prospects for attaining a peace
agreement. We urge the international community to
address the conflict in its entirety rather than narrowly
focusing on the recent events in Gaza. In that vein,
SADC expresses its unwavering support to current
efforts by Prime Minister Abbas to garner support
for a peace plan that he hopes will compel Israel to
negotiate the framework for a two-State solution
within a specific time frame. The plan, announced by
Prime Minister Abbas when he addressed the General
Assembly on 26 September (see A/69/PV.12), entails a
resumption of negotiations to demarcate the borders,
reach a comprehensive agreement and draft a peace
treaty. Palestinian authorities hope that the plan will be
adopted in a Security Council draft resolution.

Israel’s recent announcement that it would acquire
1,000 acres of Palestinian territory in the West Bank
is a blatant violation of various Security Council
resolutions. It demonstrates Israel’s belief that it can
continue to act with impunity, which arises from the
protection it receives from some within the Security
Council. The international community’s constant
appeasement of Israel has fostered the belief that it
is a State above the law, and has enabled it to pursue
atrocities against the Palestinian people. The illegal
acquisition of Palestinian territory continues to
undermine the vision of a two-State solution based on
the pre-1967 borders.

52/72

SADC supports negotiations towards a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East
leading to the restoration of the Palestinian people’s
legitimate right to establish an independent State
coexisting peacefully with the State of Israel. There
is no option to peaceful dialogue to achieve the twoState solution based on the June 1967 borders. Any
other manoeuvres to change demographic realities
through settlements or use of force will only prolong
the suffering of the Palestinian people.
In conclusion, allow me to recognize Egypt’s
important role in brokering the ceasefire that ended

14-58091

21/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

50 days of Israel’s bombardment of Gaza, its continued
efforts in trying to find a lasting solution to the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict and for hosting a successful
reconstruction conference that brought some hope to all
those whose homes were destroyed in Gaza.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Let me begin by thanking
you, Madam President, for convening this open debate.
I would also like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his comprehensive briefing this morning.
Indonesia associates itself with the statements
delivered by the representatives of Iran and Saudi
Arabia on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
respectively.
I would like to focus my statement on the question
of Palestine. The last time that the Security Council
convened an open debate on the situation in Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, was in mid-July,
at the height of the Israeli aggression against Gaza
(see S/PV.7222). Now that the aggression is over, the
international community is preoccupied with the issue
of the reconstruction of Gaza. To that end, Indonesia
expresses its support for last week’s International
Conference on Palestine “Reconstructing Gaza”, which
was convened at the initiative of Egypt, Norway and
Palestine. We also commend the generosity of countries
that have pledged their assistance to Palestine.
Nonetheless, we must be clear. The success of the
Conference, in our view, should not blind us to the root
of the problem, which is none other than the continued
Israeli occupation. The international community’s view
has been very clear and consistent on this particular
matter — the status quo ante is unacceptable. The
occupation must end, and it must end immediately.
Unless we focus on bringing the occupation to an end,
the situation in the occupied Palestinian territory is
destined to remain volatile, and violence will erupt
with the least provocation.
Against that backdrop, Indonesia again voices its
call on Israel to heed the demands of the international
community to resume peace negotiations and allow
the establishment of an independent State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital. We also take
this opportunity to remind the Security Council of
its responsibilities under the Charter of the United

S/PV.7281

Nations. By allowing Israel to continue with the
occupation, the Council not only fails to uphold those
responsibilities, but it also calls into question the
very principles of justice and humanity that are the
foundations of the United Nations. It is therefore high
time that the Security Council fulfil the demands of the
Government of Palestine to set a deadline for Israel to
end its occupation.
It is also very disturbing to see Israel’s persistent
policies aimed at frustrating the peace process. The
blockade on Gaza remains in place, and in the West
Bank the construction of illegal settlements continues.
Earlier this month, the Israeli Government announced
its intention to construct more than 2,600 housing units
in East Jerusalem. To add to our dismay, Israel has also
been continuing its practices of desecrating religious
sites. Again last week, several Israeli politicians,
protected by soldiers, entered the Al-Aqsa Mosque. We
also take note of the recent incidents in which Israeli
soldiers stormed the Al-Aqsa Mosque and evicted
worshippers. Those deplorable developments clearly
underline the proposal that Palestine be put under a
United Nations protection mechanism. It is also one
more reason for the international community to support
the work of the Human Rights Council commission
of inquiry. It is our hope that the commission will
contribute to the efforts to end Israel’s culture of
impunity.
I will conclude by reiterating Indonesia’s steadfast
support for the Government and the people of
Palestine in their pursuit to strengthen unity among all
factions. We believe strongly that Palestinian national
reconciliation is an encouraging factor in the quest for
lasting peace, and not an obstructing one. In that regard,
I underline Indonesia’s suggestion that this courageous
move of Palestine receive the sustained support of
the international community, including through the
recognition of the State of Palestine. The struggle of
Palestine is the just and legitimate struggle of a people
under foreign occupation. That is a fact that should not
be ignored by members of the international community.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the observer of the Observer State of the Holy
See.
Archbishop Auza (Holy See): My delegation
congratulates you, Madam President, on the Argentine
Republic’s assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of October. On behalf of

14-5809153/72

S/PV.7281

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Pope Francis, who has been duly informed of today’s
meeting and follows it with interest, I commend you
highly for convening this timely open debate on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question. The Holy See has always followed the
situation in the Middle East with great interest and
concern. It has always pleaded for negotiations and
dialogue among the parties involved. It has always tried
to do all it could to help the victims of violence.
Given the rapidly deteriorating situation in the
region during these past months, Pope Francis has
intensified his efforts to push for negotiations and to call
on all parties to respect international humanitarian law
and fundamental human rights. During the first week
of the current month, the Pope convoked in the Vatican
the Papal Ambassadors to the Middle East countries,
including Egypt and Turkey, the permanent observers
of international organizations and high-ranking Vatican
officials to discuss the Middle East situation. Just
yesterday, 20 October, the Pope held a meeting with the
Cardinals and Bishops from the Middle East to discuss
the same issue. Following those meetings, the Holy See
reiterates its conviction that peace in the Middle East
can be sought only through negotiated settlements and
not through unilateral choices imposed by the use of
force.
With regard to the Israeli-Palestinian question,
the Holy See reiterates its support for a solution based
on two States, Israel and Palestine. With the vigorous
support of the competent organs of the United Nations
and the entire international community, we must work
towards the final objective, which is the realization of
the Palestinians’ right to have their own State, sovereign
and independent, and of the right of the Israelis to
peace and security. Pope Francis reaffirmed this in
a statement to the Palestinian authorities on 25 May,
when he visited Bethlehem, where he said:
“The time has come for everyone to find ... the
courage to forge a peace which rests on the
acknowledgment by all of the right of two States
to exist and to live in peace and security within
internationally recognized borders.”
With regard to the horrific situation in Syria,
the Holy See urgently calls on all parties to stop the
massive violations of international humanitarian law
and fundamental human rights, and on the international
community to help the parties find a solution. There is
no other way to alleviate and put an end to the untold
sufferings of the entire nation, half of whose population
54/72

21/10/2014

needs humanitarian assistance and around one third has
been displaced.
Turning to Lebanon, the Holy See calls for
international solidarity at a time when the country is
gravely affected by the Syrian crisis and by the massive
presence of refugees. It exhorts Lebanon itself to find
a solution as soon as possible to the vacancy of the
presidency of the republic. The Holy See reaffirms its
support for a sovereign and free Lebanon. For the Holy
See, Lebanon is a message and a sign full of hope for
the coexistence of the various groups that form it.
As to the grave violations and abuses committed
by the so-called Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham,
the competent organs of the United Nations must act
to prevent possible new genocides and to assist the
increasing number of refugees. The Holy See appeals in
particular for the protection of the ethnic and religious
groups, including the Christian communities, who are
specifically targeted and victimized simply because of
their ethnic origins and religious beliefs. The Holy See
insists on respect for the right of those communities
and all displaced persons to return to their homes and
to live in dignity and safety.
The Holy See hopes that the United Nations will take
the escalating, ruthless phenomenon of international
terrorism as an occasion to urgently re-enforce the
international juridical framework of a multilateral
application of the responsibility to protect people from
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing, crimes against
humanity and all forms of unjust aggression. With
lessons learned from our failure to stop recent horrors
of genocide, and presently confronted with blatant,
massive violations of fundamental human rights and
international humanitarian law, now is the time for
courageous decisions.
Finally, the Holy See reiterates its call on all
religious leaders in the Middle East and everywhere
else in the world to play a leading role in promoting
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, in promptly
denouncing every use of religion to justify violence and
in educating all in reciprocal understanding and mutual
respect.
I wish to end by citing a passage from the words
of Pope Francis during his meeting yesterday with the
Cardinals:
“This unfair situation [in the Middle East]
requires an adequate response by the international

14-58091

21/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

community, as well as and in addition to our
constant prayer”.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing today. His continued
personal engagement in the Middle East gives us hope.
His visit to the occupied Palestinian territory last week
provided him with an opportunity to witness first-hand
the frustrating build-destroy cycle.
We fully support his two-pronged strategy of sparing
no effort to rebuild Gaza and sparing no time to jumpstart the peace talks. We meet here for the Council’s
last open debate on this subject for the year — a year
that we ourselves had declared the International Year of
Solidarity with the Palestinian People. We cannot put
a spin on what happened this year. The peace process
collapsed, Gaza was devastated once again, Israel
announced its largest land grab in over three decades,
and tensions around the Al-Aqsa Mosque increased.
The Council failed to fulfil its responsibility as Gaza
was burning and 2,100 of its citizens — of whom
one-third were women and children — were killed. We
appreciate the pledges of $5.4 billion made in Cairo to
rebuild Gaza. But Gaza, as we all know, will remain
vulnerable if the status quo continues.
An overwhelming majority of the international
community continues to support a clear path towards
full Palestinian statehood and sovereignty. The British
House of Commons has recognized the State of
Palestine. Sweden’s new Government has also decided
to recognize it. Those weighty pronouncements,
coming from two major European Union countries,
raise the hopes of the beleaguered Palestinian people.
The Council must acknowledge these realities on the
ground. Sustainable peace in the region is not possible
without establishing an independent, viable and
contiguous State of Palestine with pre-1967 borders and
Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, living side by side in
peace and security with Israel.
All Arab lands, including the Syrian Golan must
also be vacated. Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, while
addressing the General Assembly last month, said,
“The United Nations should facilitate a just and
lasting solution to the Palestinian issue, based on the
relevant United Nations resolutions” (A/69/PV.12,
p. 38).

S/PV.7281

We appreciate the United States’ persistent efforts
in the quest for peace. We hope that Secretary Kerry’s
efforts to reinvigorate the peace process will bear fruit.
The Quartet also needs to be re-energized, but dialogue
should not be pursued only for the sake of dialogue. It
should not forever remain a mirage. It should have clear
goals, timelines and benchmarks.
In Syria and Iraq, the international community
has been challenged to face down the rising tide of
primeval barbarism and criminality. The so-called
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) does not
derive its authority or writ from any religion. We must
all, collectively, oppose and defeat its evil ideology
of hatred, murder and destruction. We must remain
united in our fight against this new face of terrorism
and violent extremism. The political process must be
revived to resolve the continuing conflict in Syria. Now
is not the time to abdicate diplomatic responsibility in
the hope that the warring parties will force the outcome
through guns and blood.
The United Nations and regional players should
use all diplomatic means at their disposal to prevent a
further deterioration of the situation. It is now clear that
if the Syrian conflict had been addressed two years ago,
we would not have witnessed the rise of ISIS. We should
hold fast to the lessons that we have learned so painfully
in our contemporary history. As the Secretary-General
said in Gaza, this “endless, needless, mindless cycle
of suffering” must end. Whether in Palestine or Syria,
dialogue and diplomacy need to be pursued with a real
sense of purpose and urgency. That was the rationale
behind creating the United Nations and we must not fail
in fulfilling our duties in that regard.
We know from experience that the failure to resolve
the Palestinian issue has spawned many more conflicts.
The object lesson is that fixing Palestine will fix the
Middle East; fixing the Middle East will cure some
major ailments of our international polity.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Namibia.
Mr. Emvula (Namibia): It is a pleasure, Madam
President, to see you presiding over the Council for the
month of October. I wish to thank you for organizing
this very important debate at this crucial moment,
which affords the wider United Nations membership an
opportunity to address the challenges facing the Middle
East, particularly the people of Palestine.

14-5809155/72

S/PV.7281

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

My delegation aligns itself with the statements
made by the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and by the
representative of Zimbabwe on behalf of the Southern
African Development Community.
This debate is taking place following the
indiscriminate massacre of over 2,000 Palestinian
civilians — including innocent women and
children — with more than 100,000 Palestinian
people left without a place to call home during the
more than 50-day criminal Israeli military aggression
against Gaza. That genocidal aggression by the Israeli
occupation forces took place under the watchful eye of
the international community, including the Security
Council. No one stopped the aggression. We reiterate
our call on the Human Rights Council to take immediate
action to investigate the genocide against the people of
Palestine.
Furthermore, the international community is
bearing witness to Israel’s fixation on its illegal
settlement enterprise, which includes the destruction,
theft and confiscation of Palestinian lands and property,
the construction and expansion of both the settlements
and the wall, and the forced displacement of Palestinian
families. We applaud the decision of Sweden and the
United Kingdom to recognize the State of Palestine and
call upon the rest of us to do so as well.
My delegation has repeatedly cautioned that the
illegal Israeli settlement campaign is undermining and
fragmenting the contiguity and territorial integrity of
the State of Palestine and threatens the viability of and
prospects for the physical realization of a two-State
solution on the basis of the pre-1967 borders. As the
Security Council debates the situation in the Middle
East, the turmoil and the deterioration of the situation
in the occupied State of Palestine, including East
Jerusalem, persist due to the illegal and provocative
policies that Israel, the occupying Power, continues to
pursue. Those illegal policies have a negative impact on
and prejudice the situation on the ground and enflame
already heightened tensions between the two sides. We
thank the Secretary-General for his efforts, including
his participation in the Cairo donors’ conference and
his visit to the affected areas in the Gaza Strip.
Namibia will continue to draw the international
community’s attention to the ongoing plight of the
more than 1.8 million Palestinians living in the Gaza
Strip who have dramatically suffered from the massive
human devastation and physical destruction resulting
56/72

21/10/2014

from the more than 50-day criminal Israeli military
aggression. They must not be forgotten, and all efforts
must be made to alleviate the suffering and hardship.
Thousands of families rendered homeless by the
Israeli destruction of their homes in Gaza are sheltered
in schools operated by the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East or with host families. Thousands of civilians
continue to require medical care due to Israeli attacks.
Clean water for human consumption remains scarce.
Electricity cuts last up to 18 hours a day due to power
plants’ lack of fuel, which affects every aspect of life.
Thousands of pieces of unexploded ordnance launched
by Israel at Gaza continue to threaten civilian lives and
require removal before any effective reconstruction can
take place. But how much longer will the international
community continue to step in to reconstruct just for
Israel to destroy again?
A clear demand must be made that Israel, the
occupying Power, cease all its illegal actions and
commit to the path of peace. It is the responsibility of
the international community, especially the Security
Council, not to tolerate the occupying Power’s empty
pretexts and utter violation of international law.
Collective action is necessary if Israel, the occupying
Power, is to be held accountable for its violations. In that
regard, Namibia calls upon all members of the Security
Council to fully support the Palestinian initiative to
seek for a Security Council resolution that would, inter
alia, delineate a time frame for an end to the Israeli
occupation that began in 1967. That resolution would
naturally be based on the long-standing parameters
enshrined in United Nations resolutions.
While supporting the steadfast resolve of the
Palestinian leadership in the face of the unprovoked
aggression against its land and people, we reiterate
our total condemnation of all of the illegal actions and
crimes perpetrated by Israel, the occupying Power, in
the Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. In
that context, we reiterate our call for the immediate
establishment of a committee to investigate those
horrendous crimes. We further urge the international
community to continue to provide the necessary
humanitarian assistance to ease the suffering of the
affected Palestinian communities, in particular the
most vulnerable members of society such as women
and children. We welcome the ongoing efforts to keep
negotiations going and appeal to both parties to commit
themselves to success, embrace the opportunity

14-58091

21/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

presented and abide by the obligations under their
previous agreements, in order to achieve lasting peace
between Israel and Palestine.
I would conclude by reiterating Namibia’s support
for the efforts undertaken by the Secretary-General, our
unwavering friendship and solidarity with the people of
Palestine in their just cause for freedom, independence
and social justice, and our backing for the establishment
of an independent Palestinian State on the basis of the
1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and its
unconditional admission as a full member of the United
Nations and its agencies, so that it can take its rightful
place among the community of nations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate the Argentine
Republic and you, Madam President, on having taken
up the important task of presiding over the Security
Council in this month of October.
To save time, I will read out only a part of my
statement. My full text will be distributed in the
Chamber.
(spoke in English)
The Gaza reconstruction Conference held in Cairo
on 12 October proved to be a significant catalyst for
renewing the international community’s commitment
towards the reconstruction of Gaza. We congratulate
Egypt and Norway on their role in organizing that
important conference. I would also like to pay tribute
to the personal efforts of the Secretary-General, who
just travelled to the region to re-energize the peace
process. In Cairo, Japan pledged to provide more
than $20 million in aid towards the reconstruction
and development process, which is in addition to
the $7.8 million in emergency aid already disbursed
in August. These contributions are part of Japan’s
$200 million aid package announced by our Foreign
Minister Kishida in Jakarta in March.
It is essential that we build on the commitments
made by the international community for attaining a
sustainable ceasefire and reconstruction of Gaza. In that
regard, the establishment of an international mechanism
that addresses the issues of security, humanitarian aid and
good governance is indispensable. Japan, in cooperation
with Israel, Palestine and the United Nations among
others, is ready to work towards that goal.

S/PV.7281

The recent crisis in Gaza demonstrates the urgent
need for a just, durable and comprehensive peace based
on a two-State solution. Efforts for the reconstruction of
Gaza must also target the resumption of peace talks and
the stabilization of the Middle East region. Regrettably,
we have yet to see the resumption of direct negotiations
since its interruption in April and the Gaza crisis in
July. It is imperative that both Israel and Palestine work
towards fostering mutual confidence and dialogue.
Japan stands ready to assist the parties in building
mutual confidence. At every opportunity, Japan has
called on leaders from both sides to work towards the
resumption of peace negotiations, including, inter alia,
during the visit by Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu
to Japan in May and through the participation of
Foreign Minister Kishida at the meeting of the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee held in New York last month. Our
Parliamentary Vice-Minister, Mr. Sonoura, is currently
on a visit to Palestine and Israel to reiterate our message
to both sides.
We call on Israel to completely freeze its settlement
activities, which are illegal under international law.
Israel’s recent land seizures, which risk paving the
way for further settlement activities, run counter
to international efforts for the pursuit of a two-State
solution.
Correspondingly, we look to the Palestinian
National Unity Government, under the leadership of
President Abbas, to remain committed to renouncing
violence, the recognition of Israel and adherence to
previous diplomatic agreements, on the path towards
achieving national reconciliation and peace in the
Middle East. Japan welcomes the convening of their
first-ever cabinet meeting in Gaza, on 9 October, as a
positive step. Japan also calls on Palestine to refrain from
any unilateral action that may hinder the resumption
of peace negotiations. From this perspective, we will
closely follow discussions in the Council on this matter.
Japan is of the view that assistance for Palestine’s
nation-building efforts also strengthens the foundations
of the political process towards a two-State solution. To
this end, we have been making distinct contributions
to this effort by mobilizing private investments in
Palestine. One such initiative is the Jericho agroindustrial park project. It is a flagship project of the
“Corridor for Peace and Prosperity” initiative that
Japan has been implementing since 2006 in cooperation
with Israel, Jordan and Palestine. Six companies have
already signed tenant contracts. It is expected that the

14-5809157/72

S/PV.7281

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

industrial park will lead to the creation of 7,000 jobs,
with expected annual economic benefits totalling more
than $40 million.
Another initiative of Japan is the Conference
on the Cooperation among East Asian Countries for
Palestinian Development. This is a process aimed
at mobilizing East Asian resources for the sake of
Palestinian development. During its second ministerial
meeting, held in Jakarta last March, participants
committed to carrying out numerous capacity-building
projects. We have steadily been doing our part, for
example, by conducting tourism-sector cooperation
with Thailand as well as human-resource training for
Islamic finance with Malaysia.
In the interest of saving time, I will stop here.
Please refer to the full text distributed, which covers
our stance on the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
and Syria.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nicaragua.
Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke
in Spanish): As this is the first time we are addressing
the Security Council under your presidency, we wish
to commend you, Madam, for your sterling leadership
and in particular for the dynamism that you and your
delegation have brought to the work of the Council.
Nicaragua reiterates its absolute and total solidarity
with the Palestinian people in their struggle for
freedom and the exercise of their inalienable right to
self-determination, with the creation of a Palestinian
State based on pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, allowing for the return of all refugees and
in solidarity with all Palestinian political prisoners.
We also demand the immediate lifting of the criminal
blockade and an end to the settlement policy.
It is with a great deal of pride that we convey our
greetings to the Palestinian national unity Government.
We regret that this year, the International Year of
Solidarity with the Palestinian People, at a time when the
overwhelming majority of the international community
has pledged to support the Palestinians in their struggle
to claim once and for all their inalienable rights, we
have witnessed yet another massacre — another
genocide of Palestinian children, women and men,
along with the destruction of their homes, schools,
hospitals and infrastructure. We wonder if Israel and
those who support it understand the meaning of the
word “solidarity”?
58/72

21/10/2014

That criminal aggression lasted more than 50 days,
even as people looked on. Beyond the loss of life, it
left behind a Gaza that is but scorched earth and has
consequences for the future that we are all familiar with:
more refugees, more overcrowding, more destroyed
houses, hospitals and schools, and more Palestinian
children, women and men traumatized by this horrible
assault.
It is important that the funds recently pledged
by donor countries for the reconstruction of Gaza
become a reality. These must be immediate, new and
unconditional so as to provide support and ensure
reconstruction for this long-suffering people.
But I wonder how long we will allow the vicious
circle of policies and practices by Israel: attack, destroy
and massacre, and, once everything has been destroyed,
accept a temporary ceasefire and then wash its hands of
the tragedy that it caused, and, later, start anew.
As a developing country, the State of Palestine has
every right to receive development aid and investments,
but if we allow this vicious circle of mass destruction
and massacres on the part of Israel to continue, the
international community’s aid will serve only to help
that people merely survive. They deserve, as we all do,
a sustainable development that is in keeping with their
interests and promotes their well-being. They should
not be destroyed in step with the cyclical agenda of the
occupying Power.
Israel continues to refuse to negotiate in good faith,
hiding behind the veil of impunity that a permanent
member of the Security Council has historically offered
it. Each time we have seen progress in the negotiations,
inevitably we have seen Israeli policies and practices
aimed at interrupting that process. We must put an end
to this vicious circle. Countries with responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security
cannot continue to allow this impunity or the suffering
of this heroic people.
The Security Council must meet its responsibilities
by adopting a resolution containing a set timetable for
the creation of a Palestinian State based on pre-1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, laying the
foundation for a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East, and with two States, Palestine and Israel, living
side by side in peace, in accordance with the relevant
United Nations resolutions and the aspirations of
peace-loving people.
Peace in the Middle East will hinge on not only
resolving the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, but also on
14-58091

21/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

liberating the Lebanese and Syrian territories occupied
by Israel. The situation in the Middle East beyond
the situation in Palestine and the rest of the occupied
territories must be resolved through dialogue and
negotiation, bearing in mind the legitimate interests of
all the States in the region, without external interference.
We cannot continue to encourage conflicts, finance
terrorist groups or impose regime-change policies.
All of this, as has been shown since 2003, has brought
nothing but death and destruction, extremism and
radicalism. Syria, a brotherly nation, is a victim of
those policies.
In conclusion, I call for us to work together with
Security Council members for a Middle East zone of
peace and development for their peoples.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
I am honoured to deliver this statement on behalf of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC). I would
like at the outset to extend my sincere congratulations
to you, Madam President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month and wish
you every success. Moreover, I express my gratitude
for convening this open debate on the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question. We
thank His Excellency the Secretary-General for his
briefing and his efforts in that context.
Today’s meeting is of particular importance
because it follows the inhuman Israeli military
aggression against the Palestinian people in the Gaza
Strip, which lasted 51 days. During that time, the Israeli
war machine burned fields, claimed lives, destroyed
infrastructure and indiscriminately targeted elderly
civilians, women and children. It resulted in the death
of more than 2,800 martyrs, including 516 children,
11,100 wounded, and the demolition of more than 10,620
houses and residential complexes, including several
assaults on United Nations institutions and premises.
All those actions constitute war crimes and crimes
against humanity and will not be forgotten by future
generations. They constitute a flagrant disregard of all
the international community’s appeals to Israel to end
such practices, which are truly a stain on humankind’s
conscience.
The OIC expresses its support for and solidarity
with the population of Gaza and all the Palestinian
people, and strongly condemns the successive,

S/PV.7281

continuous and brutal Israeli campaigns against the
occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem. The
Organization of Islamic Cooperation holds Israel solely
responsible, as the occupying Power, for its shameful
killing of innocent Palestinians and destruction of
thousands of homes, buildings and infrastructure, and
holds it fully responsible for all human and material
damages suffered by the Palestinian people in the Gaza
Strip.
The OIC member States stress that the disasters
and consequences caused by the Israeli aggression must
be at the forefront of the international community’s
concerns. In that regard, we welcome the Conference
of international donors for the reconstruction of Gaza,
which was held in Egypt, on 12 October. In addition,
we commend the efforts of Egypt and Norway, who
chair the international coordination committee for
aid to the Palestinians. We also emphasize the need to
fulfil the declared contributions, and not to surrender
to disappointment and frustration after Israel destroyed
the infrastructure projects for which the donors had
contributed originally. Moreover, we reiterate our call
for an end to the illegitimate blockade of the Gaza
Strip in order to enable the Palestinian people to live
in dignity, freedom and peace in their native country.
In addition, the OIC reiterates its call for the
immediate implementation of the Human Rights
Council’s decision to provide immediate international
protection for the Palestinian people in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, and the
formation of an independent international investigation
commission to investigate all violations of international
humanitarian and human rights laws committed by
Israel.
The OIC reaffirms the Islamic, Arab and Palestinian
identity of occupied Jerusalem and that East Jerusalem
is an integral part of the Palestinian territory occupied
by Israel since 1967, and that its annexation by Israel,
the occupying Power, remains illegal, unrecognized
and condemned by the international community. The
OIC condemns in the strongest terms the ongoing
violations against the Al-Aqsa Mosque and Muslim
worshipers committed by the Israeli occupying forces
and settlers. The OIC stresses that those actions are a
flagrant violation of the principles of international law
and relevant United Nations resolutions.
Accordingly, we call on the Security Council to
put an end to those violations, and to compel Israel,

14-5809159/72

S/PV.7281

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the occupying Power, to respect the right to freedom of
worship and to preserve the sanctity of the holy places
and the worshipers. Moreover, the OIC condemns
Israel, the occupying Power, for not permitting the
international mission of experts mandated by UNESCO
to reach the occupied city of Jerusalem to investigate
the Israeli violations.
In addition, the OIC holds Israel, the occupying
authority, fully responsible for the consequences of the
heinous crimes practiced by extremist settlers against
the Palestinian people, and calls for the inclusion of
settler leaders and extremist settlers groups, including
the Price Tag and Hilltop Youth factions, on the list
of terrorists and criminals wanted for international
prosecution by the States of the world and international
organizations.
The continuation of illegitimate settling practices
by Israel, the occupying Power, and its seizure of
Palestinian land and the expulsion of its indigenous
Palestinian population are clear evidence of the policy
of ethnic cleansing it practices. That policy undermines
the two-State solution and is a definite confirmation that
Israel is not interested in peaceful solutions and only
applies a policy of fait accompli, continuous occupation
and deprivation of the Palestinian people of their rights.
We call upon the Security Council to take the necessary
measures to stop the Israeli settlement activity in the
occupied Palestinian territory and to implement the
relevant international resolutions, particularly both
resolutions 465 (1980) and 497 (1981), which affirm the
illegitimacy of the settlement policy and the necessity
of dismantling the existing settlements.
The OIC stresses the necessity for the international
community, especially the Security Council, to shoulder
its responsibilities in maintaining international peace
and security, to take all necessary measures to put an
end to the continuing Israeli occupation of Palestinian
land and ensure Israel’s compliance with relevant
international resolutions. If the Council is to avoid
losing further credibility in the eyes of the international
community and the conscience of the world, it is time to
adopt a resolution establishing an imperative time limit
to end the Israeli occupation of Palestinian and Arab
territories and compelling Israel to withdraw to the
borders of June 1967, including a withdrawal from the
occupied Syrian Golan and other occupied territories
and to move forward towards implementing the twoState solution and the achievement of independence for
the Palestinian people. In that regard, we reaffirm our
support for Palestinian efforts seeking to use all legal
60/72

21/10/2014

means based on international legitimacy to achieve
those goals.
Together with the countless honourable people
around the world, we cannot help but wonder what
obstacles are preventing justice and putting a time
limit for ending the illegitimate occupation, as
stipulated in United Nations for many decades now.
What is the obstacle that prevents resorting to legal
means? The member States of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation welcome the recent decision by
the Kingdom of Sweden and the decision of the House
of Commons of Great Britain to recognize the State
of Palestine, and we call on other countries to follow
suit. The independence of the State of Palestine,
in accordance with the resolutions of international
legitimacy, and the granting to the Palestinian people
of their right to self-determination are long overdue.
The States members of the OIC express their deep
concern at the escalation of the violence, destruction,
murder and other heinous crimes being committed
against the Syrian people as well as the serious
deterioration of the humanitarian situation and the
failure to implement both Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014) and 2165 (2014) due to the intransigence
of the Syrian regime. Those resolutions stipulated the
unhindered delivery of humanitarian aid to Syrian
civilians. Moreover, we call on all States Members
of the United Nations to fulfil their commitments to
support the humanitarian needs of the Syrian people,
especially since the number of displaced persons and
refugees has reached over 10 million individuals inside
Syria and in neighbouring countries, in addition to
four million in need of urgent humanitarian aid in the
besieged areas.
The States members of the OIC emphasize the need
to achieve a negotiated political solution as soon as
possible. In that regard, we call on the Security Council
to shoulder its full responsibility towards the stalled
political solution, and urge the United Nations Special
Envoy, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, to step up his efforts
to form a transitional Government with full executive
powers, according to the first Geneva declaration, so
as to achieve the aspirations of the Syrian people for
change, freedom, security and stability, and to guarantee
that there be no place in such a solution for those whose
hands are soaked in the blood of more than 100,000
Syrians — that is, those who have committed crimes
against humanity, including aerial bombardment and
the use of fire bombs, missiles and chemical weapons.

14-58091

21/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.
Mr. Reyes Rodríguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba once again expresses its pleasure at seeing
you, Madam, preside over the Security Council.
We commend you for the manner in which you have
discharged you duties, as during its prior presidency.
We fully support the statement made by the
representative of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
The Middle East situation has worsened in recent
months and the international community remains highly
attuned to developments there. The crimes committed
by Israel in its latest aggression against the Palestinian
people shocked global public opinion. Israel again acted
with impunity. The Security Council, revealing once
again its characteristic double standards, stood silently
by as Israel murdered over 2,000 Palestinians, most of
them children, women and elderly, and we again bore
witnesss as Israel’s massive military might destroyed
homes, livelihoods, basic services and infrastructure.
Cuba reiterates that the Security Council must
uphold the duties with which it is entrusted by defending
international peace and security and by adopting,
without delay, specific and practical measures to bring
to an end once and for all Israel’s aggression against the
Palestinian people, and to hold it accountable for the
crimes of aggression, collective punishment, arbitrary
arrests, mass imprisonment and genocide committed
against this people.
We fully support the Palestinian initiative seeking
a Security Council resolution setting a deadline for the
end of the Israeli military occupation of the Palestinian
territories that began in 1967 and permitting the
exercise of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people, including the right to self-determination in
an independent Palestinian State within its pre-1967
borders with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The General Assembly took an historic decision
when its members adopted the majority resolution 67/19,
granting Palestine non-Member observer State status
in the United Nations. The international community
must continue to support the Palestinian people in their
legitimate call for the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State and its admission as a full Member of
the United Nations.
The construction and expansion of illegal Israeli
settlements, the building of the wall of shame in the

S/PV.7281

occupied Palestinian territory, the destruction and
confiscation of Palestinian land and property, the forced
displacement of hundreds of thousands of Palestinian
families and the transfer of settlers into occupied
Palestinian territory are unacceptable. Following the
recent announcement by the Israeli Government of the
construction of over 2,000 new Israeli settlements in
occupied East Jerusalem, we demand the immediate and
complete cessation of all Israeli settlement activities in
the Palestinian territories.
Such aggressive Israeli colonizing policies and
practices deliberately contravene United Nations
resolutions, international law and international
humanitarian law; constitute a threat to regional and
international peace and security; and deprive the
Palestinian people of their fundamental human rights.
Only the end of the colonization policy, the release
of Palestinian prisoners and the recognition of the
legitimate and inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people will allow for the launching of a meaningful
political process that could lead to lasting peace in the
region.
The deteriorating humanitarian situation in the
besieged Gaza Strip, where living conditions have been
excacerbated by the most recent atrocious bombardment,
requires the urgent attention and support of the
international community. Cuba reiterates its support
for the Palestinian people in its just struggle for selfdetermination. We demand an end to the occupation of
all Arab territories and reiterate our position in favour
of a just and lasting peace for all the peoples of the
Middle East.
We reiterate our call for the safeguarding of the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Syria and for the right to self-determination of its
people without foreign interference or intervention
of any kind. Foreign intervention in Syria must stop.
Cuba reiterates its opposition to the calls of those who
promote regime change in the Syrian Arab Republic
and are committed to the use of force and violence.
We cannot but reiterate our serious concern at
the loss of innocent life resulting from the Syrian
conflict. We condemn all acts of violence taking place
in that country against the civilian population, but
the supposed protection of human lives and the fight
against terrorists cannot be used as a pretext for foreign
intervention. Cuba reiterates its condemnation of all
acts, methods and practices of terrorism in all their
forms and manifestations, wherever and by whomever

14-5809161/72

S/PV.7281

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

they are committed, including State terrorism. We
condemn all the acts of terrorism that have taken place
in the Middle East and any support of irregular armed
groups, including the use of mercenaries, which sows
only destruction and death and attempts to obstruct the
settlement of this conflict through diplomatic channels.
We reject unilateral actions and those taken outside
the United Nations, such as those of the United States,
which is launching air strikes across boundaries of
sovereign States in clear violation of international law.
We recall that it is the duty of the Council to promote
peace, not violence; to avoid destabilization and not to
contribute to financing, arming and training those who
would destabilize.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iceland.
Ms. Gunnarsdóttir (Iceland): I would like to
thank the Argentinian presidency for organizing this
meeting and in particular for the way you have framed
the debate.
Iceland agrees that in the wake of the ceasefire in
Gaza, this open debate is an important opportunity to
focus on that longstanding issue. That is not to diminish
the importance and urgency of other crises demanding
our attention in the region, or the importance of other
forums where this issue is discussed, including the
Quartet. But, as the President has pointed out, the
Council can and must play a more active role and
assume its responsibilities, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, by supporting all efforts
and initiatives aimed at reaching a lasting peace. It
is, after all, the Security Council that is charged with
maintaining international peace and security.
The present state of affairs is sustainable neither for
the Israelis or the Palestinians. When we look at Gaza,
the facts on the ground are shocking. In the pointless
war of the past summer, 20,000 homes were destroyed
and more than 2,000 Palestinians killed, most of them
civilians, including more than 500 children. More than
70 Israelis were killed, including 6 civilians. Iceland
has condemned the disproportionate use of force by
the Israel Defense Forces during the conflict, and we
also condemn the indiscriminate rocket attacks by
Hamas and other militant organizations in Gaza against
civilian targets in Israel.
The phrase “facts on the ground” began as an
innocent euphemism for Israeli settlements established
in violation of international law. It has come to signify

62/72

21/10/2014

the enormous gap between statements of political intent
and actions — that is, what people have done in spite of
what they say or have said. Those facts stand in disregard
of international human rights and humanitarian law.
The facts on the ground include widespread violations
of the rights and dignity of Palestinians through denial
of property rights and restrictions on their freedom
of movement and expression. Those actions have
clear consequences for the chances of the peaceful
coexistence of two States living side by side. We have
seen a series of actions over a long period that diminish
the chances of establishing a two-State solution. And
that means diminishing the chances of any solution that
would allow both populations to live in peace for the
long term.
A sea change is needed to move this issue onto a path
that can lead to an enduring peace. The core problem
on the ground is the occupation of Palestine, and that
occupation must end. Without a clear political horizon
there is no hope and the bloodshed will continue.
Choosing the way of peace must bring results. On the
twenty-fifth anniversary this year of the Convention
on the Rights of the Child, we should think about all
the children whose names have been read out in this
very forum at former meetings, to remind us that in
the end, maintaining international peace and security
is about people, and that the Security Council has both
the responsibility as well as the tools to do its utmost
to solve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, as well as all
the other conflicts in the region where children are
suffering.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): I join other speakers in
commending you for convening this important debate,
Madam President. The Sri Lankan delegation associates
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
We are very concerned about the humanitarian
impact of the recent escalation of violence resulting in
large-scale destruction, devastation and displacement
in Gaza. Sri Lanka joined the international community
in mourning the tragic loss of life, including those
of many children, during the violence. The extensive
damage to public infrastructure, including schools,
hospitals and United Nations buildings, further
undermined the already precarious access to basic
services that prevailed prior to the current conflict,

14-58091

21/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

services that include electricity, water and sanitation,
health and education.
Despite the open-ended ceasefire reached on
26 August, the situation in Gaza remains tense.
The challenges ahead of addressing the immediate
humanitarian needs and launching reconstruction
activities are enormous. The international community
must ensure that the injured, the displaced and the
homeless are taken care of while addressing the broader
question of peace in the region. In that regard, we
welcome the successful convening of the conference
on reconstructing Gaza held in Cairo on 12 October. It
is essential that the unilateral sanctions and blockade
of Gaza be lifted if we are to find a more permanent
solution to its bleak economic conditions. The
restrictions on imports and exports due to the blockade
are stifling economic growth as well as aggravating
the humanitarian crisis. We welcome the partial lifting
of the restrictions within the framework of resolution
1860 (2009), which should contribute significantly to
Gaza’s economic advancement and the well-being of its
people, and to creating an environment of hope.
We join the international community in appealing
to all parties to refrain from indiscriminate and
disproportionate attacks on civilians, since they are
detrimental to the peace and security of both Israel
and Palestine and to the stability of the entire region.
Indiscriminate attacks on civilians will only worsen
feelings of desperation and insecurity and widen the
gap between the parties. The security needs of the
people of Israel must be respected. A climate conducive
to peace will be encouraged by a mutual approach
sensitive to the concerns of both sides. We hope that
all parties will engage constructively and sincerely to
end the conflict, enabling the achievement of a lasting
peace. The ongoing settlement activity, which is illegal
under international law, particularly article 49 of the
Fourth Geneva Convention, the relevant United Nations
resolutions and an advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice, must end if a sustainable solution to
this problem is to be negotiated.
Finding a just and durable solution to the situation in
the Middle East has been a priority for the international
community since 1948. It is disappointing that after
more than five decades, we are still nowhere near a
satisfactory solution. The Middle East conflict absorbs
a considerable amount of international attention and
resources. As we heard in the summit-level meeting of
the Security Council on 24 September (S/PV.7272), the

S/PV.7281

conflicts in the Middle East, especially the lingering
question of Palestine, are one of the main motives
driving the recruitment of terrorists in the region and
worldwide. Terrorism originating from the region has
the potential to pose a serious threat to the security and
stability of many countries.
Given the events of this year that led to the
unprecedented humanitarian crisis in Gaza, we hope
that every effort will be made to achieve a successful
negotiated end to the conflict so that the people of
both Israel and Palestine will be able to enjoy peace
and prosperity in their own lands. In this year of
International Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People, we must not give up on our hopes for a lasting
peace accord that leads to the establishment of a
fully sovereign and secure State of Palestine. We are
encouraged by the political rapprochement between
Gaza and the West Bank with the formation of the unity
Government.
Sri Lanka supports Palestine’s application for
admission to full membership in the United Nations.
Let me conclude by reiterating Sri Lanka’s support for
the implementation of General Assembly resolutions
regarding the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people to statehood and the attainment of a two-State
solution on the basis of the 1967 borders.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): As this is my
first statement in the Council for this month, please
accept my congratulations — to Argentina and you
personally, Madam — on your assumption of the
presidency. I thank you for convening this open debate
on the very important topic of the situation in the
Middle East. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing and for his tireless efforts to promote peace in
the Middle East.
Along with the entire international community, we
are alarmed that terrorist groups are creating quasiState entities to fight against legitimate Governments
and sow enmity and hatred. Kazakhstan strongly
condemns the attacks by the so-called Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and associated armed
groups in the Middle East, which pose a major threat
to the region and beyond, including our part of the
world, and Central Asia in particular. They must be
held accountable for their violations and atrocities and
brought to justice by the international community.

14-5809163/72

S/PV.7281

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We stress that terrorism can be defeated only by a
sustained and comprehensive approach involving the
active participation and cooperation of all States and
international and regional organizations, to impede,
impair, isolate and incapacitate the terrorist threat.
My delegation has already expressed to the
Council Kazakhstan’s concern about the developments
in the Gaza Strip. Kazakhstan expresses its deepest
condolences and profound sympathy for the senseless
deaths among the civilian population of the Gaza Strip,
most of which were of women, children and the elderly.
We call for the immediate lifting of the Israeli blockade
on Gaza. We are also concerned about the continuing
settlement process on Palestinian territory.
It is clearly evident that the persistence of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict continues to threaten regional
and international peace and security, and its negative
implications are not confined to just that region, but
are felt well beyond, across the globe. The ultimate
goal of the efforts of all parties involved should be the
restoration and promotion of the peace processes in all
directions. That should be in accordance with Security
Council resolutions, the Madrid principles and the
land-for-peace formula. All parties to the Middle East
conflict must fulfil their commitments, as stipulated by
the Road Map.
We support Egypt’s peaceful initiative and welcome
the outcomes of the 12 October Cairo talks on the longterm settlement conditions. Kazakhstan expresses its
hope that international actions, including those of the
Secretary-General, will contribute to the ceasefire
and resumption of further peace talks. My delegation
reiterates our recognition of the legitimate right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination, the creation
of an independent State of Palestine within the 1967
borders in peaceful co-existence with Israel and fullfledged membership in the United Nations.
In conclusion, we again urgently call on all parties
to commit their political will to ensure lasting peace
and security, and freedom and justice for all people
through a genuine multilateral approach.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to commend your initiative, Madam
President, to convene an open debate on the situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question. I

64/72

21/10/2014

would also like to welcome the briefing by the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process.
From the beginning, the situation in the Middle East
has been of particular concern for Peru. With respect to
the question of Palestine, my country has consistently
maintained a clear position in accordance with the
rules and principles of international law, in particular
peoples’ right to self-determination. Therefore, my
country recognizes the need to implement the relevant
General Assembly resolutions, which are the basis for
the creation of two States in the territory of Palestine,
one Arab and one Jewish, coexisting side by side as
neighbours within secure and mutually recognized
borders, in peace and security and free from the threat
or use of force.
Therefore, conscious of the inalienable right of
the Palestinian people to establish themselves as an
independent State, and convinced that the creation of
a Palestinian State is a key element in the peaceful and
definitive resolution of the conflict, Peru has recognized
Palestine as a State and supported the relevant United
Nations resolutions, including through our sponsorship
of historic General Assembly resolution 67/19, of
29 November 2012, in accordance with which Palestine
was granted the status of non-member observer State.
The attacks against densely populated urban areas in
the Gaza Strip carried out by Israel last summer were the
subject of vigorous condemnation by my Government.
In the same vein, Peru condemned the firing of rockets
from Gaza towards Israeli civilian populations. Of
course, Peru deplored the disproportionate use of
military force during the conflict, which resulted in
the deaths of more than 1,400 people in the Gaza Strip,
mostly Palestinian civilians, including women and
children, some of whom were seeking shelter in United
Nations facilities.
Therefore, consistent with our ongoing call for the
parties to act with strict respect for human rights and
international humanitarian law and to take measures
to protect the civilian population, Peru voted in favour
of Human Rights Council resolution S-21/1 through
which, in addition the attacks being condemned,
Israel was asked to cease its settlement activities and
end the blockade of the Gaza Strip. While my country
recognizes the inalienable right of Israel to preserve
its own existence and security, including by exercising
its right to legitimate self-defence, we note that the
exercise of this right must be carried out in accordance

14-58091

21/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

with international law and international humanitarian
law, in particular the principles of proportionality
and lawfulness, within defined and internationally
recognized borders.
On that last point, my delegation reiterates that
the acquisition of territory by force is inadmissible
in the light of international law, which is why any
action by Israel to impose its laws, jurisdiction and
administration are null and void. In that regard, we
reiterate our call on Israel to immediately cease the
practice of the construction of settlements, house
demolitions and evictions in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, in accordance with
the provisions of various General Assembly resolutions.
In accordance with our traditional and unchanging
commitment to the peaceful settlement of disputes, my
delegation reaffirms its full support and calls for the
search for a lasting peace in the Middle East, which
can only be achieved as a result of negotiations with
the participation of parties, and on the basis of full
implementation by all parties of their obligations under
the Madrid terms of reference, the Quartet Road Map
and other agreements and full respect for international
law, including Security Council resolutions on the
subject. My delegation therefore hopes that the ceasefire
agreement signed in August will pave the way for the
parties to resume the peace process on the Middle
East, in order to achieve a viable and lasting solution
that ends the status quo and allows Palestinians and
Israelis to live in peace, in two States, within secure
and internationally recognized borders.
I would like to turn to a growing threat to the
peace and security of the entire Middle East region,
namely, the terrorist organization that calls itself the
Islamic State, whose terrible acts and crimes cannot
be tolerated. In that regard, Peru reiterates its strong
condemnation and rejection of terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, reaffirming its commitment
to the fight against that scourge. In that context, Peru
welcomes the recently adopted resolution 2178 (2014),
which seeks to combat the spread of terrorism, in
particular by reducing the threat posed by so-called
foreign terrorist fighters given that their presence may
increase the intensity and duration of conflicts. In
addition, it represents a serious threat to their States of
origin, transit States and the States to which they travel.
Finally, I wish to reiterate Peru’s commitment to
taking all necessary measures to combat terrorism

S/PV.7281

at the international and the national levels, while
always bearing in mind the four pillars of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, in strict
accordance with international law, including the norms
and principles of international human rights law,
international humanitarian law and refugee law.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mamabolo (South Africa): For countless
years, in numerous Security Council meetings, the
international community has utilized this forum to
express its anger and disappointment at the senseless
loss of life and the cruelty and barbarism meted out
to women, men and children by warring factions
that refuse to acknowledge the reality that peace will
reign in the Middle East only as a result of peaceful
negotiations, justice and fairness. On numerous
occasions, the international community has reiterated
its position that the conflict between Israel and Palestine
can be resolved only through a two-State solution, with
a viable Palestinian State living side by side with Israel
and its other neighbours.
South Africa wishes to congratulate you,
Madam President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of October and
on having convened such an important debate. We also
extend our gratitude to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his briefing today and express our appreciation
for the role that he plays in upholding the principles
of the United Nations and in his involvement in the
resolution of conflict in the Middle East. My delegation
associates itself with the statement delivered earlier
by the representatives of Zimbabwe on behalf of the
Southern African Development Community and of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
This morning, we listened attentively to the
briefing of the Secretary-General on his recent visit
to the State of Palestine, including the Gaza Strip, in
which he told us that he had witnessed first hand the
massive destruction in those areas. South Africa, for its
part, believes that such visits are helpful in drawing the
attention of the international community to the reality
of the horrific killing and the suffering of civilians in
Palestine.
We also listened to the Permanent Observer of the
Observer State of Palestine to the United Nations, who
told us that Palestinians now face the mammoth task of

14-5809165/72

S/PV.7281

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

rebuilding their lives after the deaths of 2,180 people,
the majority civilians, including 516 children and 283
women. Clearly, we should unreservedly condemn such
a situation in the Council. At the same time, we equally
listened to the representative of the State of Israel, who
pointed out Israel’s readiness to find a lasting solution
to the conflict. In order to demonstrate its seriousness,
we believe that the starting point should be the lifting
of the seven-year blockade on Gaza.
We are also pleased that the Palestinians and
Israelis have concluded a ceasefire agreement. We are
hopeful that the ongoing negotiations will lead to a
permanent ceasefire arrangement. South Africa, for its
part, believes that now is the time for our readiness to
be put to the test and that attempts should be sought
to indeed seek a genuine solution to the long conflict.
South Africa is ready to support a Security Council
resolution that will compel both Israel and Palestine to
negotiate a framework for a two-State solution within
a specific time frame. In that regard, we welcome the
attempts of the Group of the Arab States, which is
making an effort in that regard.
Lastly, South Africa very recently pledged its
support for the ongoing humanitarian assistance effort
taking place in Gaza. We are indeed pleased that the
international community is making efforts to try and
restore conditions in Gaza. In that regard, we have
pledged 10 million South African rand, or $1 million,
as a contribution to that end. The funds pledged by
South Africa will be transferred to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East. We stand ready to be of assistance, if called
upon, to share our experience in national reconciliation,
nation-building, constitution-building and post-conflict
reconstruction and development.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bahrain.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me to sincerely thank you, Madam
President, for having convened this open debate of the
Security Council on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. Allow me also to
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing to the
Security Council.
The Kingdom of Bahrain reaffirms that a lasting and
comprehensive settlement of the Palestinian question
will be achieved only through the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as its

66/72

21/10/2014

capital in accordance with United Nations resolutions,
the Arab Peace Initiative and the decisions of the
Quartet, as well as all international terms of reference
in that regard. Just peace can be obtained only through
a complete Israeli withdrawal from all occupied Arab
territories and the lifting of the illegal Israeli siege of
Gaza.
A peaceful settlement of the Middle East issue
requires putting an end to the illegitmate Israeli
occupation of Arab and Palestinian lands, including
East Jerusalem and the Syrian Golan. as well as a
Israel’s complete withdrawal from other occupied
Lebanese territories, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions. The most recent brutal
aggression against the Gaza Strip, which led to the
widespread destruction and more than 2,000 martyrs,
clearly demonstrates Israel’s violations and its breach
of all international resolutions, laws, norms and
treaties owing to its expropriation of Palestinian land,
construction of illegal settlements, their expansion and
the imposition of the blockade.
The Kingdom of Bahrain underscores the words of
His Excellency Mr. Mahmoud Abbas, President of the
State of Palestine, when he called for the international
protection of the Palestinian people and their occupied
land, Israel to commit to implementing the Fourth
Geneva Convention, a specific timeline to end the
Israeli occupation and the realization of the aspirations
of the Palestinian people to set up their own independent
State of Palestine on the basis of the 4 June 1967 lines,
with East Jerusalem as its capital. All of this must
be undertaken pursuant to the Arab Peace Initiative,
the two-State solution, international legitimacy and
relevant United Nations resolutions.
We pay tribute to the key role played by the Arab
Republic of Egypt in securing the ceasefire and as
co-host with the Kingdom of Norway of the International
Conference on Palestine, “Reconstructing Gaza”. The
Kingdom of Bahrain will always support the principles
of peace, freedom, justice, self-determination and
coexistence. We support moderation and international
resolutions, and will continue to act and work to ensure
the implementation of resolution 1515 (2003).
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Maldives.
Mr. Sareer (Maldives): My delegation wishes to
thank Argentina, in its capacity as President of the
Security Council, for convening this open debate in

14-58091

21/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

connection with the agenda item on the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question. I would
also like to extend our appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing and his dedicated efforts
towards a resolution of the conflicts in the Middle East.
Once again, the Maldives takes the floor in the
Council to join the global chorus of voices condemning
the violence in the Middle East, especially in the State
of Palestine. For the past few decades, the international
community has expended time, energy and resources
towards the realization of a two-State solution based
on relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
Road Map. However, time and time again the progress
made ends in the sound of gunfire, rockets, missiles and
bombs. Time and time again, it ends in the cries of the
innocent who unwillingly give their final measure in
what we so nonchalantly refer to as collateral damage.
Generations grow up under the oppression of
occupation and learn both hatred and violence,
although there has been long-standing consensus on
the parametres of a solution. United Nations resolutions
and subsequent negotiations have made clear that the
Israeli occupation that began in 1967 has no place in
the modern world, and that the State of Palestine must
be recognized. It must be granted full independence
within its pre-1967 borders and with East Jerusalem
as its capital. As elaborated in these resolutions, the
issues of refugees, borders, settlements, security,
natural resources, prisoners and East Jerusalem must
be addressed if there is ever to be hope for peace.
Yet with peace only a distant hope, the international
community must first rally to keep this latest induced
despair and human misery at bay. The United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East now estimates that 600,000 Palestinians were
affected in the latest bombings that destroyed 100,000
homes, and the need for more aide is dire. Yet, with the
current restrictions on movement, trade, employment
and aid, the effort at rebuilding is severely hindered.
A resolution from this Council ensuring the reopening
of the Gaza Strip based on the 2005 Agreement on
Movement and Access, an end to the blockade and
guaranteed protection of civilian populations is long
overdue and much wanted.
This is the first step in easing the situation — the
first step in rebuilding. Unless population recovers its
God-given right to human dignity, the cycle of hatred

S/PV.7281

and violence will continue, not only in Palestine but
around the world. Hatred breeds violence, contempt,
extremism and the very worst that humankind has to
offer. We have seen this hatred infect young people from
every nation, race and creed. Yet today it spreads across
the Middle East and threatens the future stability of the
entire region. It is a threat facing the Islamic Ummah.
Terrorist organizations, including the so-called Islamic
State, are among the greatest emerging threats to the
global community.
The President of Maldives, Mr. Abdulla Yameen
Abdul Gayoom, and the Government of Maldives
condemn these groups, their ideologies and activities in
the strongest terms. The Maldives welcomes initiatives
that emphasize the global will to jointly address the
issue of foreign fighters, including resolutions 2170
(2014) and 2178 (2014). Unfortunately, far more needs
to be done.
It is deeply concerning to note that an estimated
1.8 million Iraqi citizens have been internally displaced
this year alone. It is deeply concerning that, every
day, thousands of refugees are fleeing for their lives
and that the refugee crisis is only worsening, with no
end in sight. More than 3 million Syrians have been
registered as refugees outside of the country, with
another 6.5 million estimated to be internally displaced
since the Syrian civil war began.
The need for continued aid is ever present. The
ongoing violence in the region is once again creating
a generation without access to basic needs including
food, water, shelter, education, health care, peace and
stability. Once again, a generation will grow up in fear
and will learn hatred unless we begin to take steps that
will address them in a holistic and long-sighted manner.
It is time we stopped repeating our mistakes.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): First of all, let me join
previous speakers in thanking you, Madam President,
for organizing today’s meeting of the Security Council
devoted to the important issue of the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question. Ukraine
very much appreciates and supports Argentina’s
initiative in organizing today’s open debate.
Ukraine is deeply concerned over the situation in
the Middle East, and in the Palestinian territories in
particular. It is our strong conviction that the solution

14-5809167/72

S/PV.7281

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

21/10/2014

to the question of Palestine should be based on the
full implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, as well as the Madrid Peace Conference
formula and the Oslo accords.

removal of Syrian chemical weapons represents an
important step for Syria and the whole Middle East
region. Ukraine condemns the ongoing violence and
systematic violations of human rights in Syria.

Ukraine is committed to a balanced and impartial
position on the Middle East peace process, and is
willing to develop stable and constructive relations with
both Israel and the Arab States, including Palestine. On
the issue of the Israeli-Palestinian settlement, Ukraine
supports the principle of the coexistence of Israel and
Arab states in peace and security. Ukraine welcomed
the Israeli-Palestinian agreement on a ceasefire, which
put an end to the killings among the civilian population
and gave parties an opportunity to find diplomatic
ways to solve their differences. The strategic outcome
of the initiative is to create two States for two peoples
that would coexist in peace and security, based on
the expectations of the international community for a
stable, democratic and prosperous Middle East.

Ukraine takes a proactive stance on the Syrian
issue. We supported General Assembly resolution
68/182, “Situation of human rights in the Syrian Arab
Republic”. The Ukrainian delegation took part in the
2nd, 3rd and 4th meetings of the Group of Friends of
the Syrian People. Ukraine is concerned about the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in Syria,
where the total number of internally displaced persons
exceeds 6.5 million, and almost 3 million refugees
were forced to move to neighbouring countries. In
that regard, we call on Syrian authorities to remove
all bureaucratic barriers and other obstacles to the
expansion of humanitarian aid operations. We also
support implementation of the provisions of resolutions
2139 (2014) and 2165 (2014) to ensure the free access
of humanitarian assistance to the affected population
and the protection of medical personnel and United
Nations humanitarian workers. Realizing the critical
humanitarian situation in Syria, Ukraine has provided,
through the relevant United Nations agencies,
humanitarian aid to Syrian refugees.

Ukraine considers the principles of the 2002 Arab
Peace Initiative to be a key element of international
efforts to reach a comprehensive Israeli-Palestinian
peace agreement. Ukraine reaffirms its commitment to
the universal principles and basic norms of international
law, in particular strict observance of human rights,
territorial integrity, inviolability of borders and State
sovereignty. Ukraine stands for an immediate end to the
bloodshed and calls on to maximize the use of political
and diplomatic means to resolve the conflict.
Ukraine proceeds from the fact that, according
to the Charter of the United Nations, the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security lies with the Security Council, and specifically
its permanent members. We consider the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2178 (2014) on the fight against
foreign terrorists to be an important example of such
responsibility, and call upon all Member States to
support its full implementation.
Ukraine supports the mission of Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura, tasked with the Syrian crisis,
as well as other initiatives brokered by influential
international organizations, and calls on the parties to
the conflict to rapidly and fully implement the Geneva
agreements. Ukraine welcomes the cooperation of
the Syrian Government with the overall aims of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical WeaponsUnited Nations Joint Mission to destroy the arsenal
of chemical weapons. We are confident that the final

68/72

Ukraine has clearly expressed its position in the
statement issued by the Ukrainian Foreign Ministry
on 16 September on the results of the International
Conference on Peace and Security in Iraq, held in
Paris. Ukraine, which decisively fights foreign-backed
terrorists and itself faces direct aggression, shares the
view that the terrorist group the Islamic State is a threat
not only to Iraq and Syria, but also to the international
community.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Philippines.
Mrs. Natividad (Philippines): Madam President,
I thank you for convening this most important open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question.
The Philippines continues to closely follow
developments in the region. There is a continuing
need to take stock of the advances achieved by our
Organization in helping secure a lasting and just peace
in the region. We also need to be fully apprised of the
continuing and emerging challenges that confront us.
Even as we acknowledge the efforts being undertaken
in the Middle East, we clearly realize that more needs

14-58091

21/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to be done, particularly on humanitarian assistance,
given the toll that conflicts have taken on civilian
populations. The Philippines continues to be concerned
about the situation in Gaza. We welcome the ceasefire
brokered by Egypt between the concerned parties. We
express the sincere hope that all parties will continue
working together for a long-term and durable solution.
Extremism continues to cast its long shadow, and
the emergence of the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters further complicates the already complex
terrain in the Middle East, with security implications
extending beyond the region. The scourge that is the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) is particularly
troublesome. The Philippines condemns ISIS and
its atrocities in the strongest terms. The Philippines
co-sponsored resolution 2178 (2014), believing that
resolute and immediate action by the international
community is necessary to suppress that group.
As a responsible member of the international
community, the Philippines will do its part in the
global efforts to thwart ISIS and its false ideologies.
Resolution 2178 (2014) rightly indicates the importance
of countering violent extremism and the need for States
to step up their efforts to do so and to decrease the risk
of radicalization to terrorism in their societies. The
annual General Assembly resolution on interreligious
and intercultural dialogue is a long-standing initiative
of the Philippines and Pakistan that aims to counter
violent extremism. Along with other initiatives, the
international community can learn from the wealth of
experience and expertise in that initiative.
Also worrisome is the existence of non-State actors
in situations of armed conflict that impact the efforts
of our Organization to maintain the line of peace. That
is true for United Nations peacekeeping operations,
particularly the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF). The presence and actions
of anti-Government armed elements have seriously
affected the implementation of the UNDOF mandate.
Peacekeepers, including those from my country, have
been restricted in movement, held in siege conditions or
kidnapped. That situation is unacceptable. While United
Nations peacekeepers are known for their courage
and professionalism, that alone will not help them
implement their mandate. They should be provided wth
the necessary support to deal with emerging factors not
contemplated when the mandate was formulated.
To ensure that UNDOF continues to successfully
implement its mandate, it is necessary to revisit

S/PV.7281

outstanding operational and tactical issues, including
United Nations command and control vis-à-vis the
safety and security of peacekeepers during kidnapping
and siege incidents, the accountability of peacekeeping
mission leaders for decisions made during crisis
operations, and multidimensional contingency plans
and procedures to address similar situations. The
Philippines believes that much can be learned from
UNDOF’s experience. In that regard, the inclusion of
such lessons in the high-level review of peacekeeping
operations called for by the Secretary-General should
be sought and anticipated.
Finally, the situation in the Middle East requires
all stakeholders to work together on the establishment
of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and
all other weapons of mass destruction. My country is
disappointed that, four years after the 2010 Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), we have
not yet convened a conference on the establishment of a
Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and all other
weapons of mass destruction. I wish to briefly recall
that the issue was an integral part of the grand design
that made the 2010 NPT Review Conference a success.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Mukerji (India): Since this is the first time
I am addressing you, Madam President, let me begin
by congratulating you on ably steering the Council
as the President for this month and by expressing our
appreciation for the convening pf this quarterly open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. I should also like to thank
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing
earlier today.
When the Council held its open debate on 22 July
on this agenda item (see S/PV.7222), we were faced
with the unfortunate situation of the resumption of the
tragic and steeply escalated conflict in Gaza, which
resulted in a large number of civilian casualties and
heavy damage to property. We in India, on our part, had
called upon both sides to exercise maximum restraint
and avoid taking actions that might further exacerbate
the situation and threaten the peace and security of the
region. We remain hopeful that the current ceasefire
will be sustainable and that both sides will resume the
peace process soon towards a comprehensive resolution
of the Palestinian issue.

14-5809169/72

S/PV.7281

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

India’s deep association with and continuing
commitment to Palestine are rooted in our modern
history going back to our own struggle for independence.
We should also like to reiterate our support for a
negotiated solution to the Israeli-Palestinian issue,
based on the relevant United Nations resolutions,
the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map,
resulting in a sovereign, independent, viable and united
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
living within secure and recognized borders, side by
side and at peace with Israel.
Apart from strong political support to the
Palestinian cause at the international, regional and
bilateral levels, India has been contributing economic
and development assistance to the Palestinian people.
In keeping with those efforts, India pledged $4 million
in response to the Palestinian National Early Recovery
and Reconstruction Plan for Gaza, presented by
Palestinian Authority during the recent International
Conference on Palestine, “Reconstructing Gaza”, held
in Cairo on 12 October.
India remains firmly convinced that dialogue
remains the only viable option that can effectively
address the issues confronting the region and its people.
We hope that both sides will demonstrate the necessary
political will to return to the negotiating table and
resume dialogue.
We are also deeply concerned about the activities
of radicalized and extremist groups in the northern
parts of Iraq and Syria, with a dangerous exacerbation
of sectarian and extremist tensions critically impacting
the peace and stability of the region. Efforts must be
taken by all parties and stakeholders in the region to curb
those trends. We believe that consolidation of political
processes and solutions, while building durable State
institutions, will be an effective way of addressing such
extremism and radicalism in the region.
On Syria, we have consistently supported a Syrianled, comprehensive political solution to the ongoing
crisis, in alignment with the 2012 Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/523, annex). We continue to urge all parties
to demonstrate the requisite political will, exercise
restraint and commit to seeking common ground in
accommodating their differences.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The representative
of Israel has asked to make a further statement. I give
him the floor.

70/72

21/10/2014

Mr. Nitzan (Israel): Once again, we have heard
serial human rights abusers, such as Zimbabwe, Syria,
Nicaragua, Cuba, Iran and Saudi Arabia, as well as
systematic religious rights violators such as Bahrain,
Qatar and — once again — Iran and Saudi Arabia
attack my country. President Kennedy once said, “No
matter how big the lie, repeat it often enough and the
masses will regard it as truth”.
Today, I heard a lot of lies directed at the State of
Israel, so I wish to clarify a number of issues. Israel
respects and protects religious freedom and grants full
religious rights to people of all faiths — an uncommon
practice in our region.After reuniting Jerusalem in
1967, Israel abolished discriminatory laws. Israel
introduced religious freedom that allowed millions of
Muslims and Christians to visit and pray in the holy
sites in Jerusalem. Today Jerusalem is an open city
for all faiths that celebrates religious tolerance and
diversity.
I want to remind some of the delegations here in
this institution that Jerusalem had a Jewish character
long before most cities in the world had any character
at all. Jews have lived continuously in Jerusalem for
3,000 years, from the time that King David built his
great palace in the city’s rolling hills. By denying the
history of the Jewish people, the Arabs and Palestinians
are planting seeds of intolerance. The truth is that the
Palestinian Authority incites violence in Jerusalem
and on the Temple Mount. President Abbas and other
Arab leaders try to advance their political agendas by
inflaming tensions and encouraging violence. In doing
so, they are playing with fire and distancing us from
peace.
I have to admit that it was difficult to follow the
complex conspiracy theory devised and delivered by the
Syrian representative earlier today. Syria has become
an expert at blaming others for its problems. The
responsibility for the catastrophe of the humanitarian
crisis taking place in the Syrian Arab Republic lies
solely with the Syrian Government. Blaming Israel
for the evacuation of United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF) troops from the area of
separation is nothing more than revisionist history. The
truth of the matter is that the Syrian Army fled in the
face of the advancing Jabhat Al-Nusra fighters, leaving
UNDOF troops unprotected and at risk. Recognizing
the danger, Israel opened its gates and provided
UNDOF safe harbour.

14-58091

21/10/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Finally, I want to once again address the remarks
made by the representative of Qatar. The Qatari
representative once again had the audacity to criticize
Israel. The fact of the matter is that Qatar serves as the
chief financial sponsor for Hamas and others among the
most brutal and dangerous groups in the Middle East.
That is a matter that should be a source of concern for
the Council and for the international community.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine has asked to
make a further statement. I give him the floor.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I want to thank you,
Madam President, and all of the members of the Security
Council and the large number of representatives
speaking on behalf of the entire international
community for reaffirming their commitment to justice
for the Palestinian people, and for their call for an end
to the occupation so that we can actualize the global
consensus on the two-State solution. We cannot have
the two-State solution without ending the occupation.
We challenge the one delegation that is refusing to
accept that it is an occupier and refusing to tell everyone
here, and throughout every corner of the globe, that it
is willing and ready to withdraw from our land and
to allow for the independence of our State with East
Jerusalem as its capital, so that we can achieve the twoState solution.
Let me also say that those who speak about lies
should not themselves tell lies. We know for a fact that
Palestinians under 50 years of age are not allowed to
come to Jerusalem to practice their religious freedom.
We know for a fact that Palestinians from areas outside
of East Jerusalem and the West Bank cannot freely come
to exercise their religious freedoms in Al-Aqsa Mosque
or in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre. We have sent
many letters to the Council telling the stories of the
restrictions imposed by those who say that Jerusalem
is a city that is open to everybody to practice their
religion. We live the daily reality in which thousands
and sometimes tens of thousands of Palestinians pray in
the streets close to the holy sites in Jerusalem because
the Israeli occupying authority denied them such rights.
Let me also note that the representative of the
occupying authority said “since the unification of
Jerusalem”. We know that there is a Security Council
resolution saying that everything that Israel has done
unilaterally in annexing Jerusalem is null and void and
has no legal authority. Israel is alone — isolated — in

S/PV.7281

not accepting East Jerusalem as an occupied territory.
The entire international community — those who
are represented in this Chamber and those who are
not — are all united in stating that Israel is occupying
East Jerusalem and that it must withdraw from East
Jerusalem. We agree that Jerusalem is one of the final
status issues, yet the Israeli representative speaks to
the Council with such disrespect, saying “since we
unified Jerusalem” — in other words, they do not
want to withdraw from it. Is the behaviour of such
authorities — leaders, including the Deputy Speaker
of the Knesset, who, together with extremists, stands
on top of the Al-Aqsa Mosque and raises the flag of
Israel — the behaviour of a Government that is really
interested in peace with us? Or is it the behaviour of a
cavalier colonial Power that disrespects the people that
it occupies?
We are familiar with that behaviour — everyone
here is familiar with that behaviour. All colonialists
behave in the same way: they blame the victims for their
own crimes. As all of them in history were defeated, we
are confident that this colonial authority will withdraw
from our land so that we can have a two-State solution.
We thank you again, Madam President, for this
support. We look forward to seeing this collective will
to be translated into the adoption of a draft resolution
that demands from the occupying Power that it
withdraw from our land and negotiate with us in good
faith the end of occupation so that we can celebrate the
two-State solution after the State of Palestine acquires
its independence.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The representative
of Israel has asked for the floor to make a further
statement. I would never stand in opposition to
constructive dialogue, for which reason I shall give him
the floor. Following his additional statement — he does
have the right — I think we will be able to conclude
the meeting. Again, as President of the Council and
in my national capacity, we can never, in any way, cut
off constructive statements. That is what I ask of his
statement.
I give the floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Nitzan (Israel): I will be very brief. We are
familiar with the Palestinian delegation’s selective
descriptions of the reality on the ground. They are
probably the result of selective hearing. We said it
earlier today, we say it in each and every meeting, we
say it every day: this is our dream, we want peace.

14-5809171/72

S/PV.7281

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Unilateral steps by the Palestinian delegation here or by
the Palestinian Authority, which are designed to incite
violence in Jerusalem, will not give us peace; it will
actually distance us from peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Observer of the Observer State
of Palestine, who wishes to make a further statement.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I will be very short. We
are interested in peace. We also consider the building
of settlements and declaring Jerusalem the capital of
the State of Israel, and not an occupied territory, to be
unilateral illegal actions condemned by everyone here,
who also demand that Israel stop illegal settlement
activities — because they are illegal — and to implement
Council resolutions that state that the unilateral, illegal
action of annexing Jerusalem is not acceptable.
For us, we are exercising our legal right to join
treaties and conventions. We are doing it peacefully.
We are doing it diplomatically. We are doing it legally.
Even when we join the International Criminal Court
(ICC) to go after those who committed crimes against
our people, we are taking an action that it is our right to
take. It is legal. It is civilized.
Why is Israel afraid of us exercising our right?
Why does Israel call it “unilateral”, when it is the

72/72

21/10/2014

one that is acting unilaterally and illegally? In Arabic
literature we have a very famous saying: people
who live in glass houses should not throw stones.
We do not need those who are buried to their ears
in illegal behaviour — settlements, the blockade of
the Gaza Strip, the unilateral action with regard to
Jerusalem — to lecture us that they do not want us to
so-called “unilaterally” act on something on which it is
our legal right to act.
We came to the General Assembly, which recognized
the State of Palestine. It changed our status. It opened
doors for us to defend ourselves peacefully, legally,
diplomatically. Why is it a unilateral action when we
exercise our right — our legal, peaceful, civilized,
diplomatic right — to defend ourselves in a better way?
If the Israeli leaders think they are not doing anything
wrong, why are they afraid of our going to the ICC in
order to go after those who are committing illegal acts
against us?
I apologize for taking the floor for the third time.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.35 p.m.

14-58091
