22

General Assembly -

Expressing the principle that. the ~nited Nati~ns
is duty bound to combat these mamfestahons, to establish
the facts and the causes of their origin, and to recommend resolute and effective measures which can bl'
taken against them,
1. Resolutely condemns all manifestations and practices of racial, religious and national hatred in the
political, economic, social, educational and cultural
spheres of the life of society as violat\ons of the Char~er
of the United Nations and the Umversal Declarat10n
of Human Rights ;
2. Calls upon the Governments of all States to take
all necessary measures to prevent all manifestations of
racial, religious and national hatred.
943rd plenary meeting,
12 December 1960.

1511 (XV). Teaching of the purposes and principles, the structure and activities of the
United Nations and its related agencies

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 137 (II) of 17 November
1947, which recommended to the Governments of all
Member States that they take measures to encourage
the teaching of the purposes and principles, the structure
and activities of the United Nations in schools,
Noting the action which the Economic and Social
Council has taken in the intervening years in promoting
this objective,
Noting in particular Economic and Social Council
resolution 748 (XXIX) of 6 April 1960,
1. Believes that teaching about the United Nations
and its related agencies in schools is important as a
means of promoting interest in, and support for, their
work;
2. Believes further that knowledge and understanding of the aims and activities of the United Nations
and its related agencies contribute to the fostering
among young people of the ideas of peace and international co-operation and should therefore be promoted
as widely as possible;
3. Endorses the action taken by the Economic and
Social Council in encouraging the implementation of
the recommendation contained in General Assembly
resolution 137 (II) ;
4. Expresses its appreciation of the co-operation
shown by the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization and the other specialized
agencies and the non-governmental organizations in
advancing the United Nations idea;
5. Urges all those concerned to continue their
efforts to promote in primary and secondary schools, as
well as in faculties of the social and human sciences
and audio-visual education centres, the teaching of the
purposes and principles, the structure and activities of
the United Nations and its related agencies;
6. Invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, with the co-operation of
the United Nations, to assist by preparing basic material
which may be used for these purposes.
943rd plenary meeting,
12 December 1960.

Fifteenth Session

1512 (XV). Main trends of inquiry in the natural sciences, dissemination of scientific
knowledge and application of such knowl,
edge for peaceful encls

The General Assembly,
Considering the important role which the natural
sciences in general continue to play in promoting the
ernno111ic and social progress of mankind,
H avrng recciz,cd the smvey of the main trends of
inquiry in the field of n:itural sciences, the dissemination of scientific knowledge and the application of such
knowledge for peacdnl encls,fi
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 804
B ( XXX) of 3 August 1960 requesting wide dissemination of the sttrvl'y ancl seeking comments from Governments of Member States, the appropriate specialized
agencir·s and the International Atomic Energy Agency,
I. T:ndorscs the decision of the Economic and Social
Council to give detailed consideration to the survey
at its thirty-second session, taking into account such
views thereon as may be expressed by the General
Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization;
:?. Recommends Governments of Member States,
agencies related to the United Nations, and appropriate
non-governmental organizations to publicize this survey
as widely as possible;
3. Requests the Economic and Social Council, taking
into account the views obtained by the SecretaryGeneral in pursuance of Council resolution 804 B
( XXX) and the discussion on this item at the fifteenth
session of the Genl'ral Assembly, to report further on
this matter to the Assembly at its sixteenth session and
to recommend concrete measures including those relating
to:
(a) The possibility of utilizing the present achievements in the natural sciences for peaceful purposes, for
furthering the economic progress and welfare of
mankind, and especially for accelerating the economic
and social progress of the less developed countries;
( b) The possibility of extending international cooperation in the exchange of scientific information and
experience in the field of the natural sciences.
943rd plenary meeting,
12 December 1960.
1570 (XV). Draft Declaration on Freedom of
Information

The General Assembly,
Not having been able to consider at its fifteenth
session the draft Declaration on Freedom of Information
submitted by the Economic and Social Council in resolution 756 (XXIX) of 21 April 1960,
Decides to consider the draft Declaration at its
sixteenth session.
954th plenary meeting,
18 December 1960.
1571 (XV). Draft Declaration on the Right of
Asylum

The General Assembly,
Not having been able to consider at its fifteenth
session the draft Declaration on the Right of Asylwn,
~ See A/4461.
