Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

of asking the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development to send a mission of experts to study
the situation and the possibilities of economic development in the Trust Territory of Somaliland under
Italian administration;
3. Requests the Trusteeship Council to continue its
study of the question and on the basis of the conclusions of the 1954 Visiting Mission to Trust Territories
in East Africa and the report of the Bank, if the plan
for the mission referred to in the preceding paragraph
is carried out, to endeavour to decide on practical
measures for financing the economic development plans
for Somaliland and to report to the General Assembly
at its next session;
4. Expresses the hope that, in the meantime, the
Administering Authority will continue unremittingly in
its efforts to further the economic development of the
Trust Territory.
512th plenary meeting,
14 December 1954.

856 (IX). Form of the annual report of the
Trusteeship Council to the General Assembly
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 433 (V) of 2 December 1950
on the annual reports of the Trusteeship Council,
Recalling its resolution 789 (VIII) of 9 December
1953 on the control and limitation of documentation,
Having taken note of the conclusions of the Council
on this question as contained in its report 14 covering
the period from 22 July 1953 to 16 July 1954,
1. Approves, on a trial basis, the proposals of the
Trusteeship Council concerning the form of its report
to the General Assembly to the effect that a comprehensive report on a given Trust Territory should
be presented by the Council only every third year
coinciding with the Council's examination of the report
on the Territory by a visiting mission, and that the
Council should submit a shorter report in the intervening years, giving only an account of the developments
and progress made during the year under review but
including such background materials as would enable
the Assembly to appreciate the significance of important developments, the comments and observations of
Member States and the conclusions and recommendations of the Council ;
2. Requests, however, that in view of the time-limit
set for the attainment by 1960 of independence by the
Trust Territory of Somaliland under Italian administration, the Council annually submit a comprehensive
report on that Trust Territory.
512th plenary meeting,
14 December 1954.
857 (IX). Report of the Trusteeship Council
covering the period from 22 July 1953 to
16 July 1954
The General Assembly
1. Takes note of the report15 of the Trusteeship
Council covering the period from 22 July 1953 to
16 July 1954;
14

15

Ibid., Supplement No. 4.
Ibid.

2. Recommends that the Council, in its future deliberations, take into account the comments and suggestions made in the course of the discussions of its report
at the ninth session of the General Assembly.
512th plenary meeting,
14 Decimber 1954.

858 (IX). Attainment by the Trust Territories
of the objective of self-government or independence
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 558 (VI) of 18 January 1952
by which it invited the Administering Authority of
each Trust Territory, other than Somaliland under
Italian administration, to include in each annual report
information concerning measures taken or contemplated
towards self-government or independence and, inter
alia, the estimated period of time required for such
measures and for the attainment of the ultimate objective,
Recalling further its resolution 752 (VIII) of 9
December 1953 by which it requested the Trusteeship
Council to include in its next and succeeding reports
to the General Assembly a separate section dealing
with the implementation of resoluticns 558 (VI) and
752 (VIII), specifying the various measures taken or
contemplated towards self-government or independence
and stating in each case its conclusions and recommendations in the light of these resolutions,
Considering that one of the most effective means of
assisting the peoples of the Trust Territories to achieve
the objectives set forth in Article 76 b of the Charter
is to provide them with an opportunity to obtain
experience in the work of government and administration by participation in representative bodies with
adequate powers to carry out such work,
1. N ates with satisfaction that, in response to the
request of the General Assembly, the Trusteeship Council has included in its report covering the period from
22 July 1953 to 16 July 1954 a separate section 16 dealing with the attainmerit by the Trust Territories of the
objective of self-government or independence;
2. N ates, however, that the Council has not formulated in this report any conclusions or recommendations on the measures taken or contemplated towards
self-government or independence ;
3. Expresses the hope that the Council will include its conclusions and recommendations on this
question in its next and succeeding reports to the
General Assembly ;
4. Recommends that the Council instruct its visiting missions to give special attention in their reports
to the Council to the question of attainment by the
Trust Territories of self-government or independence
in the light of resolutions 558 (VI) and 752 (VIII)
and of the present resolution;
5. Recommends to the Administering Authorities
that, as a means to facilitate an approximate determination of the date on which the populations of the Trust
Territories would be prepared for self-government or
independence, they should intensify their efforts to the
utmost to bring about the establishment of new
representative organs of government and administration
1s Ibid., p. 279 et seqq.
