S/PV.9310

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9310

th meeting
Tuesday, 25 April 2023, 6.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Evstigneeva. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Ishikane
Mrs. Frazier
Mr.Afonso
Mrs. Chanda
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-11645 (E)
*2311645*

S/PV.9310

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Sudan, and I thank the Governments of those countries
for their support.

The meeting was called to order at 6.25 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Djibouti,
Egypt, Ethiopia, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, South
Sudan and the Sudan to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Volker
Perthes, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Integrated
Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan; Ms. Joyce
Msuya, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator
in the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs; Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations
and Mr. Ismael Wais, Intergovernmental Authority on
Development Special Envoy.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
Mr. António Guterres, and give him the floor.
The Secretary-General: Allow me to say a few
words before my colleagues provide their briefings.
For 10 days, the Sudan has been ravaged by a
deadly conflict, despite calls for a ceasefire from
inside and outside the country. At least 450 people
have been killed, including four members of our United
Nations family. More than 4,000 have been injured
and tens of thousands have fled their homes. Reports
from Khartoum paint a devastating picture. People are
trapped indoors, terrified, with dwindling supplies
of food, water, medicine and fuel. Health services
are near collapse, and according to the World Health
Organization, several hospitals are being used by armed
groups. Across the country, there are reports of armed
clashes. People have fled their homes in Blue Nile and
North Kordofan states and across Darfur. Refugees
and returnees have arrived in Chad, Egypt and South
2/26

25/04/2023

These 10 days of violence and chaos have
been heartbreaking. A prolonged, full-scale war is
unbearable to contemplate. The Sudan borders seven
other countries, all of which have either been involved
in conflict or seen serious civil unrest over the past
decade. It is a gateway to the Sahel, where insecurity
and political instability are making an already
catastrophic humanitarian situation even worse. Across
the wider region, poverty and hunger are rampant. The
climate emergency, the global cost-of-living crisis and
soaring levels of debt are taking a terrible toll. And
in some places humanitarian aid is all that is keeping
famine at bay. The power struggle in the Sudan is not
only putting that country’s future at risk. It is lighting
a fuse that could detonate across borders, causing
immense suffering for years and setting development
back by decades.
The fighting must stop immediately. We need
an all-out effort for peace. I call on the parties to
the conflict, Generals Abdel Fattah Al-Burhan and
Mohamed Hamdan Dagalo “Hemedti”, the Sudanese
Armed Forces and the Rapid Support Forces, to silence
the guns. It is incumbent on the Sudanese leaders
to put the interests of their people front and centre.
The conflict will not, and must not, be resolved on a
battlefield over the bodies of the people of the Sudan.
The Sudanese people have made their wishes very
clear. They want peace and the restoration of civilian
rule through the transition to democracy. The parties
to the conflict must respect the 72-hour ceasefire
brokered by the United States and come together to
establish a permanent cessation of hostilities. I urge
all Council members and other Member States and
regional organizations with influence to press them
to de-escalate tensions and return to the negotiating
table immediately.
I commend our Sudanese and international partners,
including several present today, who are working to
support peace in the Sudan. The United Nations has
reconfigured its presence to protect its personnel and
their families while staying and delivering support to
the Sudanese people. The United Nations leadership in
the Sudan, headed by my Special Representative Volker
Perthes, remains in the country.
We are establishing a hub in Port Sudan to enable
us to continue to work with our partners in support
23-11645

25/04/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

of peace and to alleviate humanitarian suffering. One
third of the Sudan’s people needed humanitarian aid
even before the recent crisis; that number can only have
risen sharply after the destruction of the past 10 days.
The United Nations stands with the African Union,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
its regional and international partners. Above all, we
stand with the Sudanese people and their hopes and
demands for peace, the restoration of civilian rule and
the democratic transition.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
Secretary-General for his introductory remarks.
I give the floor to Mr. Perthes.
Mr. Perthes: I thank the Secretary-General. I am
grateful for his words and his support to us on the
ground here.
Before I begin with my factual briefing, let me
take this opportunity to pay tribute to all the Sudanese
women, men and children, including United Nations
personnel and humanitarian workers, who have lost
their lives or have been injured in the fighting in
the Sudan.
Since I last briefed the Council on 17 April,
my efforts, along with those of Member States and
regional organizations, have all focused on securing
humanitarian pauses or ceasefires between the Sudanese
Armed Force and the Rapid Support Forces. Those
efforts have been met with limited success to date, and
the situation on the ground has escalated dramatically.
In a positive step, as the Secretary-General has
just mentioned, a 72-hour ceasefire was brokered by
the United States on 24 April, yesterday. It seems to
be holding in some parts so far. However, we also hear
continuing reports of fighting and the movement of
troops. The Sudanese Armed Forces and Rapid Support
Forces have both accused one another of violating
the ceasefire.
In Khartoum, the fighting around the Republican
Palace, Khartoum International Airport, the army
headquarters, Rapid Support Forces bases and other
strategic locations has largely continued or in some
cases intensified. Air strikes and heavy shelling have
also continued, particularly in Bahry and Omdurman,
the two partner cities around Khartoum that form
Khartoum together with Khartoum. The Khartoum
airport is reportedly now operational, but its aprons
are damaged.

S/PV.9310

Residential areas near the army’s headquarters and
the airport have come under persistent attacks. Homes,
shops, schools, water and electricity installations,
mosques, hospitals and other health facilities have
been damaged or are now fully destroyed. Reports of
home invasions and the looting of homes and shops
and cars at checkpoints have been rampant. Those have
included the homes and the cars of Sudanese citizens,
United Nations staff, humanitarian workers and the
diplomatic community.
We have also received disturbing reports of
attempted sexual assaults. With supply lines running
out and destroyed, fear of increased criminality is
mounting. Reports of prisoners being released from
detention centres across Khartoum have compounded
those fears.
In the Northern state, the control of Merowe
airport remains disputed. The group of Egyptian forces
captured by the Rapid Support Forces, which I briefed
the Council on last Monday, were safely handed over
to Egypt.
The situation in Darfur regions remains volatile.
In North Darfur, thanks to a local ceasefire brokered
by state authorities and the native administration, with
the support of the Permanent Ceasefire Committee
chaired by the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan, the violence decreased
during the Eid Al-Fitr period. The ceasefire has been
renewed, and it is still holds.
In West Darfur, however, in El Geneina particularly
near the Chadian border, fighting has resumed with
increased and worrisome reports of tribes arming
themselves and joining the fight.
Nyala in South Darfur continues to experience
fighting, although local initiatives aimed at dialogue
have led to relative calm in some localities.
In North Kordofan, there has been sporadic fighting
in El Obeid. In Blue Nile, intercommunal clashes
erupted between Hausa and Funj communities in the
absence of security forces.
Other regions of the Sudan, while spared from
armed confrontation, are feeling the impact of the
fighting. Several are now hosting thousands of
internally displaced people, yet supply routes are
disrupted resulting in fuel shortages. Throughout the
Sudan, significant increases in the prices of basic
commodities are reported. There are also increasing

23-116453/26

S/PV.9310

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

25/04/2023

reports of armed robbers at checkpoints on some roads,
looting civilians who are fleeing the violence.

Darfur and other regions are holding, although they
are tenuous.

The fighting in the Sudan has created a humanitarian
catastrophe with civilians bearing its brunt. As of this
morning, at least 427 people have been killed and
up to 4,000 injured. Those figures are conservative
estimates, and they are climbing as fighting continues.
The humanitarian situation will be covered by Assistant
Secretary-General Msuya Mpanju in her briefing, so I
will not go into further details.

There are reports of mobilization by some tribes
and some armed movements in Darfur who are
taking sides. This is dangerous and could draw in the
Sudan’s neighbouring countries. I renew my call on all
communities to maintain their neutrality and refrain
from taking sides.

Civil society and grassroots networks have
mobilized to fill the response vacuum. Several
neighbourhood resistance committees are providing
basic health care, or they are supporting the coordination
of civilian evacuations from the areas that have been
hardest hit. In the midst of violence, the ordinary
Sudanese women and men continue to show the power
of solidarity and compassion.
Both of the warring parties have fought with
disregard for the laws and norms of war, attacking
densely populated areas with little consideration for
civilians, hospitals or even vehicles transferring the
wounded and the sick. I urge both sides to abide by
their obligations under international humanitarian
law and ensure the protection of civilians and civilian
infrastructure. Civilians must be given safe passage
to leave areas of active hostilities, and they must be
allowed to access supplies.
The safety and security of United Nations
personnel, premises and assets and of humanitarian and
medical workers must be ensured.
I have continued my regular contact with Lieutenant
General Al-Burhan and Hemedti to urge them to
stop the fighting and allow humanitarian pauses.
The trilateral mechanism and the quad were able to
negotiate humanitarian pauses twice. Each of those
pauses held for only a few hours. On the occasion of Eid
Al-Fitr, with the support of the Secretary-General, we
were able to persuade Lieutenant General Al-Burhan
and Hemedti to commit to a three-day pause, from
21 April. That pause allowed some brief respite for
Sudanese in parts of the capital and the country. It
also enabled the United Nations and its humanitarian
partners to relocate its staff out of the immediate lines
of fire. However, the pause was not fully upheld, with
attacks on headquarters, attempts to gain ground, air
strikes and explosions in different areas of the capital.
In contrast, locally brokered ceasefires in parts of
4/26

Both leaders have not been able to fully commit
to a complete ceasefire or to implement one. The two
generals continue trading accusations and issuing
competing claims of control over key installations.
There is no unequivocal sign that either is ready to
seriously negotiate, which suggests that both think that
securing a military victory over the other is possible.
That is a miscalculation. As fighting continues, law and
order will break down further throughout the country
and command and control will dissipate. The Sudan
could become increasingly fragmented, which would
have a devastating impact on the region. Even if one
side wins, the Sudan will lose.
Unfortunately, as we have not been able to secure a
sustained pause or ceasefire since the start of fighting,
the United Nations took the decision to evacuate and
relocate United Nations staff out of Khartoum, Darfur
and elsewhere.
I am speaking to the Council today from Port Sudan,
where many of my colleagues and our non-governmental
organization (NGO) partners arrived yesterday on or
with a United Nations convoy of nearly 1,200 people,
including 744 United Nations staff and their dependents,
international NGO staff and their dependents and
diplomatic staff from several embassies — all relocated
to Port Sudan from Khartoum. This afternoon, I said
farewell to 450 of them as they boarded a French frigate
that would take them to Jeddah through the night. The
rest will be evacuated on commercial vessels in the next
two days. A few international staff and their dependents
are still in Khartoum and were not evacuated due to
various reasons. We are also continuing to ensure that
our national staff can relocate as needed to safe areas.
Staff in West and Central Darfur have either evacuated
or relocated. Other relocations and evacuations are
planned or ongoing. The evacuation of personnel from
El Fasher in North Darfur has not yet commenced, but
options are being considered, with potential Member
State support.
23-11645

25/04/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

I am immensely grateful to the Members States
who helped facilitate those movements, and we rely on
continued cooperation for our remaining relocations
and evacuations.
Let me be clear: our relocation and evacuation do
not mean that the United Nations is abandoning the
Sudan. We will continue to maintain our presence in the
Sudan, although reduced, and focus on the immediate
priorities, in coordination with our international
partners. Those priorities are a sustained ceasefire
with a monitoring mechanism, a return to political
negotiations and the alleviation of human suffering. On
a ceasefire, an initiative was launched by the United
States, in close partnership with the quad and with us,
in the trilateral mechanism.
The United Nations and our partners are redoubling
efforts to ensure that the 72-hour temporary ceasefire
holds and evolves into a lasting cessation of hostilities
and return to political negotiations. Both military
leaders must adhere to the ceasefire and work towards its
consolidation into a permanent cessation of hostilities,
facilitated by a mechanism. The United Nations is ready
to support that. I also call on the Member States with
influence on the warring parties to back those efforts.
Sudanese national figures including former Prime
Minister Hamdok, business leaders, political parties and
civil society are mobilizing against the war and urging
support for a ceasefire and humanitarian support. I am
coordinating closely with them too.
The courage and resilience of our Sudanese friends,
national staff and partners continue to motivate us. The
entire United Nations family will work tirelessly towards
ending the violence in the Sudan and restoring hope for
a better future. The Organization’s commitment to the
Sudan and its people remains unwavering.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Perthes for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Msuya.
Ms. Msuya: I thank you, Madam President, for
this opportunity to brief the Council on the desperate
humanitarian situation in the Sudan.
Let me start by expressing my deepest gratitude
to all my humanitarian colleagues and to the Sudanese
people themselves. I thank them for their heroic efforts
and for putting their lives at risk to help others. We are
doing our absolute best to support them in these trying
times. What has been unfolding there since 15 April is

S/PV.9310

a nightmare for ordinary citizens and aid workers alike.
The fighting must stop.
Even prior to 15 April, humanitarian needs in
the Sudan were at a record high, with one third of the
population — a staggering 15.8 million people — were in
need of humanitarian aid. In addition, 4 million children
and pregnant and lactating women were malnourished
and 3.7 million people were internally displaced.
This conflict will not only deepen those needs, but
also threatens to unleash a new wave of humanitarian
challenges. Fighting is massively impeding and
imperilling aid operations. A humanitarian crisis
is quickly turning into a catastrophe. More than 400
people have been killed and more than 3,700 have
been injured. At least 20 hospitals have been forced to
close due to damage, military use or lack of resources.
Power cuts and fuel shortages risk damaging vaccine
stocks and water supplies, a precursor for the spread of
disease. There have been numerous reports of sexual
and gender-based violence. We call on all parties to
protect all women and girls from such crimes. The
toll on mental health and psychological well-being,
especially among children, is unimaginable.
The humanitarian community has not been spared.
We have lost five of our own. Aid workers have been
attacked in their homes, beaten and held at gunpoint.
Warehouses, offices and vehicles have been attacked,
looted or seized. The situation is extremely dangerous
and alarming.
Our commitment to the people of the Sudan
remains resolute. While we have been forced to reduce
our footprint in areas where fighting is at its most
intense, let there be no mistake: we are not leaving the
Sudan. A humanitarian leadership team will remain in
the country, based in Port Sudan, to lead operations.
Where possible, humanitarian operations will continue,
thanks to the dedication of aid workers, including our
local partners. Together, we will continue to deliver
whenever and wherever feasible, particularly in the
areas of health and nutrition.
We are exploring ways to replenish our stockpiles,
so that we can deliver aid to our partners in Port
Sudan and elsewhere as soon as it is safe to do so. We
are activating a hub in Nairobi to support the rapid
response, and we are preparing for refugee influxes
into countries across the region.
We have received reports of tens of thousands
of people arriving in the Central African Republic,

23-116455/26

S/PV.9310

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Chad, Egypt, Ethiopia and South Sudan. I thank those
countries receiving people fleeing the fierce fighting.
It is critical to keep borders open. We are also working
to redistribute recent allocations from the Central
Emergency Response Fund and the Sudan humanitarian
fund, and we will continue to work with local partners,
including civil society networks, to reach those most
in need.
International humanitarian law is unequivocal.
All parties to the conflict must respect civilians and
civilian infrastructure, taking constant care to spare
them. This includes allowing safe passage for civilians
to leave areas of hostilities on a voluntary basis. The
parties must respect humanitarian workers and assets
and facilitate relief operations, and they must respect
medical personnel, transport and facilities.
What the people of the Sudan need, and what we
need to reach them, is an immediate ceasefire and a
lasting solution to the crisis. We are counting on
Council members’ relentless efforts to this end.
The President (spoke in Russian) I thank Ms. Msuya
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mohammed.
Ms. Mohammed: I would like to start by
congratulating the Russian Federation on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
April and thank you, Madam President, for inviting the
African Union to speak at this crucial time. I also wish
to thank the Secretary-General, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Perthes and Ms. Joyce Msuya
for their briefings. I also look forward to the briefing by
the Special Envoy of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD), Mr. Ismail Wais.
I have the honour to present the following
statement on behalf of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, His Excellency Mr. Moussa Faki
Mahamat, who unfortunately could not join us today:
“The role of the African Union (AU) in
supporting the Sudanese national actors resulted
in the August 2019 transitional agreement. This
agreement permitted relative stability for two
years and included the signing of the Juba Peace
Agreement with Sudanese armed groups in 2020.
During this time, the Sudan was also removed from
the United States list of State sponsors of terrorism,
and we saw the Sudan’s return to the international
community, with key decisions on debt relief and
6/26

25/04/2023

economic and development assistance, following
decades of sanctions against the country, thus laying
the ground for a stable and prosperous country.
“However, the October 2021 coup brought the
civilian transition to an end and led to the African
Union Peace and Security Council’s suspension of
the Sudan from participating in all activities of the
Union. It should be recalled that the Chairperson
has travelled to the Sudan five times since the
October coup to engage with the military and
civilian actors to impress upon them the urgency of
reaching an agreement for the return to a civilianled Government and finalizing the transition period
by holding general elections.
“Since the descent into violence that began
on 14 April this year, the African Union issued
a statement calling for an urgent de-escalation,
a ceasefire and a return to the negotiating table.
For its part, the AU Peace and Security Council
convened an emergency meeting to consider the
worrisome developments in the Sudan during
which the Peace and Security Council, inter alia,
demanded that the Sudanese parties embrace a
peaceful solution and dialogue. The Council also
tasked the AU Commission Chairperson with using
his good offices to engage the belligerents.
“It was also in this spirit, that the Chairperson
convened and chaired an urgent global high-level
meeting on 20 April, to which the United Nations
Secretary-General, the regional body IGAD, the
League of Arab States, the European Union, the
five permanent members of the Security Council,
the three African members of the Security Council,
the Sudan’s neighbouring countries, as well as
Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Qatar and
Norway were invited. Participants agreed, among
other issues, on the following conclusions.
“Participants condemned the violence and
called for an immediate humanitarian ceasefire to
allow the observance of Eid Al-Fitr, with a view
to paving the way for a more permanent ceasefire.
They demanded that the belligerents establish
humanitarian corridors and allow for unhindered
humanitarian access to address the urgent and
immediate needs of the population, including the
rehabilitation and civilian use of critical basic
infrastructure, particularly water and electricity
services, respect the safety of diplomatic and
humanitarian personnel and reopen critical
23-11645

25/04/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

transport infrastructure, such as the Khartoum
International Airport.
“Participants also called for the urgent
resumption of the political process, through
dialogue and negotiation, towards the establishment
of an inclusive civilian-led Government. They
strongly rejected any forms of external interference.
Participants also committed to coordinating,
collaborating and harmonizing their common
action, and in this regard, they requested the
trilateral mechanism, under the leadership of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, be
enlarged to include the League of Arab States, the
European Union, the Troika and bilateral actors, to
immediately engage the leadership of the Sudanese
Armed Forces and the Rapid Support Forces, and
other stakeholders. The enlarged mechanism is
expected to meet in the coming days to discuss
immediate practical steps regarding issues related
to an envisaged cessation of hostilities, which is
linked to humanitarian access, both being priority
actions, before any others can follow.
“All this is underpinned by the African Union’s
guiding principles, namely, that no military
action can solve this crisis and that any political
process must be one that has recently registered
important milestones and that it be an inclusive
Sudanese-owned process. We also reiterate our
strong rejection of any foreign interference in what
is already a dangerous crisis for the Sudan, the
region and the continent, as well as the millions
of innocent civilians affected. I also wish to recall
that the 20 April meeting unanimously mandated
the African Union and the United Nations to
coordinate international action on the Sudan with
the objective finding an urgent end to the violence
and the destabilization of the country, the region
and the continent.
“There is a real risk of regional conflagration
and indeed of the internationalization of this
conflict. All the ingredients are there. We saw
this happen 11 years ago in Libya, which is on the
Sudan’s northern border, the consequences of which
still affect the entire region today. There is therefore
a real need for the international community to
speak with one voice and in coordination with the
African Union.
“I must also underline the importance of the
role of IGAD. This is crucial for bringing the

S/PV.9310

Sudanese parties to the table and encouraging
peaceful dialogue. In this regard, the African
Union looks forward to the visit to be undertaken
by the IGAD high-level mediation mission to
the Sudan and marks its readiness to assist in
facilitating this visit, which will be an important
contribution to the ongoing efforts deployed by the
entire international community.
“From a broader perspective, the AU continues
to express its deep concern over the consequences
that the current dangerous situation could have on
the overall political process that recently registered
important milestones despite the difficulties it was
facing. It is essential for the Sudanese parties not
to lose sight of the central objective of forming a
broad-based civilian-led Government headed by
a Prime Minister appointed by consensus to steer
this transition to a new democratic dispensation
in the Sudan. We must take full advantage
of the strategic partnership between our two
organizations, the African Union and the United
Nations, as well as regional actors, to further
strengthen coordination on the various aspects in
order to optimize and maximize the efficiency of
that support and its positive impact.
“Finally, I reiterate the Secretary-General’s
call for all belligerents to de-escalate and to
fully respect and uphold the ceasefire in order to
facilitate the efforts being deployed. We must not
lose sight of those who are most affected by this
spiralling conflict — the people of the Sudan. We
must remain engaged. The AU will continue to
monitor closely the situation and keep the Council
duly informed.”
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Ms. Mohammed for her briefing.
Unfortunately, the video link with Mr. Ismael Wais
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
was interrupted.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
would like to start by thanking Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Volker Perthes, Assistant
Secretary-General Joyce Msuya, Ms. Fatima
Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African Union
to the United Nations, and, in his absence, Special
Envoy Ismael Wais — when we hear from him. I would

23-116457/26

S/PV.9310

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

like to begin by paying tribute to the tireless work of the
Special Representative, as well as the work of the team
of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan and the United Nations agencies
and non-governmental organization implementing
partners on the ground. We are very relieved that the
operation to evacuate and relocate international and
United Nations workers was successful, and we thank
the Special Representative and his teams for their
commitment and dedication to the Sudan. We extend
our condolences for those colleagues who have lost
their lives. For the United Kingdom’s part, we carried
out an operation to evacuate British embassy personnel
on 23 April, and today we have begun flying out British
nationals. We would like to thank our international
partners for their cooperation in those efforts. Our
priority continues to be the safety of all British nationals
in the Sudan and providing support to those in need.
The United Kingdom unequivocally condemns
the military clashes that continue to take place across
the Sudan. We echo the Secretary-General’s calls for
peace and especially for an end to attacks on civilians
and humanitarian workers. Hundreds have died, and
thousands are injured, adding to the acute humanitarian
needs across the country. We welcome the 72-hour
ceasefire brokered yesterday by the United States, but
we are concerned that, once again, the parties have
failed to uphold their commitments. We call on both
the Sudanese Armed Forces and the Rapid Support
Forces to immediately establish a lasting ceasefire
across the country — and we are in direct contact with
the leadership of both — in order to end the violence
and de-escalate tensions. We call on both sides to allow
humanitarian access, comply with their obligations
under international humanitarian law and ensure the
protection of civilians and humanitarian and medical
workers. We welcome and encourage continued regional
and diplomatic initiatives, including those set out today.
We will continue to work with all Security Council
members and the Secretary-General to ensure that the
Council supports efforts towards an end to the fighting,
a permanent ceasefire and a political resolution.
In conclusion, we stand in solidarity with the
Sudanese people in their demands for a peaceful and
democratic future.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Let me thank Secretary-General Guterres,
Special Representative Perthes, Assistant SecretaryGeneral Msuya and Special Envoy Wais of the
8/26

25/04/2023

Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
for their informative briefings. I want to thank Special
Representative Perthes in particular for his efforts
over the weekend to try to end the carnage and stop
the fighting. I also want to welcome the participation
in today’s meeting of the Permanent Observer of the
African Union to the United Nations.
It goes without saying that we are disappointed
that the Security Council did not meet again sooner on
this crisis, as the situation in the Sudan demands our
urgent attention. The people of the Sudan demanded
our attention, and humanitarians needed to hear from
us. This meeting should also demand the attention of
the Sudanese Armed Forces and the Rapid Support
Forces, because our message today is clear: the fighting
must stop immediately, and as the Secretary-General
just urged, the killing has to stop. In no uncertain
terms, the United States condemns the continuing
violence between the Sudanese Armed Forces and the
Rapid Support Forces. We call on them to adhere to
their latest commitment to implement and uphold a 72hour ceasefire, which started at midnight on 24 April.
We further call on the parties to the conflict to engage
with regional and international partners and Sudanese
civilian stakeholders. Together, they should form a
committee to oversee the negotiation, conclusion and
implementation in the Sudan of a permanent cessation
of hostilities, as well as humanitarian arrangements.
The United States strongly supports the
continued diplomatic efforts of the African Union,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
the League of Arab States and the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
to resolve this crisis. We also welcome the communiqué
of the ministerial special session on the Sudan, held
on 20 April, involving the United Nations, IGAD, the
League of Arab States, the permanent five members of
the Security Council and neighbouring and regional
partners. Those are not separate messages — rather,
that is the international community speaking with
one strong voice, and it is time the Sudanese military
leaders heard our collective call.
In just more than one week — and we have heard
this repeated before — the violence between the
Sudanese Armed Forces and the Rapid Support Forces
has killed more than 420 civilians, wounded thousands,
endangered the lives of the Sudanese people, diplomats
and humanitarian workers, and forced thousands of
people from their homes. We are also gravely concerned
23-11645

25/04/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

about the growing reports of sexual and other physical
assaults on civilians. The rival security forces must
abide by international law. They must immediately
commit to the safety, security and protection of civilians,
diplomatic missions and personnel, United Nations
staff and facilities, and humanitarian and medical
personnel, including by ensuring the safe and secure
departure of foreign nationals. We are also extremely
concerned about the millions of Sudanese in need of
critical humanitarian assistance. According to the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
the humanitarian needs in the Sudan were already at
record levels before the recent outbreak of violence.
Attacks on humanitarian aid staff, offices, vehicles,
equipment and food stocks have disrupted life-saving
humanitarian operations. Civilians are running out of
food, water, fuel and other vital supplies, and many
urgently need medical care. That is why there must
be immediate, full, safe, unhindered and sustained
humanitarian access to all in need.
In addition to killing hundreds of civilians, the
violence has also killed three World Food Programme
(WFP) staff and an International Organization for
Migration Sudan staff member, and we mourn with
their families and colleagues. The suspension of
WFP activities will directly affect countless others,
but unfortunately the United Nations had no choice.
Diplomats, including a United States diplomatic
convoy, have come under attack, and our Embassy
has been hit by direct and indirect fire. Such acts are
reckless and irresponsible, and they are shameful. As
all are aware, we have been consistently calling on the
security forces to protect diplomatic personnel and
facilities and civilian and humanitarian infrastructure,
consistent with the Sudan’s obligation under the Vienna
Convention on Diplomatic Relations.
Lastly, I want to reiterate that there must and will
be accountability for anyone, including military and
political actors, who attempts to undermine or delay
the Sudan’s democratic progress. The same is true
for anyone responsible for violations of international
humanitarian law and violations or abuses of human
rights. The United States stands in solidarity with the
people of the Sudan. We stand in solidarity with the
humanitarian workers, who have continued to try to
provide assistance. As we have repeatedly said to the
Sudanese security forces, it is time to put down the
guns and start talking.

S/PV.9310

Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): First of
all, I would like to thank Secretary-General Guterres
for his briefing. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Mohammad, Permanent Observer of the African Union
(AU) to the United Nations, who spoke on behalf of
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Perthes and Assistant Secretary-General Msuya for
their briefings.
The recent eruption of armed conflict in the Sudan
has led to massive civilian casualties and the destruction
of infrastructure. China is a good friend and partner of
the Sudan, and it pains us to see the country relapsing
into turmoil. China calls on both parties to the conflict
to prioritize the interests of the country and its people
and immediately end hostilities so as to avoid a further
escalation of the situation. We have noted that both
parties to the conflict have committed to a 72-hour
ceasefire beginning on 25 April. We hope that they
can ensure that the humanitarian ceasefire is fully
implemented, civilians are effectively protected, the
safety of foreign institutions, personnel, and diplomatic
missions in the country is ensured and security and
logistics support provided for humanitarian aid and the
evacuation and relocation of personnel.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank all the
parties concerned for their assistance and facilitation
in the evacuation and relocation of Chinese personnel.
China commends the AU, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), the League of Arab
States and other relevant organizations and countries
of the region for their critical role in responding to the
situation in the Sudan. We welcomed the AU emergency
special meeting on 20 April and its communiqué.
IGAD has asked the leaders of South Sudan, Kenya and
Djibouti to conduct mediation, and we hope they can
visit the Sudan as soon as security conditions allow. We
also acknowledge the efforts of the Secretary-General
and the United Nations team and support the United
Nations in continuing to coordinate with the AU,
IGAD, the League of Arab States and other regional
organizations in creating synergies. On 15 April, the
Security Council issued a press statement (SC/15257)
on the situation in the Sudan, sending a clear message
calling for a ceasefire and promoting peace talks. In
considering its next steps on the issue of the Sudan, the
Council should fully hear out and respect the opinions
of its African members and regional organizations such
as the AU and IGAD.

23-116459/26

S/PV.9310

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The Sudan is an important country in the Horn
of Africa. Should the current conflict drag on and
escalate, the risk of a spillover effect will undoubtedly
increase. That is not in the interests of the Sudan and
will damage regional peace and security. Right now we
should prioritize facilitating the immediate cessation
of hostilities, urge both parties to the conflict to
resolve their differences through dialogue and put the
political process, socioeconomic development and the
social order back on track. The reasons for the current
turmoil in the Sudan warrant serious reflection. The
international community should respect the Sudan’s
sovereignty and ownership and support it in exploring
institutional arrangements in line with its national
conditions. Imposing an external solution or setting up
an arbitrary timetable is likely to be counterproductive.
The 20 April communiqué issued at the AU emergency
meeting reiterates its rejection of any form of external
interference in the internal affairs of the Sudan, which
is very important. The international community should
carefully take into account the concerns of the Sudan
and the countries of the region.
In conclusion, I want to reiterate that China firmly
supports the Sudan’s sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity and hopes that the country will see
a speedy end to the conflict and return to the track of
peace, stability and national development.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I thank the Secretary-General, Special
Representative Volker Perthes, the representative of
the African Union and the Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs. I would like to underscore
five points.
First, the situation on the ground is desperate.
Since 15 April the clashes have resulted in the deaths
of more than 450 people, and 4,000 injured, and the
actual toll is likely much higher. We condemn the
indiscriminate violence. Civilians, humanitarian
personnel, hospitals and United Nations staff members
should never be targeted. The looting of humanitarian
aid depots must also stop. The people responsible for
those violations must be held accountable. In response
to the emergency, we have evacuated the members
of the French community and others representing
42 nationalities. We thank the Djibouti authorities
for their help, and we will continue to work with the
United Nations in pursuing its evacuation operations.
We should prioritize ensuring that the humanitarian
ceasefire agreed by both parties is upheld. The halt
10/26

25/04/2023

in fighting is vital if we are to enable civilians to find
refuge and respond to the emergency by establishing
humanitarian corridors. France, together with its
European Union partners, has not ceased to respond
to the humanitarian needs of the Sudanese population.
Financial assistance from the European Union, which
has totalled almost €600 million since 2013, was already
increased in February from €44 million to €73 million.
We will continue to fully do our part.
The current ceasefire must be maintained. We are
ready to support such efforts with the stakeholders
of the region and all international actors, including
the United Nations. The Security Council’s action
will complement the efforts of the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
League of Arab States. Collective and coordinated
action is crucial, given the risks facing the unity of
the country and the stability of the region. The crisis
is increasingly jeopardizing the realization of the hope
that resulted from the 2019 revolution. It is a huge
setback to the peace process and the transition to a
civilian Government. France is concerned about the
spiral of violence at the national level and the formation
of armed groups based on communal identities. We call
on all Sudanese political forces to refrain from taking
part in the fighting. We condemn any attempt, whether
by former regime forces or foreign actors, to add to
the instability. The international community will not
support a fait accompli that is decided by weapons.
France expresses its solidarity with the Sudanese
people. I commend the bravery of the members of the
Sudan’s civil society. I am thinking of those who are
trapped in the fighting but who continue to help one
another. I am also thinking of the mediation efforts of
organizations, political parties and local authorities.
When the time comes, all political forces must engage
in a peaceful and inclusive process in the interests of all
the people of the Sudan. And the Council must speak
out and support the initiatives of the African Union and
the region.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I would
like to thank all our briefers today for their sobering
remarks. I thank Special Representative Perthes in
particular for providing us with the most recent updates,
and I join others in expressing our hope that the United
Nations team is holding up and staying safe under such
difficult circumstances. I also add our voice to all those
who have offered their gratitude for his hard work and
express the condolences of the United Arab Emirates to
23-11645

25/04/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the families of our United Nations colleagues who have
lost their lives in service.
Like many countries around the world, the United
Arab Emirates has been focused on urgently getting
our citizens and those of other nations to safety since
the outbreak of conflict on 15 April. To date, we
have evacuated individuals from 19 countries out of
Khartoum to Port Sudan and, in collaboration with
Egypt, helped secure the safe return of Egyptian
soldiers in the Sudan. But at the same time, as we
focus on the evacuation of international citizens and
diplomats, we must not forget those who remain. The
safety of Sudanese civilians is of equal priority to the
United Arab Emirates. We mourn the 427 lives already
accounted for as having been lost to the conflict. Due
to the lack of data on the ground, those numbers could
be much higher, as Special Representative Perthes just
said in his briefing.
It is now more important than ever to halt the
hostilities and maintain the 72-hour ceasefire that
began at midnight last night. The agreement brokered
by the United States will help pave the way for crucial
humanitarian relief, but we also need assurances of full
implementation by all the forces on the ground, which
according to our information on the ground remains
a challenge.
We commend the dedication of the region’s leaders
to de-escalating the crisis, and we need to maintain
that momentum. Last week, in their statements, the
African Union (AU), the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) and the League of Arab
States decisively called for a ceasefire. As regional and
international actors work together to support the Sudan,
we must all be focused on preventing any regional
spillover. We should ensure that the Security Council’s
own work is aligned with and reinforces those critical
efforts. The regionalization of the conflict will succeed
only in making a dire situation worse.
Our briefers today have also highlighted the
critical situation that millions of Sudanese people are
facing. Khartoum is under fire, and life has become
unsustainable. With no food or water and unreliable
electricity and connectivity, people are desperately
fleeing to safety. Meanwhile, the fighting continues
unabated in other parts of the country, leading to
further displacement. The crisis has crippled aid
operations serving nearly 10 million Sudanese people
and is preventing aid agencies from responding to the
needs of the newly displaced.

S/PV.9310

Almost one third of Sudan’s medical facilities are
now out of service, while others have come under fire
or have been looted. That demonstrates the dangerous
conditions in which Sudanese medical professionals
find themselves. I would like to commend here the
heroic efforts of those who continue to do their
life-saving work, and call for full assurances for their
protection as they conduct those necessary activities.
We are also extremely concerned about reports today
that technicians cannot access the Sudan’s national
public health laboratory to secure potentially hazardous
biological material. We call on the parties to allow
unhindered access for the World Health Organization
and local public health officials in order to secure
and verify the safety of the material. Aid workers
and diplomatic staff are in danger. Five Sudanese aid
workers have been killed since the outbreak of violence.
In the past 24 hours, Mohamed El-Gharawi, an official
at the Egyptian Embassy in Khartoum, also lost his life.
We offer our condolences to Egypt following that loss.
We also unreservedly condemn those actions and share
our condolences with all grieving families in the Sudan
today and in the days ahead.
The United Arab Emirates is taking concrete
steps to alleviate the urgent humanitarian situation
on the ground and provide evacuation support for all
those requesting it. As an immediate measure, we are
contributing $50 million in emergency humanitarian
aid. Prioritizing the most vulnerable, including women
and children, the sick and the elderly during the
evacuations, the United Arab Emirates will continue
providing care and accommodation assistance to the
evacuees who come to our country.
We also remain actively involved in efforts to
de-escalate the situation on the ground. Alongside
our partners, including the AU, IGAD, the League
of Arab States, the quad — Saudi Arabia, the United
Arab Emirates, the United States and the United
Kingdom — the European Union and the Sudan’s
neighbouring countries, we will continue to support all
efforts to de-escalate and make the space for dialogue,
as we have been doing in the past two weeks.
In conclusion, stability will not come from violence.
Rather, fighting will cause further unbearable suffering
and lead to greater numbers of casualties. There will
be no military victory in the conflict and Sudanese
civilians alone will pay the price. That is why all
actors — regional, national and international — must
unite their efforts and remain resolute in our calls for a

23-1164511/26

S/PV.9310

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

permanent ceasefire with a view to bringing the crisis
to an end. We support the Secretary-General’s efforts
in that regard and will continue to work tirelessly for an
end to the conflict.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank Secretary-General
Guterres and the United Nations for their tireless work
on the ground. I also thank Special Representative
Perthes, Assistant Secretary-General Msuya and
Ms. Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African
Union (AU), for their insights. I would like to extend my
heartfelt condolences to the families of those deceased,
and wish those wounded a speedy recovery. I would
like to make four points.
My first point concerns the protection of civilians.
While we take note that the Sudanese armed forces
and the Rapid Support Forces have largely upheld
the three-day humanitarian ceasefire during Eid and
assured the safe passage and departure of evacuees,
civilians are still under attack. Some foreign nationals
were attacked during the evacuation process. A large
number of civilians, including women and children,
are being forced to stay in an area in which active
fighting is under way. Foreign nationals, international
organization and other aid agency personnel and
diplomats also remain in the country. Japan strongly
calls for the parties to protect those people and abide by
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
In that regard, Japan takes note of the latest agreement
by both parties to extend the ceasefire for another three
days. We urge the parties to implement that agreement
in good faith and stop the violence, killing and looting.
Secondly, with regard to the cessation of hostilities,
Japan is deeply concerned about the continued fighting
between the Sudanese armed forces and the Rapid
Support Forces. Japan calls on the parties to agree a
permanent ceasefire and return to peaceful dialogue.
The Council must speak with a united voice in
that regard.
Thirdly, Japan greatly appreciates the efforts of
the Secretary-General, the United Nations Integrated
Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan, the AU, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and other
international, regional and various Sudanese players to
realize the humanitarian ceasefire. We look forward
to their further collaboration in order to improve the
situation, and Japan stands ready to contribute to
that end.
12/26

25/04/2023

Fourthly, the Sudanese-led and Sudanese-owned
political process must not be suspended. The return of
a civilian-led transitional Government is the only way
forward to achieve peace and prosperity in the Sudan,
as well as to ensure that the country receives further
international assistance. Japan respects the unity,
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
the Sudan and is ready to contribute to the efforts of
the Sudanese people in that regard. We must not let the
Sudan fail. The continued deterioration of the situation
will have unforeseeable negative impacts, not just on the
people of the Sudan but also on the region and beyond.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our full
support for the efforts of the United Nations in the
Sudan and our solidarity with the people of the Sudan.
Allow me to thank, among others, the United Nations,
France, the United States, the United Arab Emirates
and the Republic of Korea for their cooperation and
solidarity in the safe evacuation of Japanese nationals.
Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the presence of Secretary-General
Guterres at the start of today’s meeting and thank
him for his clear diagnosis of the seriousness of the
situation in the Sudan. We are grateful to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Volker
Perthes, for his briefing and above all for his work at
the helm of the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan. We would also like to
thank Ms. Joyce Msuya, Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency
Relief Coordinator, and Ambassador Fatima Kyari,
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the
United Nations, for their briefings. We hope to hear the
important information that Mr. Wais, Special Envoy
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
has to tell us. We also recognize the Permanent
Representatives of Djibouti, Egypt, Ethiopia, Saudi
Arabia, South Africa, South Sudan and the Sudan, who
are with us in the Chamber today.
Ecuador expresses its solidarity with the people of
the Sudan and extends its condolences to the families
of the Sudanese citizens and diplomatic, international
and humanitarian staff who have lost their lives there in
the past few days. We condemn the clashes between the
Sudanese Armed Forces and the Rapid Support Forces,
which have created a crisis affecting civilians and have
so far left hundreds dead and thousands wounded,
including women and children. As the SecretaryGeneral said, the guns must be silenced. And the least
23-11645

25/04/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

that we can ask right now is for the 72-hour ceasefire that
was agreed yesterday to be respected. The international
community cannot remain paralysed in response to
this tragedy and an enormous humanitarian crisis,
exacerbated by the deaths of some of the humanitarian
staff of the United Nations and other organizations
tasked with providing humanitarian assistance in the
Sudan. Those acts cannot go unpunished.
Attacks on critical civilian infrastructure have
destroyed water treatment plants, hospitals and airports,
which is a violation of international humanitarian law
and disproportionately affects civilians, and which
must cease immediately. Before the conflict, a third
of the population was in need of humanitarian aid,
including 4 million children under five in urgent need of
emergency food assistance. However, with their attacks
on humanitarian services and civilian infrastructure,
the hostilities have led to a complete halt of those
activities, putting the country’s most vulnerable
citizens in immediate jeopardy. We call on the parties
to meet their obligations under international law and
international humanitarian law. It is imperative that
humanitarian corridors be established and evacuations
of wounded civilians allowed. We echo the SecretaryGeneral’s call for immediate action to guarantee the
security of humanitarian staff remaining in the country.
It is clear that the international community is demanding
that the parties be committed to and ensure the security
and protection of civilians, diplomatic missions and
United Nations staff, as well as humanitarian and
medical personnel, together with humanitarian goods
and services, in order to guarantee the safe departure
of foreign citizens from the Sudan.
Ecuador reiterates the content of the press statement
(SC/15257) issued on 15 April in which the Security
Council expressed its deep concern about the clashes
between the Sudanese Armed Forces and the Rapid
Support Forces and urged the parties to immediately
cease their hostilities and restore calm. It called on the
parties to resume dialogue in order to resolve the current
crisis. In this complex situation, we cannot lose sight of
the fact that illicit arms trafficking is exacerbating the
situation for civilians and could jeopardize the security
and stability of other countries in the subregion.
Ecuador attaches great importance to the efforts
of the countries in the region, regional organizations
such as the African Union, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and the League of Arab
States, and all parties that support efforts to put the

S/PV.9310

country back on track to a transition process to restore
constitutional order. The Security Council must act in
line with its current mandate and use all the tools at its
disposal, including those outlined in the Charter of the
United Nations.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the three African members
of the Security Council — Gabon, Mozambique and my
own country, Ghana (A3).
At the outset, the A3 would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his statement. We also thank
the briefers, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Volker Perthes, Assistant Secretary-General
Joyce Msuya and Her Excellency Ms. Fatima Kyari
Mohammed, speaking on behalf of the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission.
We welcome the acceptance by the Sudanese parties
of the 72-hour ceasefire, which started at midnight,
despite the tenuous state of peace in the Sudan,
particularly in Khartoum. We note the painstaking
efforts that regional and international leaders have
made to get the two sides to pause the fighting and
encourage sustained and focused engagement with the
parties in order to silence the guns in the Sudan. We
also encourage maintaining the ceasefire and urge both
sides to engage in dialogue and establish humanitarian
corridors so as to ensure unhindered humanitarian access
and protection for civilians caught up in the conflict. In
that regard, we note the cooperation of the parties in
allowing the evacuation of the diplomatic staff of some
missions, as well as the staff of various international
organizations and non-governmental organizations. We
continue to consider it important to ensure the retention
of the minimum staff capacity needed to provide
adequate and coordinated humanitarian assistance to
all internally displaced persons and refugees.
As the A3, we have been mindful of the full spectrum
of the dynamics of the situation in the Sudan and have
asserted strong support for a regional-led approach
to resolving the outbreak of the armed confrontation
between the Sudanese Armed Forces and the Rapid
Support Forces. We call on all Council members and
the Sudan’s international partners to support a careful
approach, guided by the Swahili proverb that “running
is not necessarily arriving”.
Since the outbreak of the conflict between the Rapid
Support Forces and the Sudanese Armed Forces on
15 April, the international community has maintained

23-1164513/26

S/PV.9310

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

a united position on the conflict. It is important that we
work to maintain that unity of purpose and a coherent
approach so that we can assist the Sudanese people in
overcoming this regrettable and very difficult moment
in their nation’s history. The cost of the present conflict
in the Sudan has been high. It is reported that more
than 450 people have been killed and more than 3,700
injured. We regret the loss of life and commiserate with
the families of the victims, including the families of
the nine children and the four United Nations personnel
who have died. We wish the injured a speedy recovery
and hope that the two sides will consider the toll of the
conflict in their further decisions necessary to stabilize
the Sudan.
The A3 is particularly concerned about three key
issues. The first is that we need to maintain coherence
and prioritize efforts to maintain the cessation of
hostilities, de-escalate the situation and protect
civilians, including the injured, international officials,
diplomatic agents and foreign nationals. We call on
all the parties to resume the political process for
sustainable peace in the Sudan and in the region. We are
encouraged by the actions taken by the African Union,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
League of Arab States and neighbouring and other
States to keep that key objective in focus. We commend
the concerted efforts made to achieve the current
ceasefire and the role that the Secretary-General has
played in support of the region’s engagement with the
leaders of the Sudan. We emphasize the importance of
ensuring that our actions are coordinated if we are to
be effective in resolving the continuing concerns and
succeeding in the further efforts needed for a permanent
cessation of hostilities.
The second issue of interest to the A3 is the need
to contain and abate the hostilities in order to prevent a
widespread and long-drawn-out conflict. We therefore
urge the two sides in the Sudan to cooperate with the
processes for the implementation of the communiqué
of the Ministerial Special Session on the Sudan held on
20 April under the auspices of the African Union. We
strongly appeal to all armed groups to avoid involvement
in the ongoing conflict, in support of the aspiration
of the people of the country for a de-escalation of
the situation.
We reiterate our collective rejection of any external
interference in the ongoing conflict, which would
complicate the situation on the ground. The Sudan should
not be a place for clashes of international geopolitical
14/26

25/04/2023

interest. We emphasize that the continent can no longer
tolerate such clashes and their consequences.
Lastly, the A3 is concerned with the implications
of the present conflict on the security of the region. We
welcome the very clear clarifications that have been
issued by authorities and actors in neighbouring States
to indicate their non-involvement and/or non-offensive
conduct against the territorial integrity of the Sudan.
We encourage neighbouring States to continue to play
a positive and constructive role for the stabilization of
the Sudan and request international institutions to work
with them as appropriate in managing the effects of
the conflict, including support in managing refugees,
such as the 20,000 refugees that have been reported to
have gone to Chad as a result of the situation, adding to
the nearly 400,000 refugees that the country is already
dealing with.
Before concluding, let me underscore the A3’s
resolve to continue to play a role that will be helpful
to our common effort to stabilize the Sudan. We
commend the constructive role of different actors
and know that while all members of the international
community may have an interest in the situation in the
Sudan, for those of us in the region and the continent,
our interests are enduring and proximate. Our resolve
remains undiminished.
In conclusion, the A3 reaffirms its solidarity with
the Sudanese people and its commitment to respect
the territorial integrity of the country. We know that
in such challenging times it is easy to oversimplify
the concerns of other parties and actors. We do not
seek to do that, and we hope others will not seek to
do the same. We believe, as another African proverb
says, that even though the tree of patience may have
bitter roots, its fruit is sweet. We therefore hope that
working constructively we can all make a meaningful
contribution to help stabilize the situation in the Sudan
as soon as possible.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I thank Special
Representative Perthes, Assistant Secretary-General
Msuya and Permanent Observer Kyari Mohammed
for their briefings, and I hope we will be joined later
by Special Envoy Wais. I also welcome the Permanent
Representatives of the Sudan, Egypt, Djibouti, Ethiopia,
South Sudan, Saudi Arabia and South Africa.
Malta strongly condemns the violence that broke out
in Khartoum on 15 April, and we echo the SecretaryGeneral’s message. We call on both parties to cease
23-11645

25/04/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

hostilities, restore calm and return to dialogue towards
the long-term transition for a civilian-led Government
in the Sudan.
Malta deplores in the strongest stems all attacks
against civilians, medical and humanitarian workers
and diplomatic personnel. Our condolences go to
the families of all those who are tragically killed.
We remind the parties of their obligations under
international humanitarian law and to ensure rapid, safe
and unimpeded humanitarian access to all civilians.
Since the start of clashes, over 400 people have been
killed and thousands wounded. Before the escalation,
the Sudan was already facing a major humanitarian
emergency with 16 million people requiring emergency
humanitarian assistance, 3.1 million of whom were
severely food insecure. The recent violence serves only
to compound their hunger, pain and vulnerability.
As civilians are in desperate need of health services,
the Sudan’s hospitals have become unreachable and are
running out of medical equipment and medicine. Tens
of thousands of pregnant women are put in danger when
seeking urgent care, and, as the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General has informed us, women and
girls are at higher risks of sexual and gender-based
violence as protection services are interrupted by
the clashes.
Children were reported to be sheltering in schools,
as fighting rages around them. Specific attention must
be given to women, children, the elderly and those with
disabilities to ensure that they are not left behind in
protection and evacuation operations.
Malta fully supports pauses in fighting, including
the ongoing nationwide ceasefire. It is critical for that
to be fully respected, and we hope that it is maintained
and consolidated. In that vein, Malta commends the
ongoing coordinated efforts for a lasting peace in
the Sudan.
We underline the importance of diplomatic efforts
by the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, the League of Arab States, the United
Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission
in the Sudan (UNITAMS) and the European Union
to ensure that dialogue remains key with a sustained
return to the negotiating table. We echo our support
to Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Perthes for his good offices and his team at UNITAMS
for their unfaltering commitment to the Sudan’s path
towards stability.

S/PV.9310

Malta also welcomes efforts at the local and
national levels. We recognize the engagement of key
signatories of the Juba Peace Agreement, assisted by
the trilateral mechanism, as well as other religious and
societal leaders. We encourage those efforts to be fully
inclusive, including women, youth and civil society, to
ensure that all Sudanese are represented. We urge both
parties to hear and act on those calls.
Those are all encouraging efforts in extremely
difficult circumstances. However, without an end to the
violence, we risk a destabilized Sudan with potential
spillovers in the region and beyond. The Security
Council’s central commitment to all those efforts must
be reinforced in view of its primary role of maintaining
international peace and security. Malta continues to
support strong unified messages by the Council, in
concert with regional initiatives.
We remain steadfast in our solidarity with the
Sudanese people. We remain convinced that issues
raised by the warring parties must be resolved by
dialogue. The aspirations of the Sudanese people ought
to be back at the front and centre.
There is no more time to lose. The violence must
end before it is too late.
Mrs. Chanda (Switzerland) (spoke in French): We
express our appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
strong commitment and to the Special Representative
for his briefing. We thank him and his team for the work
they have done under the current extremely difficult
circumstances. We also thank the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and the Permanent
Observer of the African Union for their briefings. We
hope to also hear the briefing of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development Special Envoy.
The civilian population in the Sudan is paying a
very heavy price for this spiral of violence, as they were
hoping for a peaceful democratic transition. The events
of the past few days are clearly a worst-case scenario.
In that context, I would like to emphasize
three points.
First, hundreds of civilians have been killed,
thousands more injured and the toll is rising. We express
our condolences to the victims and their families. Our
thoughts are also with all the civilians who are currently
trapped in shelters, waiting for the fighting to stop.
Switzerland notes the fact that yesterday the Sudanese
Armed Forces and the Rapid Support Forces declared

23-1164515/26

S/PV.9310

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

a nationwide ceasefire for three days. Against the
background of several unsuccessful attempts to silence
the arms in recent days and even hours, we call on both
parties to fully and immediately respect the ceasefire.
Secondly, we are gravely concerned about the
humanitarian situation, which is deteriorating by the
day. The clashes, especially in urban areas, make the
delivery of humanitarian aid almost impossible. The
only hospitals that are still operational are less and
less able to help the many wounded. That is untenable
and unacceptable. Switzerland urges both parties to
assume their responsibility by allowing and facilitating
rapid, sustainable and unhindered humanitarian access
to civilians in need, and by allowing the evacuation
of the wounded. Furthermore, we urge the parties to
fully respect their obligations under international
humanitarian law and human rights law. That
includes taking special precautions to protect the most
vulnerable, such as children, and not targeting areas
where they might take refuge, including schools.
Thirdly, both parties must ensure the security and
protection of the civilian population and diplomatic
missions and staff, United Nations and humanitarian
and medical personnel, as well as humanitarian goods
and services. To date, at least five humanitarian
workers and an embassy employee have been killed,
humanitarian property has been looted and attacks
have been carried out against United Nations staff
and property, non-governmental organizations and
diplomatic missions. That must stop. Intentionally
directing attacks against personnel, facilities or
equipment employed in a humanitarian assistance
mission could constitute a war crime. We regret that
some of those personnel, including our own Embassy
staff, had to be evacuated due to lack of security. This
significantly limits the ability of many organizations,
both bilateral and multilateral, to support the Sudanese
population in these difficult times.
In conclusion, we welcome the ongoing diplomatic
efforts of regional organizations, including the African
Union (AU), IGAD and the League of Arab States, and
of bilateral partners. In that regard, close coordination
is essential, as underlined in the communiqué of the AU
ministerial meeting of 20 April. That said, we must also
highlight the tireless efforts of the Sudanese civilian
actors who remain at the heart of a lasting solution and
a peaceful future.
The Security Council has an essential role to play in
restoring peace and security in the Sudan. Switzerland
16/26

25/04/2023

stands ready to support efforts to achieve a lasting
ceasefire and calls on all members of the Council
to speak with one voice, as they did on 15 April, to
promote a complete end to hostilities and a return to
dialogue between the parties.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): We also thank all of
today’s briefers, and particularly thank Mr. Perthes,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
briefing us on the latest updates on the ground.
Albania is concerned about the continued fighting
that has left more than 700 people killed and more
than 4,000 injured. We strongly condemn civilian
fatalities, including the deaths of United Nations staff
members and humanitarian aid workers. We express
our condolences to the victims’ families and wish a
quick recovery to those suffering severe injuries. This
situation is a sharp reminder of the urgent need for a
lasting ceasefire across the country and for restarting
peace negotiations.
In that regard, we echo the calls of the SecretaryGeneral and Special Representative Perthes for an
immediate ceasefire and an end to all forms of violence.
We urge all sides to resume dialogue in order to stop the
ongoing crisis and to put the security and the welfare of
civilians first.
In that context, we welcome the 72-hour ceasefire
brought by the West. We urge all parties to uphold their
commitment to it and to work towards enforcing the
humanitarian arrangements. Albania encourages all
regional and global players to urge the parties to commit
to defusing the situation and immediately halting all
hostilities. Furthermore, we welcome the diplomatic
efforts of the African Union, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), the League of Arab
States and the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan. We also welcome the
communiqué issued by the African Union Peace and
Security Council on 16 April, the ministerial special
session of the African Union on 20 April and today’s
diplomatic efforts.
As mentioned during the briefing, the armed
conflict has exacerbated the humanitarian situation,
pushing it from dire to catastrophic. We therefore join
the call for full, secure and unhindered access to all
those in need and trapped inside buildings, including
schools, hospitals and damaged infrastructure. In that
context, we pay tribute to all the United Nations staff on
the ground and applaud ongoing United Nations efforts.
23-11645

25/04/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

We also thank medical staff and humanitarian aid
workers for their tireless efforts in helping those trapped
in conflict and evacuating United Nations personnel
and foreign nationals. We call on the rapid support
forces and the Sudanese Armed Forces to uphold their
commitment under international humanitarian law.
In conclusion, Albania reaffirms its commitment
to standing with the Sudanese people in their pursuit
of peace and stability. In that regard, the Council
should spare no effort in responding to this situation
with urgency.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Let me begin by
thanking the Secretary-General, Special Representative
Perthes, Assistant Secretary-General Msuya and
Her Excellency Ms. Fatima Mohammed, Permanent
Observer of the African Union, for their briefings. I
also want to thank the United Kingdom for requesting
today’s meeting and welcome the delegations of the
Sudan, Egypt, Djibouti, Ethiopia, South Sudan, Saudi
Arabia and South Africa.
We are gravely concerned about the situation in
the Sudan. Brazil deplores the violence that erupted on
15 April and the ensuing fighting. We deeply condemn
the threats to millions of civilians caused by the heavy
fighting in Khartoum, North Darfur, South Darfur,
North Kordofan, Northern state and Al-Qadarif in the
first days of the hostilities.
We tracked with apprehension the clashes in the Blue
Nile, West Darfur and Central Darfur, which raised our
fears that the conflict had spread to almost every part of
the country and could even spill over to its neighbours.
We also deplore the many violations of international
humanitarian law and the Vienna Convention on
Diplomatic Relations, including violence perpetrated
against the personnel of humanitarian agencies,
diplomatic missions and international organizations.
We reiterate that there must be no politicization of
humanitarian assistance, nor selective application of
international humanitarian law.

S/PV.9310

negotiated before Eid Al-Fitr was a step in the right
direction. The agreement announced yesterday
by Secretary Blinken emboldens hopes of halting
hostilities. We appreciate the hard work of the United
Nations, the African Union, IGAD, the Arab League,
the United States, Saudi Arabia and all those who have
enabled these negotiations to succeed. We welcome
the apparent commitment to a permanent cessation
of hostilities and call on both parties to show their
willingness to stop the fighting and engage in dialogue.
We should always bear in mind that the Sudanese
civil society is the main stakeholder in the current stage
in the Sudan’s road to a transitional Administration and
a civilian-led legitimate Government.
Before the recent military clashes, the Sudan was
as close to a comprehensive political deal as it had been
since October 2021. Street protests have been a feature
of its cities for many years. Violent scenes of repression
did not discourage the resilient Sudanese who took to
the streets. We therefore reiterate our solidarity with
the people of the Sudan, express our condolences to
those who lost loved ones in this senseless conflict and
encourage the Sudanese society to persist on the path
towards a civilian-led Government.
In the last few days, many Brazilian citizens have
left the Sudan and are making their way back home
in safety. We appreciate the support provided by the
United Nations and other countries to that end. It is our
great hope that the Sudanese people, including those
who have had to leave their country, also enjoy peace
and safety in their homes.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.

The Sudanese people have faced severe economic
hardship in recent months. Even before the conflict
erupted, humanitarian needs across the country were
already at record levels. The economic crisis is severe.
We must therefore not allow the Sudanese people
to become embroiled in a conflict with profound,
unpredictable effects.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his
brief introductory statement at our meeting today, and
we listened very carefully to the briefings by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Volker
Perthes, and by the representative of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Joyce
Msuya. We are also grateful to the head of the African
Union Mission to the United Nations, Ms. Fatima
Mohammed, for her participation in today’s meeting,
as well as that of the Permanent Representative of the
Sudan, Mr. Al-Harith Idriss Al-Harith Mohamed, and
other representatives of countries of the region.

Violence must stop. We echo the words of the
Secretary-General in that regard. The ceasefire

The Russian Federation is deeply concerned by the
clashes in the Sudan since 15 April between regular

23-1164517/26

S/PV.9310

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Sudanese Armed Forces and the Rapid Support Forces.
We have been following developments very closely.
The humanitarian situation is deteriorating, and in
many regions of the country there are shortages of food
and medicines.
Attacks on diplomatic mission staff and
representatives of international organizations accredited
in Khartoum are particularly alarming. We agree that
the relevant task today is to carry out evacuations
from combat zones. We underscore that it is not only
United Nations staff and Western nationals who are in
dire straits in Khartoum but also other foreigners and
Sudanese people themselves, whose problems deserve
equal attention. We welcome the efforts of all Sudanese
forces that are working to ensure the safe evacuation of
people who wish to leave the country and the responsible
approach shown by the Sudan’s neighbours, which are
providing support to this process.
We must state that the current crisis in the Sudan
is to a large extent due to external interference in
its sovereign affairs as well as attempts to engage in
political engineering and impose democratic formulae
on the country. The political situation in the Sudan
was difficult from the very beginning. Sudanese
political forces were fragmented, and their cooperation
was under colossal pressure due to historic, ethnic,
economic and other factors. This is also true of the
relationship between the Sudanese Armed Forces and
the Rapid Support Forces.
Security sector reform in the country was one of
the most complex issues, requiring increased attention
and a painstaking negotiation process. However, what
have observed that many external players artificially
forced through a process for the transfer of authority to
civilian forces and imposed a great many decisions that
were not accepted by vast swathes of the population.
A host of countries trumpeted the Sudan political
framework agreement of 5 December 2022, but it did
not turn out to be an inclusive platform for the various
Sudanese forces. Several political heavyweights were
left out of this format, which made it unlikely to foster
a comprehensive resolution.
The provision of sorely needed international
assistance to the country was directly tied to the
transfer of authority to a civilian Government. As
a result, the imposition of so-called democracy
through pressure and blackmail caused the fragile
stability in the country to be sacrificed. This has
18/26

25/04/2023

been disappointing to see in the context of activities
of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS), which very recently
reported to the Security Council on its achievements
(see S/PV.9289). On many occasions, we drew attention
to the fact that UNITAMS should not focus its efforts
only on one objective, namely, seeking an ultimate
agreement, while also ignoring a whole host of issues in
its mandate. As a result, the crisis in the Sudan caught
everyone off guard.
In the region, efforts to reconcile parties are
continuing. We note the mediation work carried out with
the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, as well as neighbouring countries.
We note the agreement reached over the weekend on a
ceasefire that will allow for the general fighting in the
Sudanese capital to be less intense. However, it has not
been able to stop the fighting completely.
Regional players should be provided with the
necessary space and time. It is critically important
not to repeat the experience of Libya, where African
political efforts were haughtily cast aside, and Western
countries’ use of force wreaked havoc on the country
and destabilized half of the continent. It is important
that all mediators act in a united manner in order
to calm the situation independent of their possible
national interests.
We fully support those colleagues who today
spoke about the unacceptable nature of any external
interference in the sovereign affairs of the Sudan that
could add fuel to the fire. Such interference could turn
the country into a platform for geopolitical plays, in
particular those provocations that are being carried out
by Western media at the moment.
We are certain that citizens of the Sudan can and
must resolve their domestic problems themselves.
They are fully able to do this and decide who is a
friend and who is not. We call on the warring parties
to demonstrate political will and undertake immediate
steps for a cessation of hostilities. We believe
that any disagreement can be resolved around the
negotiation table.
In conclusion, we wish to reaffirm the unwavering
readiness of the Russian Federation to continue to
provide assistance to a friendly Sudan, successfully
overcome the current difficulties and return to a path of
peace and sustainable development.
23-11645

25/04/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Guterres,
for his briefing and for his efforts to establish peace
in the Sudan. I also thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Volker Perthes for his briefing,
the Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, Ms. Joyce Msuya, the Permanent Observer of
the African Union, Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, and
the Special Envoy of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, Mr. Ismail Wais. I also wish to
convey our sincere condolences on the deaths of the
Egyptian administrative attaché and the international
staff members.
Madam President, I extend my congratulations to
you on your country’s assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of April 2023, and
we commend the ingenuity with which you have steered
the Council’s agenda during the month.
Allow me to put the recent events in the Sudan in
the right context. Based on the official position of the
Government of the Sudan, these unfortunate events,
which started on 15 April, resulted from the rebellion
of the Rapid Support Forces against the Sudanese
Armed Forces. In a number of locations in the capital
and in some other cities, the former have attempted
to seize power through a military coup by launching
coordinated attacks on the residence of the President
of the Transitional Sovereignty Council and the
headquarters of the General Command of the Sudanese
Armed Forces, as well as Khartoum International
Airport and other vital and strategic facilities. The
attacks took place on the same day as a meeting
between the President of the Transitional Sovereignty
Council, the Commander-in-Chief of the Army, and the
Commander of the rebel Rapid Support Forces, which
was scheduled to discuss the technical arrangements
for the full integration of the Rapid Support Forces into
the Sudanese army to ensure the building of a single
national army characterized by professionalism and
unity of leadership and command-and-control, and to
strengthen military doctrine in accordance with the
established professional traditions of the Sudanese
army that it has accumulated over more than a century.
Our army is known for professionalism, moral guidance
and discipline.

S/PV.9310

Faced with this rebellion and based on its
constitutional, national and moral obligations to protect
the country’s national security, territorial integrity,
sovereignty and stability, the Sudanese Armed Forces
are defending the status quo created by the revolution
in the context of the transition recognized regionally
and internationally. The armed forces are dealing with
this rebellion in a way that would restore normalcy
and ensure the safety of civilians and the security and
stability of the country and end the dual military and
security presence. It is well known that in modern
States, the armed forces are united under a single
governmental and constitutional entity, which is the
regular army. And in doing so themselves, the Sudanese
Armed Forces have committed to a combat strategy
aimed at minimizing civilian casualties and damage to
private and public property in order to end the control
of the rebelled units of Rapid Support Forces over the
Government sites and homes and private buildings they
had seized or captured. The President of the Transitional
Sovereignty Council and Commander-in-Chief of the
Armed Forces issued a decision dissolving the Rapid
Support Forces and declaring it a rebel force against the
State. He also announced that some of its units, such as
its border guard, would be integrated into the Sudanese
Armed Forces. The door is still open for the members
of the rebel force to lay down their arms and integrate
into the Sudanese army according to the conditions
applied in such cases.
To deal with the consequences of this crisis, the
Sudanese leadership has heeded the call of the SecretaryGeneral to implement a three-day truce, in line with the
spirit of the holy month of Ramadan and Eid Al-Fitr,
in order to ensure the safe passage and evacuation of
civilians, the staff of diplomatic missions, employees
of regional and international organizations, as well as
the evacuation of wounded and stranded persons. The
Sudanese Armed Forces have adhered to the truce,
despite the violations by the other side. The Ministry for
Foreign Affairs has continued to receive, since the first
day of confrontations and throughout the truce, many
communications from diplomatic missions, United
Nations agencies and other organizations accredited
with the Republic of the Sudan informing us that
their headquarters and residences have been subjected
to storming and trespassing and that ambassadors,
diplomats and employees had been intimidated by the
Rapid Support Forces, in violation of international
humanitarian law.

23-1164519/26

S/PV.9310

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The Sudan’s Ministry for Foreign Affairs, in
the interest of ensuring the security and safety of
those diplomatic missions and in line with its duty,
immediately informed the competent State authorities
of those infringements. The State authorities proceeded
to reinforce the security presence around diplomatic
headquarters in the light of the circumstances the
country is going through. However, the activities of
the rebel forces, through assaults with various weapons
in residential neighbourhoods and their attacks on
civilians and looting of their properties represent an
ongoing threat to public security and safety in general.
And they have directly endangered the headquarters
and staff of diplomatic missions and international
and regional organizations. Those rebel forces are
also targeting law enforcement agencies and releasing
inmates and detainees, some of whom are convicted of
serious crimes such as terrorism, human trafficking
and murder, which poses a threat to public security and
illustrates the state of indiscipline and loss of command
and control. We call on all states that love peace,
stability and peace in the Sudan to condemn those rebel
forces for their deployment and continued fighting in
populated cities and residential areas, which endangers
civilians, including women and children.
We would like to mention that the President
of the Transitional Sovereignty Council and
Commander-in-Chief of the Army, Lieutenant General
Abdel Fattah Al-Burhan, has received calls from
several Heads of States requesting him to facilitate and
ensure the evacuation of their nationals and diplomatic
missions from the country. His Excellency agreed to
extend the assistance needed to ensure such evacuation
for several states. A number of diplomatic missions
and organizations wishing to do so have evacuated
hundreds of their employees, with the cooperation
of the Sudanese authorities, which has been granting
the necessary permits, securing the nationals to be
evacuated and providing them with care and protection
until they reach other, safer cities and regions inside the
Sudan, or are airlifted out of the country. In a statement
attributed to him on Monday, the Secretary-General
praised the evacuation process, which did not witness
any incident.
We would like to point out that those successful
evacuations were coordinated by forces from the
following States: Saudi Arabia, the United States,
China, Japan, Jordan, Egypt, Kuwait, Qatar, Spain, Italy,
the United Kingdom, Germany, Bangladesh, Libya,
Pakistan, France, Malaysia, Indonesia, Singapore,
20/26

25/04/2023

Lebanon, Canada, the Netherlands, Djibouti, India,
South Korea, Hungary, Denmark, Belgium, Tunisia,
Switzerland, Austria, Morocco and Algeria. Some
nationals of Argentina, Colombia, Ireland, Portugal,
Venezuela, Mexico, Türkiye, Palestine, Iraq and Syria
have also been evacuated, while citizens from Nigeria,
Ghana and Kenya are preparing to leave the Sudan.
The evacuation process has reached an international
level, attesting to the efficiency of the Sudanese Armed
Forces in supervising the conduct of operations, despite
the known security threats.
While we express our appreciation for the efforts
of the brotherly and friendly States and regional
organizations aimed at de-escalating the situation in the
country, especially the efforts of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), the African Union
and the League of Arab States, we stress that this matter
is an internal matter that should be left to the Sudanese
to find the required solutions among themselves,
without negative international interferences. We are
therefore deeply concerned about the insistence of some
members of the Security Council to convene a series of
unnecessary Council meetings that serve their national
agendas that have nothing to do with the interests of
the Sudanese people. The Sudan will not accept the
negative pressure exerted by some of members of the
Council. The African Union, which is the organization
that represents the African continent, has clearly called
for non-interference from outside in this internal affair.
The Sudan is closely working with IGAD and the African
Union to activate their good offices, when conditions
permit, at the Khartoum airport, which was damaged
as a result of the repeated attacks by rebel forces. The
Sudan believes in the principle of African solutions to
African problems, which is in line with Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations. The Security Council
must uphold those provisions of the Charter, respect the
territorial sovereignty of regional organizations and
give the Sudan and its regional neighbours leadership
in dealing with the current situation.
The Sudan is committed positively and on the
highest level to the role of the Secretary-General and
his good offices based on his integrity, impartiality
and political experience in brokering peace agreements
when armed conflicts erupt. I invite the Council to
adopt the Secretary-General’s approach of considering
the underlying causes of conflict, in line with the spirit
of the founders of the United Nations. In that context,
the Sudan is committed to implementing the political
transition process, engaging in dialogue and committing
23-11645

25/04/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

to the cessation of hostilities and responding positively
to regional mediation efforts. We therefore hope that
the role of the Security Council will be harmonized so
that its input does not constitute an obstacle to the good
offices of the Secretary-General.
The Sudan has been on the agenda of the Security
Council for the past 18 years. We have made a great
effort to engage with the Council in a more positive
manner than before, including by attending meetings of
the International Criminal Court after it was boycotted.
We have also tried to limit the designation of the
Sudan under Chapter VII by ending the sanctions.
International wisdom dictates that the Sudan should not
be subjected to any further injustices. I therefore call
on the Council to ensure the continuity of its positive
engagement with the Sudan, while clarifying what is
going on the country according to a rational approach,
in line with our narrative.
The Sudan remains listed and held prisoner. But
we are capable of defending our national interests
and adapting to the Council’s dynamics and current
divisions. We have explained why the blockade imposed
in the aftermath of the events of 25 October 2021 was
ineffective. We thank the United Nations system for
starting to constructively engage with the Sudan. We
should indeed work to contain the current situation and
provide the Sudan with the possibility of engaging with
regional efforts, including by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), the African Union
and the League of Arab States, which are working
tirelessly to find a solution to the conflict. It is also
worth mentioning that despite its current hardships
and the positions of certain States, the Sudan was able
to win membership on the Human Rights Council by
157 of 195 votes, which means that for all intents and
purposes the boycott is over. I call on the Council to
strike a balance between the Sudan’s current situation,
which cannot be described as civil war or widespread
hostilities, given its commitment to the renewed
and extended humanitarian truce and the armed
forces’ determination to ensure the evacuation of all
accredited diplomatic and United Nations international
personnel, on the one hand, and the Security Council’s
responsibilities for maintaining international peace and
security, on the other.
In that regard, the Security Council is represented
by the African Union Peace and Security Council and
IGAD, which are also experienced in conflict resolution
as envisaged in the Charter, which defines the role of

S/PV.9310

regional organizations in such circumstances, especially
in view of the African Union’s adoption of the principle
of African solutions to African problems. We should
ensure that the Sudan is given the opportunity to renew
hope in collaboration with regional mediators. We
should not be forced to deal with the emerging national
security threats alone or cope with the boycott that
certain parties seek to impose. We would rather see the
possibility of interactive and positive engagement with
the United Nations forum, which can in turn strengthen
our ability to adapt to and cope with the most difficult
circumstances. We would not be seeing the recent
events if the international community had honoured
its commitments and provided the financial support
needed to finalize the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process in Darfur, which is an example
from which we can learn. The peacebuilding process
was short-sighted. Some parties tried to include in the
reintegration process inputs that were not relevant to
the armed forces, thereby undermining the principle
of national ownership based on the traditions of the
Sudanese army and its well-known contributions to
peacekeeping operations since the 1960s within United
Nations missions.
The fighting has led to a deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in some cities, forcing a large
number of civilians to flee their homes and seek more
secure areas and cities in the Sudan, and negatively
affecting living conditions in general. The areas
affected are currently suffering from food shortages
and insecurity caused by the rebel forces’ hostilities
and a lack of health care, electricity and drinking water.
Alongside the Government’s current adherence to the
truce for another three days, the competent authorities
in the Sudan are sparing no effort to improve the
humanitarian situation by providing assistance to
the people affected, restoring and improving basic
services such as health care, electricity, drinking water
and security. I want to take this opportunity to thank
the friendly and brotherly States that have taken the
initiative to provide humanitarian assistance to the
Sudanese people through bilateral engagement with
the relevant authorities, and especially to thank the
United Arab Emirates, which has provided $15 million
in support to the humanitarian operations.
In conclusion, I do not need physical evidence to
prove the scope of the damage and suffering caused by
the rebellion and its devastating consequences. Despite
everything that I have just mentioned, the Sudan
still has a united Government that is shouldering its

23-1164521/26

S/PV.9310

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

responsibilities for carrying out its functions. It did not
declare a state of emergency, and what took place has
not spilled over in the region. The Sudan will overcome
the difficult situation it is currently dealing with. We
hope that the repercussions of the rebellion will go no
further, and we call on the Council to understand the
exceptionally urgent situation and enable us to take the
time we need to make the progress necessary to return
the Sudan to a better place and restore hope in meeting
the aspirations of the revolution, which are freedom,
peace and justice.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Madam President. We also thank the Russian
presidency of the Council for convening this important
meeting. I am grateful to Mr. Volker Perthes, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and the other
briefers for their presentations, including Ms. Joyce
Msuya and my sister Ambassador Kyari. I am also
grateful for the condolences extended to Egypt on the
death of our assistant administrative attaché at our
Embassy in Khartoum.
At the outset, Egypt expresses its full solidarity
with the people of our brother country of the Sudan in
its current crisis, which is exacerbating the effects of
successive complex crises that the Sudan has endured
for many years. Egypt stands ready to provide all
possible support to help the Sudan overcome the current
crisis, restore peace, resume peaceful dialogue and
prevent bloodshed. We condemn the fighting, which
has led to hundreds of deaths and injuries, particularly
among Sudanese civilians. We are once again seeing
armed clashes and continuing ceasefire violations,
which is a source of concern, as the lives of Sudanese
civilians and foreign nationals in the Sudan are in
danger and the already difficult living conditions there
are deteriorating further.
Egypt hopes that the ceasefire announced yesterday
will be fully maintained and respected. At the same time,
we call for ensuring that voices of wisdom can prevail,
bringing an end to the hostilities and using dialogue to
resolve the differences that led to the outbreak of the
fighting. In that regard, on 20 April, Egypt took part
in the extraordinary international ministerial meeting
of the African Union on the situation in the Sudan, in
which we came together to issue a final communiqué.
We have been in contact with all international and
regional stakeholders and organizations with a view
22/26

25/04/2023

to finding a way out of the current crisis. On the
ground, we are cooperating with States to evacuate
Egyptian and foreign nationals living in the Sudan. In
that context, we acknowledge the effective efforts and
cooperation of the Sudanese authorities in facilitating
the evacuation, despite the difficult security situation.
We salute the United Nations and the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
for their efforts at every level.
Egypt and the Sudan share a common history, which
is why we are committed to averting bloodshed and
restoring peace and stability for the Sudanese people.
We reiterate the importance of preserving the stability,
territorial integrity, independence and sovereignty of
the Sudan, which represents a strategic component of
Egypt’s own national security. Egypt’s position on the
issue of the Sudan and recent developments there is
unambiguous and unequivocal and can be summarized
as follows.
First, Egypt stresses the need for an immediate,
general and comprehensive ceasefire. It must be
maintained, and not limited in its humanitarian aspects
if we are to avert further bloodshed and maintain the
security and safety of civilians and assets of our brother
people of the Sudan.
Secondly, the Sudanese conflict is an internal
matter. In that regard, Egypt warns against any form
of foreign intervention in the Sudan, regardless of its
nature or source, as it can only exacerbate the situation.
At the regional and international levels, we must all
avoid a recurrence of actions that can destabilize States
and undermine others’ peace and security, which is
what we have seen and are still seeing in other countries
and regions in Africa and beyond
Thirdly, Egypt stresses the need to ensure cohesion
among the Sudanese State’s institutions so as to curb
the risk of their collapse or disintegration in a manner
that deviates from the traditional framework of any
modern nation-State.
Fourthly, Egypt stresses the inevitability of
relaunching a political dialogue in the Sudan. We
express our hope that the military operations will end as
soon as possible in order to avoid a downward spiral into
a worse and more dangerous security situation for the
Sudan and its brotherly people. We wish to underscore
the need for any future political process in the Sudan to
be comprehensive and conducted with caution when it
comes to dealing with thorny and intertwined issues.
23-11645

25/04/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Fifthly, no one can ignore the deteriorating
economic conditions that have caused so much suffering
in the Sudan for decades. One of the direct results of
the current conflict is the accelerated exacerbation of
that situation and the additional burdens as a result of
the possible collapse of the country’s infrastructure.
Although we cannot measure the magnitude of that
currently, it will inevitably have severe negative
repercussions on the economic and living conditions
of the brotherly Sudanese people. The international
community must anticipate that situation and prepare a
rapid response once adequate conditions are in place in
order to rectify it as soon as possible.
In conclusion, Egypt reaffirms its continued and
unwavering support for the brotherly Sudan. We will
relentlessly pursue our endeavours to calm the situation
and restore security and stability to the country. We
continue to stand ready to work with all stakeholders
and international partners to defuse the current crisis
as soon as possible.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Djibouti.
Mr. Doualeh (Djibouti): I would like to thank
Special Representative Perthes, Assistant SecretaryGeneral Msuya and Her Excellency Ms. Mohammed,
Permanent Observer of the African Union (AU), for
their briefings and valuable input today.
I have the honour to make this statement on behalf
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) Ambassadors here in New York. In the light
of the current developments in the Sudan, the group of
Ambassadors of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development member States in New York would like to
state the following.

S/PV.9310

regard to the need for the parties to swiftly embrace
a peaceful solution and inclusive dialogue to resolve
their differences as a means to promote stability and
respect the wishes of the people of the Sudan for the
restoration of democracy, constitutionalism, the rule of
law and freedom, as well as the rejection of any external
interference in the Sudan’s domestic affairs.
The group calls on all actors and partners to
rally behind the regional mediation effort and extend
maximum support to facilitate the visit to Khartoum of
three Heads of State, namely, President Ismaël Omar
Guelleh of Djibouti, President William Ruto of Kenya
and President Salva Kiir Mayardit of South Sudan.
They are ready to jump-start talks between the parties
as soon as security conditions permit.
The group welcomes the announcement of a
three-day humanitarian truce in response to the
Secretary-General’s plea on the occasion of Eid Al-Fitr.
It equally welcomes the United States-brokered 72hour nationwide ceasefire, which started yesterday at
midnight, to allow for unfettered humanitarian access
to the civilian population. We hope that the parties
will abide by the ceasefire and work in good faith with
the mediators to negotiate and conclude a permanent
ceasefire as soon as possible.
The group reiterates its commitment to the
resolution of the situation in the Sudan within the
principle of African solutions to African problems. We
urge the Security Council to encourage and provide
adequate support to regional and continental mediation
efforts. In these trying times, the group affirms its
solidarity with the Sudanese people and reaffirms its
support for the territorial integrity, sovereignty and
political independence of the Sudan.

The group notes with concern the ongoing conflict
in the Sudan, which has led to civilian casualties
and the destruction of property. We urge the leaders
of the parties to heed the call to immediately and
unconditionally cease hostilities and de-escalate
tensions and give peace a chance in line with the
outcome of the fortieth Extraordinary Assembly of
the IGAD Heads of State and Government, which took
place virtually on Sunday, 16 April. It also recalls the
communiqué of the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union at its 1449th meeting, held on 16 April,
on a briefing on the situation in the Sudan.

(spoke in French)

The group emphasizes the African Union’s
position on the current situation in the Sudan with

Our thoughts are with for those Sudanese people
negatively impacted by the deterioration of the security

Allow me to make a few remarks on behalf of my
country, Djibouti.
Djibouti is honoured to have served as a key hub for
the evacuation of personnel and nationals of friendly
countries. We are pleased to see that those operations
were conducted effectively. Djibouti’s Ministry for
Foreign Affairs and the competent authorities were fully
mobilized and worked tirelessly to provide assistance
to teams to ensure that those operations were carried
out in the best possible conditions.

23-1164523/26

S/PV.9310

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

25/04/2023

situation in the Sudan, especially the difficulties
accessing water, food, electricity and medicine.
According to the reports we have heard today, the
humanitarian needs are immense. We are, however,
encouraged by the readiness of the United Nations,
bilateral partners and other humanitarian actors to meet
those needs in a timely and coordinated fashion.

stability. I reiterate the call by His Excellency Mr. Abiy
Ahmed, Prime Minister of the Federal Democratic
Republic of Ethiopia, on our brothers and sisters in the
Sudan to embrace dialogue to resolve their differences.
The Sudanese-owned and United Nations-AU-IGADfacilitated political process should continue to provide
the necessary platform to resolve all differences.

We wish to extend our sincere condolences to the
families of those victims who lost their lives, and we
wish those injured a swift recovery.

We also wish to underscore the need to avoid
the proliferation of initiatives that could potentially
undermine the Sudanese ownership and African
Union lead facilitation of the process. That is a clear
case where we strongly insist on the support of the
international community for an African solution to an
African problem.

Djibouti wishes to take this opportunity to reaffirm
its steadfast solidarity with the people of the Sudan.
The relations with between our two peoples are longstanding, our affinities abundant and our bonds of
friendship unbreakable. The guns must be silenced
immediately, and dialogue must resume as soon
as possible.
(spoke in English)
One death is one too many; one internally displaced
person is one too many; and one refugee is one too many.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Sabo (Ethiopia): I recognize the presence of
my brother Ambassador Idriss Mohamed, Permanent
Representative of the Republic of the Sudan to the
United Nations, and thank him for his comprehensive
statement. I also express our thanks to the SecretaryGeneral for his remarks, and to Special Representative
Volker for his briefing from the Sudan. We appreciate
his efforts on the ground and wish him the best in his
endeavours. I also thank Her Excellency Ambassador
Fatima Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African
Union (AU) to the United Nations, and Ms. Msuya,
Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
for their briefings.
The sisterly country of the Sudan is facing a serious
security challenge. In these trying times, Ethiopia
stands in solidarity with the Sudan and its people. I
would like to restate the confidence of the Government
of Ethiopia in the wisdom of the Sudanese people to
overcome this challenge, following their own paths and
accompanied by the relevant regional organization, the
African Union, and the regional economic community,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD).
The leadership of the Government of Ethiopia is
fully engaged in support of efforts to return the Sudan to
24/26

In spite of the usual disrupting consequences of
conflicts, the great people of the Sudan are renowned
for their generosity and kindness. Beyond our deep
people-to-people and cultural ties, Ethiopia and the
Sudan enjoy extensive trade and economic relations.
Our peoples’ movement across our borders is calm.
We face good times and challenges together, in a true
spirit of brotherhood. We are confident that Ethiopian
nationals who are currently in the Sudan will be treated
with the usual Sudanese kindness and assured safety in
these difficult circumstances. For its part, Ethiopia will
continue to offer safety and all the necessary support to
our Sudanese brothers and sisters who are in need as a
result of the situation.
With regard to a settlement of the crisis, we
commend our Sudanese brothers for the constructive
ceasefire arrangements that have been made so far
and the partners that have been involved in facilitating
them. We encourage them to use the pause as an
opening to return to dialogue, heeding the plea of the
people of the Sudan for peace and stability. We ask the
Council to exercise patience and wisdom in support of
the African Union-led effort. The Sudan has seen more
than its fair share of sanctions and pressure and now
needs all possible constructive support from every one
of its friends and partners.
Finally, we ask the international community
to avoid undue external interference and to stand
in solidarity with the Sudan, while respecting the
country’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): First let me congratulate
you, Madam President, on your country’s assumption
23-11645

25/04/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

of the presidency of the Council for the month of April.
We would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
remarks on the crisis in the Sudan and to acknowledge
the briefers for their useful and informative statements.
We extend our condolences to the families of the more
than 400 Sudanese victims of the crisis and of the
international personnel who have lost their lives in the
line of duty.
We thank you, Madam President, for convening
today’s timely briefing on the unfortunate crisis in the
Sudan. South Sudan, the country with the longest border
with the Sudan, and one that for the most part is not
fully demarcated, stands to be directly and adversely
affected by the events in the Sudan. It is estimated that
approximately 2 million of South Sudan’s citizens are
living across the Sudan, and they have been negatively
affected since the outbreak of the crisis. South Sudan
has opened its doors to those fleeing the crisis who have
been able to make it to the border. As of yesterday we
had received approximately 10,000 people, including
nationals of other countries. Some have been connected
with their countries and have reached home safely. We
therefore call on all of the Sudan’s neighbours to open
their borders to those who are fleeing from the conflict
zones, as a show of humanity and goodwill in the spirit
of ubuntu. South Sudan is also ready to temporarily
host any international organization or United Nations
agencies that may be considering relocating from
the Sudan.
Since the outbreak of the clashes between the
Sudanese Armed Forces and the Rapid Support Forces,
President Salva Kiir Mayardit has called for, first, an
immediate ceasefire, a cessation of hostilities between
both parties and a return to the negotiating process that
was previously in progress. He has continued to stay in
touch through daily phone calls with both Lieutenant
General Abdel-Fattah Al-Burhan, President of the
Sudan and Chairperson of the Sovereign Council, and
Lieutenant General Mohamed Hamdan Dagalo, Deputy
Chairperson of the Sovereign Council and head of the
Rapid Support Forces.
Secondly, the President has called for humanitarian
corridors to be opened for those who would like to leave
Khartoum and any other insecure areas in the Sudan and
for humanitarian supplies to be allowed to reach those
who are trapped or in need of life-saving assistance.
Thirdly, he has asked that the leaders of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
be allowed to travel to Khartoum and meet with all the

S/PV.9310

stakeholders with a view to enabling an eventual return
to the negotiating table, in order to conclude what was
started by the tripartite mechanism of the African
Union, the United Nations and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development.
Lastly, we call on the United Nations, other regional
organizations and the international community in
general to support IGAD’s initiative in addressing the
crisis and to allow the parties to return to negotiations
under IGAD’s high-level delegation, which is led by
South Sudan, with the membership of Djibouti and
Kenya. Any multifaceted approaches will complicate
the process and worsen the situation further.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Alwasil (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): We
are meeting today to discuss the critical circumstances
facing our brother people of the Sudan. My country
has been closely following the events in the Sudan
with considerable concern and sympathy since the
outbreak of the conflict on 15 April. We deplore the
events that have unfolded and extend our condolences
to the families of all the victims who have died in the
recent clashes. We extend our condolences to Egypt
following the death of the country’s assistant military
attaché in Khartoum while on his way to the Embassy
to coordinate the evacuation of Egyptian citizens.
My country reiterates its call for a swift end to
the military operations and for maximum restraint
and de-escalation. The interests of the Sudanese
people should be prioritized so as to preserve life
and property and restore the framework agreement
towards a political declaration that can lead to stability,
security and prosperity for the Sudan and its people.
We reiterate the importance of enforcing the current
ceasefire and protecting civilians and diplomatic
missions. Humanitarian corridors must be established
to enable humanitarian actors to conduct their work and
to facilitate operations aimed at ensuring the evacuation
of civilians.
My country is currently working with international
and regional partners to maintain the truce in the
Sudan in order to enable a resumption of the political
dialogue between the parties concerned and to establish
a ceasefire throughout the Sudan. Mediation efforts
are ongoing with the support of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Saudi Arabia, who has continued

23-1164525/26

S/PV.9310

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

to conduct talks with all Sudanese, international and
regional parties.
Saudi Arabia has responded to the requests for
evacuation. In fact, the Saudi Royal Navy, supported
by various branches of the armed forces, began initial
essential evacuation operations from the Sudan at
the start of the crisis. We have evacuated hundreds
of Saudi nationals and other citizens of brotherly and
friendly States, including diplomats and international
officials, providing all the basic needs to ensure that
foreign nationals can be repatriated. In that context, we
appreciate the efforts and cooperation of the Sudanese
authorities in facilitating the evacuation operations,
as well as in securing corridors and facilitating the
evacuation of civilians.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Ms. Joyini (South Africa): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this meeting to discuss the
ensuing conflict in the Sudan. I wish to thank the
Secretary-General; Ambassador Fatima Mohammed,
speaking on behalf of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission; Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Volker Perthes and Assistant
Secretary-General Joyce Msuya for sharing their
perspectives with us.
It has been over 10 days since the fighting between
the Sudanese Armed Forces and the Rapid Support
Forces started. This has caused untold pain and
suffering to the Sudanese people and foreign citizens
who found themselves caught up in this unbearable
situation.
South Africa urges the warring parties to observe
the calls for a ceasefire and to use the time to create
conditions conducive to diplomatic dialogue to resolve
their differences. No one will be a winner in this conflict.
The killing of over 470 people, with approximately
3,500 injured people, should be condemned by all of us.

26/26

25/04/2023

We commend the brave men and women who
continue to work tirelessly to evacuate foreign nationals
from the conflict areas to safety in nearby countries.
We similarly thank all the humanitarian organizations
and workers who provide the much-needed aid on
the ground and wish to convey our condolences in
connection with those who lost their lives in service.
We therefore call on all parties involved to ensure that
there is a smooth passage of people to places of safety
without hindrance.
The temporary ceasefire for evacuation provides
short-term relief, and the people of the Sudan require a
lasting solution to the current challenges. It also provides
a reprieve, but does not guarantee lasting peace to the
Sudanese people, who have endured hardship for a long
time owing to the breaking out of conflicts at various
intervals in the life of their nation.
We remain committed to supporting the leadership
of the African Union (AU) and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and the efforts of the
League of Arab States in working for peace. We
appreciate the efforts of the Secretary-General and his
team in working with the regional bodies and call on
all our international partners to work with them and the
Sudanese leaders to find a political solution.
The destruction of property, the killing of innocent
people and the ignoring of the calls by regional
organizations and the international community to stop
the fighting goes against the AU vision in aspiration
of silencing the guns on our continent. We call on all
interested parties to desist from actions and statements
that will exacerbate the conflict. We stand in solidarity
with the people of the Sudan as they seek lasting peace
in their country.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
more names on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 8.55 p.m.

23-11645
