S/2006/811

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 October 2006
Original: English

Letter dated 4 October 2006 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
As you are aware, the mandate of the Office of my Special Representative for
the Great Lakes Region expired on 30 September 2006. In its resolution 1653
(2006), the Security Council encouraged the countries of the region, in partnership
with the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and other stakeholders, to
finalize the preparations for the second Summit, to be held in Nairobi on 14 and
15 December 2006.
In view of the above, it is my intention to extend the mandate of the Office of
my Special Representative for the Great Lakes Region until 31 December 2006 to
finalize the preparation for the second Summit.
On 27 September 2006, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of the United Republic of Tanzania, Asha-Rose Migiro, on behalf of the
eleven core countries of the Great Lakes region, sent me the attached letter and
requested that I bring it to the attention of the members of the Security Council (see
annex).
I should therefore be grateful if you would bring this letter and its attachment
to the attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

06-57183 (E) 161006

*0657183*

S/2006/811

Annex to the letter dated 4 October 2006 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council
Letter dated 27 September 2006 from the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation
of the United Republic of Tanzania addressed to the
Secretary-General
On behalf of the Regional Inter-Ministerial Committee of the International
Conference for the Great Lakes Region, I wish to thank you sincerely for the
personal and continued interest that you have extended to the Governments and
peoples of our region. We equally acknowledge, with appreciation, the assistance
provided by the Office of your Special Representative.
The second Summit of the Heads of State and Government of the Great Lakes
Region will now take place in Nairobi, Kenya, on 14 and 15 December 2006
following the completion of the Presidential elections in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The draft security, stability and development pact and protocols of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region have been finalized. Copies of
these documents have also been officially transmitted to the United Nations Office
of Legal Affairs for harmonization. Likewise, the draft programmes and projects for
each of the four thematic clusters of the International Conference have also been
finalized and approved by the Ministers.
The signing of the Security, Stability and Development Pact of the
International Conference will be the culmination of over a decade of intensive and
concerted efforts on the part of the Governments and peoples of the Great Lakes
Region. Its implementation will constitute significant achievements for the whole
region and contribute to sustainable peace, security and development.
The Governments and peoples of the region are fully aware that many
challenges lie ahead, particularly with regard to the establishment and
operationalization of the new regional Conference secretariat, which will be tasked
to assist in the implementation of the programmes and projects. Consultations are
under way on the two issues of selecting one country to host the regional
Conference secretariat and another to appoint its Executive Secretary. Both
decisions are to be made by 15 November 2006 at the latest.
In this connection, the Regional Inter-Ministerial Committee, which met in
New York on 22 September 2006, has asked me to officially request that you extend
the assistance provided by the Office of your Special Representative for the Great
Lakes Region, for a period of six months from 1 October 2006 to 31 March 2007.
The current mandate of the Office expires on 30 September 2006. This period will
enable the secretariat to complete preparations for the Summit and facilitate the
transition to the new regional Conference secretariat.
On behalf of the Regional Inter-Ministerial Committee of the Great Lakes
region, I should be grateful if you would bring the matter to the attention of the
Security Council, for its appropriate decision.
(Signed) Asha-Rose Migiro
Minister for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation

2

06-57183
