S/2020/799

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 August 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 14 August 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. António Guterres; His Excellency Mr. Ban
Ki-moon; Ms. Sarah Cliffe, Director, Center on International Cooperation, New
York University; as well as the statements delivered by Her Excellency Mrs. Retno
Lestari Priansari Marsudi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia; His Excellency
Mr. Pham Binh Minh, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Viet Nam; His Excellency Mr. Urmas Reinsalu, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Estonia; Her Excellency Ms. Naledi Pandor, Minister for International Relations and
Cooperation of South Africa; His Excellency Mr. Niels Annen, Minister of State,
German Federal Foreign Office; and by the representatives of Belgium, China, the
Dominican Republic, France, the Niger, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Tunisia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America, in connection with the video-teleconference on
“Peacebuilding and sustaining peace: Pandemics and the challenges of sustaining
peace”, convened on Wednesday, 12 August 2020.
In accordance with the understanding reached among Council members
for that video-teleconference, the following delegations and entities submitted
written statements, copies of which are also enclosed: Australia, Azerbaijan,
Bangladesh, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Denmark, Ecuador, El Salvador,
the European Union, Georgia, Guatemala, India, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kenya,
Kyrgyzstan, Liechtenstein, Malta, Mexico, Morocco, the Netherlands, Nigeria, the
Peacebuilding Commission, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic
of Korea, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, Thailand and the United
Arab Emirates.
Pursuant to the procedure set out in the letter dated 2 April 2020 from the
President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives
of the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the
light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus-disease
pandemic, the enclosed briefing and statements will be issued as a document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Dian Triansyah Djani
President of the Security Council

20-10786 (E) 260820 301020

*2010786*

S/2020/799

Annex 1
Statement by the Secretary-General
Let me begin by thanking the Indonesian presidency for convening this open
debate on pandemics and the challenges of sustaining peace.
The concept of sustaining peace is essentially about positive peace, as
opposed to simply ending wars. In other words, it is the idea that the international
community accompanies a country well beyond the point of simply putting down
guns, to the point where people feel protected and represented — where trust and
the social fabric are going in the right direction, and not in the wrong direction. But
the unprecedented challenges from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) clearly risk
pushing things in the wrong direction.
As I highlighted in previous briefings to the Security Council, the COVID-19
pandemic has devastated communities and economies throughout the world, affecting
the poorest and most vulnerable the most. The pandemic not only threatens hardwon development and peacebuilding gains, but also risks exacerbating conflicts
or fomenting new ones. Questions are growing about the effectiveness of health
systems and social services, trust in institutions and systems of governance. All of
this means that our commitment to sustaining peace is more urgent than ever.
The challenges of this pandemic underscore, as never before, the imperative of
coherent, multidimensional and cross-pillar responses reflecting the integrated logic
of the Sustainable Development Goals. We know that conflict-sensitive and coherent
preventative approaches that help address the health and humanitarian crisis will
help deliver sustainable peace. But as we scan the horizon, I see three key dangers.
The first is the erosion of public trust. Pandemics can undermine faith in
Governments and public institutions. The perception that authorities are mishandling
the crisis, not being transparent or favouring political allies can lead to public
disillusionment in Government and its institutions.
The second is the destabilization of the global economic order. I am particularly
concerned about the effects of heightened socioeconomic vulnerabilities, fuelled by
an unprecedented global economic crisis. Without concerted action, inequalities,
global poverty and the potential for instability and violence could grow for years.
The third is the weakening of the social fabric — represented in, for example,
the narrowing of civic space and the closing of avenues for democratic process and
legitimate expression of grievances. We have seen many peaceful protests and, in
a number of countries, COVID-19 has been an excuse for harsh crackdowns and a
spike in State repression. At least 23 countries have postponed national elections or
referendums, and almost twice as many have postponed subnational votes.
Despite challenges, the pandemic also creates opportunities for peace.
The appeal for a global ceasefire earlier this year prompted positive responses
from Governments and non-State actors across the globe. A number of conflict
parties took steps to de-escalate and stop fighting. Yet, regrettably, in many
instances, the pandemic did not move parties to suspend hostilities or agree to a
permanent ceasefire.
Last month’s adoption of resolution 2532 (2020), which demanded a general
and immediate cessation of hostilities in all situations on the Council’s agenda, is
a step in the right direction, but much more is needed to translate early gains into
concrete action on the ground.
The Council also plays an important role in bringing its influence to bear for
an investment in prevention. In the current context that means several things.
2/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

First, our responses to the pandemic must be conflict-sensitive, starting with
a multidimensional analysis that looks at how the pandemic affects underlying risks
that drive conflict.
Secondly, inclusion is critical in the design of humanitarian and development
responses to pandemics. Dialogue, especially with communities and marginalized
groups, helps rebuild trust and enhance social cohesion. In particular, we must find
avenues for far stronger engagement with women’s groups, who play such a pivotal
role in securing peace at the community level. They are also critical rebuilders of
trust, which is often absent in fragile and fractured communities, and without which
public-health messaging and behavioural change to slow the pandemic simply do not
take root. Young people are also essential to peacebuilding solutions.
Thirdly, sustaining peace requires an integrated and coherent approach
through strong collaboration among humanitarian, development and peace actors.
For example, to sustain peace, we need to ensure that humanitarian challenges are
fully addressed in a comprehensive way. Lebanon is a case in point.
We also need to build ever-stronger partnerships with Governments, regional
and subregional organizations, the private sector and civil society actors.
And we must underscore the importance of ensuring that international
financial institutions — the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and
others — integrate sustaining peace as a priority and as a core element of COVID-19
recovery strategies and building back better.
The Council’s ongoing collaboration with the Peacebuilding Commission is
critical. Their complementary efforts can help marshal a collaborative response to
the peacebuilding impact of the pandemic, drawing on lessons from previous health
crises, such as the Ebola virus disease outbreak.
My report forthcoming next month — a key input to the 2020 review of
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture — highlights substantial progress
in fostering a systemic focus on prevention and a multidimensional approach
to peace, in closer alignment with the development and human rights pillars and
humanitarian actors.
Fourthly, we need to be flexible and tailor our approach to peacebuilding
needs in the context of the pandemic. The Peacebuilding Fund has swiftly adjusted
its work on the ground and identified new areas of support in response to COVID-19,
seeking ways to shore up relations among communities, counter hate speech, reduce
stigmatization and strengthen inclusion.
Unfortunately, demand for the Fund continues to outpace supply. We hope to
approve $210 million in projects this year, but that is still far short of the quantum
leap I have called for here in the Council and elsewhere.
With a global spike in violence against women and girls, the Spotlight Initiative
has repurposed some $20 million towards the COVID-19 response, much of this
in fragile, conflict-affected or humanitarian settings. But this is only a fraction of
what is needed to tackle what has been termed a shadow pandemic. Gender-based
violence is a pervasive form of violence and insecurity that undermines our best
efforts to build sustainable peace.
I am heartened by some countries’ willingness to think about how we can
achieve adequate and predictable financing for peacebuilding, which is the best
defence against conflict, and build a more equal and sustainable future for all. My
report in September will make suggestions to that end.

20-107863/120

S/2020/799

COVID-19 is a human tragedy, but we can mitigate the impacts by the choices
we make. More than ever, multidimensional, coordinated and conflict-sensitive
responses and whole-of-society approaches are crucial. They are key to ensuring
that peacebuilding and sustaining peace initiatives go hand-in-hand with inclusive
and sustainable development, anchored in the protection and promotion of human
rights, gender equality and the commitment to leaving no one behind.
The world is looking to all leaders, including the Security Council, to address
this epic crisis in ways that make a concrete, meaningful and positive contribution
to the lives of people. It is our responsibility to deliver.

4/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

Annex 2
Statement by His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon
It is my honour to deliver these remarks at this high-level open debate of the
Security Council on “Pandemics and the challenges of sustaining peace.”
I take this opportunity to express my sincere appreciation to Her Excellency
Mrs. Retno Lestari Priansari Marsudi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Indonesia, for inviting me to take part in this important briefing. My special
gratitude also goes to today’s briefers, Secretary-General António Guterres and New
York University Center on International Cooperation Director Sarah Cliffe.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has triggered unprecedented
global turmoil over the past six months. This includes over 735,000 deaths and
staggering socioeconomic disruption. It is truly astonishing that, in response to
this pandemic, the world has placed billions of people under lockdown, closed
international borders, suspended trade and migration and temporarily shut down a
whole variety of industries — but has not managed to suspend armed conflicts.
I welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution 2532 (2020), which called
for a humanitarian ceasefire for 90 days around the world. My fellow Elders and I
strongly supported this initiative by Secretary-General Guterres. However, valuable
months were wasted in arguments over the details of the text. That has weakened the
message that the Security Council needs to send to all warring parties: now is the
time to confront our common enemy.
The delayed decision by the Council further aggravated the current volatile
global security situations in the midst of the global fight against COVID-19. The
impact of COVID-19 on conflict-affected settings has been much worse than initially
thought. This is true not only in terms of the immediate health and humanitarian
ramifications, but also in the areas of social cohesion, governance and the rule of
law. Global solidarity has been loosened, while multilateralism has been under
threat. This jeopardizes ongoing international efforts to sustain peace, or may even
cause a reversal in hard-won peace and security gains to date.
Meanwhile, as the pandemic places States under huge pressure, some see
opportunities to ramp up attacks — from the surge in violence by Boko Haram
and other militant groups in Nigeria, to growing mob violence in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, to murders by cartels in Mexico. Some groups use health
care itself as a weapon, and civilian suffering as a tool. In recent years in Syria
and Yemen, we have seen hospitals repeatedly bombed, and in these countries and
others, we have seen hunger deployed as a weapon of war.
Unfortunately, we are still in the early stages of this pandemic. Beyond the
direct health effects, the economic impacts will be both long-lasting and severe, with
ripple effects for many fragile and conflict-affected States. For example, we already
see Lebanon’s political and economic crisis being compounded by the economic
effects on COVID-19 on tourism and trade, while Iraq’s budget is stretched thin
because of the collapse in oil prices. I take this opportunity to extend my deepest
condolences to the families and the people of Lebanon for the tragic loss of lives and
terrible destruction caused by the recent explosion of chemicals.
The World Food Programme has warned of the rising risk of famines in
conflict zones. For instance, in the Sahel, there are alarming estimates that more
than 50 million more people will face a food crisis because of the combination of
conflict and COVID-19. The humanitarian impact is simply appalling. But some will
find ways to benefit; militant groups can recruit more easily when young people are
desperate for any source of livelihood.
20-107865/120

S/2020/799

And with more than 1.5 billion children missing school during lockdowns
around the world, Save the Children has warned that 10 million kids may never return
to school. This tragedy of lost opportunities will increase the scope for disaffection
and radicalization in fragile societies.
With these stark realities in mind, today’s debate is a timely opportunity to
explore various ideas on how to dynamically respond to the current crisis and bolster
international efforts to sustain peace in the post-COVID-19 era.
In 2016, the Security Council and the General Assembly adopted historic
joint resolutions on peacebuilding (resolution 2282 (2016) and General Assembly
resolution 70/262), which, together with the Goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, serve as the United Nations blueprint in assisting conflict-affected
countries through peacebuilding efforts. The key messages from these landmark
resolutions centre on the importance of prioritizing prevention, addressing the root
causes of conflict and devising long-term, guiding strategies. This has offered an
opportunity to increase the United Nations focus on preventing conflicts so that
the systemic causes of conflicts, rather than just the symptoms, are holistically
addressed. I believe these lessons learned can also be applied to our current response
to COVID-19.
United Nations responses to the current pandemic should be in line with
conflict sensitivity, which enables us to address patterns of systematic exclusion
and the other root causes of conflicts. In addition, one of the major peacebuilding
goals at the moment should be to strengthen the socioeconomic capacities of local
communities and populations.
I commend Secretary-General António Guterres for his leadership in
maintaining momentum on sustaining peace, even during the pandemic. I also
strongly support his plan to emphasize the global responsibility to build back better
by strengthening health systems, eradicating extreme poverty, reducing inequalities
and investing in resilient societies.
The experience of this crisis should also spur us to change our priorities and
our understandings of what threats and values really matter. We need to address the
inequalities in our own societies and the gaps in social protection. We see that this
virus has flourished disproportionately among marginalized communities, such as
migrants without access to decent health care or those working low-wage jobs —
whether in the global South or in the richest countries in the world. In this regard,
this experience must remind us that inclusive, just, peaceful societies — as envisaged
by Sustainable Development Goal 16 — are the best way to deliver public health.
This pandemic also demonstrates the genuine utility of sustaining peace
and proves the benefits of enhancing the humanitarian-development-peace nexus.
The COVID-19 crisis may be limiting United Nations peacebuilding operations.
However, it is also serving as an opportunity to promote greater discussions and
activities on emerging threats such as pandemics, inequality and climate change in
the peacebuilding process. In that regard, I am confident that the 2020 review on the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture will assess the achievements made since
2015 and suggest ways to prevent the current global health crisis from reversing the
hard-won peace gains.
The pandemic has also shown that the United Nations must work more
effectively with various partners, including regional organizations, international
financial institutions, the private sector and civil society. The Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) is well positioned to help synergize such multi-stakeholder
partnerships by making full use of its distinctive convening power. Building on its
work in support of West African countries during the 2014 Ebola outbreak, when
6/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

I was Secretary-General, it should be encouraged to better fulfil its role in a few
key areas.
These include raising awareness of country-specific situations, bringing about
integrated support and allowing United Nations actors to carve out political space
and identify entry points for peacebuilding with an in-depth understanding of the
operating contexts and priorities of specific countries.
I welcome the PBC’s work to promote women and youth in the peacebuilding
process, proving how a more inclusive, whole-of-society approach will ultimately
yield better outcomes. An increased focus on the role of regional organizations in
providing an effective forum for the prevention, early detection and response to
potential conflicts is also important moving forward.
There are also opportunities to make peacebuilding more inclusive by using
digital technologies to bring together a much wider range of people — young people,
women, people from remote areas or marginalized communities who might not be
able to travel to traditional peace conferences. But this will work only if we can
urgently address the digital divide, which is now ever-more important as a result of
pandemic-induced lockdowns.
Even during the COVID-19 crisis, the ideals of sustaining peace and the
underlying spirit of the twin resolutions — which empowers the crucial role of local
communities, women and young people — should be further built upon.
Indeed, I believe that the United Nations and its Member States have a
generational opportunity to use this concept to help build back better, further catalyse
greater inclusivity and steer humanity and our planet towards a more peaceful and
sustainable and future. The United Nations must elevate its efforts to harness this
pandemic as a gateway to a brighter world.

20-107867/120

S/2020/799

Annex 3
Statement by the Director of the Center on International
Cooperation, New York University, Sarah Cliffe
It is an honour to participate in this meeting.
I will not take up time going over the tragic impacts of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) in terms of human suffering or the immediate effects in countries on the
agenda of the Security Council, with which I know all members are very familiar.
Rather, I will focus on two main questions: how will the second-generation impacts
of the pandemic likely affect conflict? What opportunities for peacebuilding may be
present? I will cover five quick points under each question.
On the impacts, I think that we have to accept that the pandemic has exposed
fragility in all countries, in our health systems and our economic, social and political
fabric. Some of the key dynamics that affect conflict risk are the following.
The first is the still-growing economic shock and rising inequality. This
shock is the deepest since the Second World War and the broadest since 1870. The
projections for 2020 are continually worsening, and I think that we know now that
we will be at not a 2 per cent but at a 5-6 per cent global contraction. By coincidence,
five percentage points is the level at which we have seen in research major increases,
around 50 per cent, in conflict risk. The impact is also exacerbating inequality
between different groups, a factor that we also know increases conflict.
Secondly, there are practical problems in convening peace processes and
elections. Physical meetings are important for trust and confidence-building: the
intra-Afghan negotiations, for example, have faced difficulties due to COVID-19
conditions. Disputed elections are a trigger for conflict, and the pandemic makes
disputes more likely because of difficulties in access and monitoring. Postponing
elections is sometimes the only responsible action to take, but that will mean rising
pressure for elections in late 2020 or 2021, when we are now likely to see double the
number of countries holding elections from what was originally scheduled. In some
countries, the pandemic is also seen as a pretext to postpone elections, shrink civic
space and adopt increasingly authoritarian approaches.
Thirdly, concerning food insecurity, we already face a global hunger crisis;
but at present that is because people do not have income to buy food, not because
they cannot get food. However, we are seeing local spikes in food prices in conflict
zones in many countries, such as Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Syria and Yemen. Food prices are the typical risk to watch, historically, for
conflict levels.
Fourthly, as regards trends in remittances, trade and migration, remittances
are projected by the World Bank to decline by $110 billion this year, or equivalent
to more than two thirds of the entire global official development assistance budget.
Within the 10 countries that depend most on remittance inflows are eight that are
post-conflict or conflict-affected and three that are still on the agenda of the Security
Council — Haiti, Somalia and South Sudan. Trade and migration issues post-COVID
also have the potential for conflict between countries.
Fifthly, I turn to the issue of inequality in access to public-health goods.
Developing countries’ difficulty in procuring personal protective equipment,
test kits, medicines and equipment has already widened the gap in capacity to
suppress COVID-19 and has damaged trust. This gap is set to widen further when
vaccines are found. Current dynamics over vaccine development see developed
countries outbidding each other in advance orders, with little capacity left for the
developing world.
8/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

These five major drivers of conflict may all increase in the months to come.
Many of them are universal, and indeed we have seen tensions rise in rich countries.
But they hit disproportionately on already conflict-affected countries.
Let me turn to positive opportunities for peacebuilding.
My first point is on trust and multilateral action. We are seeing in opinion
polls in all regions unprecedented demand for more international collective action.
In effect, people have been brutally reminded of what we have Governments and
international cooperation for — that without them there are some forms of crisis
that cannot be solved by any one individual or country alone. However, trust bubbles
typically last less than a year if no action is taken to sustain them; so this is an
opportunity, but it is a time-limited one.
My second point concerns the call for ceasefires issued by the SecretaryGeneral and supported in resolution 2532 (2020). There is still an opportunity to
strengthen implementation, because in many countries COVID-19 is far from being
under control and humanitarian needs are increasing. The Council could engage
more closely with regional and subregional bodies such as the African Union and the
regional economic commissions to amplify the call. The Council could also encourage
the Secretary-General to report on ceasefire openings and implementation, in line
with resolution 2532 (2020).
Thirdly, there is an opportunity to use a sustaining peace lens from early in the
COVID-19 response. The initial health crisis is now an economic crisis, and without
careful action can become a political and security crisis. The United Nations can
help by linking its responses across humanitarian, development and peacebuilding
areas and by building local capacities, State-citizen trust and a whole-of-society
response to the pandemic. By embracing conflict-sensitive approaches that are
sovereignty-supporting, the United Nations can also help Governments address risks
before they escalate — for example, through subnational monitoring of food prices,
serious investment to allow elections to proceed safely and reducing inequalities or
corruption in the COVID-19 response. Nationally led prevention is also a promising
area for greater alignment with the international financial institutions.
Fourthly, regarding investment in universal health and equal access to vaccines,
let me say that this is an international and not simply a domestic concern, because
the pandemic has taught us that no one is safe until everyone is safe. Domestically,
we need to embrace the message that even those well-known revolutionaries at The
Financial Times have been writing — that this needs to be paid for by higher taxes
from those who have reaped a larger share of recent gains. Internationally, developed
countries need to sustain and increase aid — which is still a drop in the bucket
compared to domestic stimulus packages — and ensure global access to vaccine and
treatment technology.
Why raise some of these socioeconomic issues in the Security Council? This
is my fifth and last point: these problems may become international threats to peace
and security if they are not addressed. The way to get them addressed, to raise their
profile, is to raise them in political and security as well as developmental terms.
The Council often refers to issues such as pandemics as non-traditional issues: there
has, of course, been well-merited resistance to securitizing development. But these
issues are not really non-traditional: if one were to ask the world’s military agencies,
most of them have planned for years for the impact of pandemics, extreme natural
disasters and so forth, as potential security risks. Analysing the risk does not, of
course, mean that the Council should try to direct health or economic activities. But
this is an example of an extreme public health and economic shock that deserves
to qualify as a peacebuilding risk. Let the Security Council raise its voice not to
“securitize” the issue, but precisely so that it does not become an international peace
and security disaster.
20-107869/120

S/2020/799

Annex 4
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia,
Retno Lestari Priansari Marsudi
This pandemic is having profound impacts on international peace and security.
It has increased the fragility of conflict-affected countries, and some of them are
very close to falling back into crisis.
Many unresolved conflict drivers may add to the heightening of tensions, from
inequalities to weak governance, from rampant poverty to poor health infrastructures,
and from collapsing economies to food shortages. This unprecedented disruption
may reverse years of peacebuilding efforts.
At the same time, the pandemic complicates the work of United Nations
peacekeepers and mediation efforts on the ground. Peace processes may run off the
rails. Since February, at least 69 countries have decided to postpone their elections,
some of which are a critical part of a peace process. All in all, tasks relating to
peacebuilding and sustaining peace have become even more daunting.
With that in mind, allow me to underline three important points.
First, sustaining peace must be a part of our comprehensive response
to this pandemic. It is imperative for us to continue supporting the efforts of
countries in conflict to take a holistic approach to addressing the interlinkages
between the health crisis and its implications, which range from socioeconomic to
peace-and-security-related.
Our support should focus on strengthening the institutional capacities and
resources of conflict-affected countries. It should also address unequal access to
public-health goods and coronavirus disease (COVID-19) treatments in conflictaffected countries. Competition in the acquisition of a COVID-19 vaccine, once it
exists, would only leave them further behind.
Moreover, advancing the sustaining peace agenda requires the inclusive
participation of local stakeholders. They have a better understanding of the risks of
conflict that must be addressed.
A conducive international enabling environment is also important to sustain
peace during this pandemic, including in my region, South-East Asia. For that
reason, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations issued a joint statement on 8 August that underlined the importance of the
principles embedded in the Zone of Peace, Freedom and Neutrality in South-East
Asia and the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia to the maintenance
of peace and stability in the region amid the current geopolitical dynamics.
Secondly, sustaining peace requires synergy between the work of all entities
of the United Nations system. The United Nations system can no longer work on
the basis of a silo approach. It must respond in a coherent manner by harnessing the
strengths of its various organs. The United Nations should also integrate a conflictsensitive approach into its pandemic response.
The Security Council must play its role to ensure the full implementation of
resolution 2532 (2020). A general cessation of hostilities and a humanitarian pause
would enable the timely delivery of aid and COVID-19 treatments to civilians caught
in conflict.
As those operating directly on the ground, United Nations peacekeeping
operations have the capacity to monitor risks of conflict that may be exacerbated by
the pandemic, serving as part of an early-warning system.
10/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

Meanwhile, United Nations agencies, funds and programmes have the technical
capacities necessary to address specific conflict drivers during the pandemic. The
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), as the lead United Nations body in sustaining
peace, plays a vital role in coordinating responses across the principal organs of the
United Nations and beyond, including regional organizations, international financial
institutions and private sectors. The PBC must make use of its advisory role to
develop a comprehensive United Nations strategy to deal with the long-term impacts
of COVID-19. Our efforts to sustain peace during COVID-19 serve as a valuable
input for the review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture.
Thirdly, sustaining peace requires the smart use of resources. The latest
report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding and sustaining peace (S/2020/773)
documented a decline in the share of the official development assistance budget
dedicated to peacebuilding in conflict-affected countries. The majority of those
countries are now faced with a hard choice between spending on health infrastructure
or spending on peacebuilding. It is important, therefore, that we optimize the use of
the limited resources at hand.
The partnership between the United Nations and international financial
institutions is vital. At the same time, we need to continue thinking outside the
box to explore innovative funding for peacebuilding, South-South and triangular
cooperation and the involvement of philanthropists and private sectors.
The pandemic may aggravate some conflict dynamics, but I am an optimist,
as history has taught us that crisis may also create an opening for peace. Let us use
that momentum to better sustain peace.

20-1078611/120

S/2020/799

Annex 5
Statement by the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Viet Nam, Pham Binh Minh
It is a great pleasure to see you again, Madam President, albeit only virtually.
I wish to thank you and the Indonesian presidency for having convened this meeting
and for having invited the best briefers for this timely and important topic.
My special greetings go to Secretary-General Guterres and former SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon.
I am joining this meeting from Hanoi, Viet Nam — a country that has seen
early success in controlling the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. A
whole-of-government approach and strong and determined actions that leave no one
behind have helped minimize casualties and impacts. Yet the recent re-emergence
of the coronavirus in Viet Nam after three months is a stark reminder that no single
country can win this battle unless and until everyone wins it.
Viet Nam has been enjoying peace, stability and long periods of growth for
decades. But when the pandemic hit Viet Nam, it hit us hard. It put enormous strain on
our health-care system and undermined our socioeconomic development. It disrupted
every aspect of our lives in unprecedented and unthinkable ways. As such, we can
only imagine the level of devastation this pandemic can bring to conflict-affected
areas. The pandemic threatens to wipe out hard-won peacebuilding gains and worsen
already complex and fragile situations, especially on the humanitarian front.
Such a multidimensional crisis demands multidimensional solutions. At a
national level, a whole-of-Government approach is needed to tackle the pandemic
from a disease-control perspective while strengthening institutions, building trust
and fostering cooperation.
Special support must be given to the most vulnerable in conflicts and health
crises, particularly the elderly, women and children, persons with disabilities,
refugees and displaced persons.
Globally, a threat like COVID-19 can be curbed only by working together
through multilateral efforts. Viet Nam welcomes the adoption of resolution 2532
(2020) and the Secretary-General’s appeal for an immediate global ceasefire and
facilitation of humanitarian activities.
We call for the lifting of sanctions that can undermine countries’ capacity to
respond to COVID-19.
We commend United Nations peace operations for continuing to fulfil their
crucial mandates and support host countries, despite an increasingly challenging
operating environment.
We urge the United Nations peacebuilding architecture — from Headquarters
to field operations — to take coordinated actions and deliver as one. A whole-ofsystem approach is crucial for the United Nations to deliver its promises of sustainable
peace and development.
Even the smallest actions to sustain peace during a pandemic can do a great
deal to win the hearts and minds of local communities. I am particularly moved
by the story of a resourceful Vietnamese woman peacekeeper in the Central
African Republic who made face masks to help protect fellow peacekeepers and the
local populations.
Lastly, the important role of regional organizations cannot be overstated. In
Southeast Asia, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), of which Viet
12/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

Nam and Indonesia are proud members, is taking a whole-of-community approach
in fighting the pandemic.
ASEAN leaders have reaffirmed their political commitment and taken
coordinated measures to protect the health of our citizens, revitalize our economies
and prevent the pandemic from undermining overall regional peace and stability.
No one can win this battle against the COVID-19 pandemic alone. Viet Nam
continues to underscore the critical importance of international solidarity and
strengthened cooperation in our response to COVID-19. We are strongly committed
and call on all to join hands in this common endeavour.

20-1078613/120

S/2020/799

Annex 6
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Estonia,
Urmas Reinsalu
I would like to congratulate Indonesia for assuming the Security Council
presidency for the month of August and for convening this timely meeting today.
At the outset, please allow me to say few words about very worrying situation
in Belarus. Sunday’s presidential elections in Belarus cannot be considered free,
fair and democratic. As a result, we are now witnessing unprecedented nationwide
protests and the excessive use of force by the Government. Let me underline that
violent crackdowns of peaceful protests is unacceptable. We call on Belarus to
immediately end its political repression of the opposition, avoid any further violence
and uphold respect for human rights.
Coming now to the matter of sustaining peace, I agree that the Security
Council should not let new challenges to international peace and security slip under
the radar. The focus of today’s debate on the effects of pandemics, including the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19), on conflict prevention, post-conflict recovery and
peacebuilding is therefore very pertinent.
Conflict prevention ought to be at the core of the work of the United Nations.
Estonia has been continuously advocating and contributing to prevention, postconflict recovery and sustaining peace initiatives. We attach great emphasis to the
role of the Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund. Estonia has been
supporting the Fund’s activities since 2013, and we see great added value in its work
to ensure favourable conditions for local organizations to play the necessary role in
sustaining peace.
We welcome the Peacebuilding Commission’s renewed focus on conflict
prevention, in addition to its more traditional post-conflict recovery analysis and
activities. The Commission’s advisory role vis-à-vis the Security Council is extremely
important and is part of a holistic, cross-United Nations approach to conflict
prevention and resolution. With that in mind, we see room for further strengthening
the Commission’s advisory role to the Council. Analysis provided by the PBC to the
Council can play an important part of an informed decision-making process.
Undoubtedly, the COVID-19 pandemic puts an additional burden on already
fragile situations. Economic, social and development pressures from the pandemic
can essentially act as threat multipliers and exacerbate tensions. We have already
seen that in the Sahel region, where armed and violent extremist groups are cynically
abusing the situation for their own advancement. That, in turn, has multiplied the
responsibilities of United Nations peacekeeping missions.
Estonia, together with other European Union countries, has pledged its
continued commitment to United Nations peacekeeping during the pandemic. We
urge others, in particular large troop and financial contributors, to follow suit.
Peacekeeping missions require our continued uninterrupted support to remain
willing and able to operate during the pandemic in order to deliver on their mandate,
promote conflict resolution, support host States and protect civilian populations.
While it is important to discuss how United Nations peacekeeping missions
could take more pandemic-sensitive approaches, that is only a part of the equation.
For peacebuilding and sustaining-peace activities to be truly sustainable, we
need political will and a strong sense of ownership from Governments and local
communities. Peacebuilding processes need to be inclusive, taking into account
the views of local peacebuilders, especially women and youth, who are often at the
forefront of such activities and the ones most affected by conflict.
14/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

There are encouraging examples from Afghanistan, the Niger, Iraq and
many other locations where the United Nations has successfully supported local
peacebuilding capacities and initiatives, many of them led by women. That is
especially important in the context of coronavirus, which has further exacerbated
the vulnerability of the least protected in society. I would also like to stress that
women’s needs have to be factored into the response to the pandemic, and we need
to ensure women`s equal representation in all coronavirus response planning and
decision-making processes.
In conclusion, the pandemic will most likely be with us for the foreseeable
future. Regardless, we need to continue creative peacebuilding efforts, empowering
local level initiatives and actively making sure that the pandemic is not being used as
a pretext for restricting human rights, limiting freedom of movement or hampering
the Organization’s peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts.

20-1078615/120

S/2020/799

Annex 7
Statement by the Minister of International Relations and
Cooperation of South Africa, Naledi Pandor
At a time when the world is only beginning to understand the impact of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and efforts are being made in various
international forums to deal with the multitude of adverse impacts, we thank
Indonesia, through Minister Marsudi, for convening this Security Council debate to
prioritize sustaining peace in the midst of pandemics.
We also welcome the important and insightful briefings by Secretary-General
António Guterres, Former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Ms. Sarah Cliffe,
which have lent substantial weight to our discussion.
South Africa has had to learn many lessons from the pandemic, such as the
critical need for international collaboration and robust multilateral institutions, and
the urgency of socioeconomic assistance in sectors that should be helping the most
vulnerable. We support the Security Council addressing the possible link between
the pandemic and peace and security.
This multilateral approach, which requires financial assistance, is of the
utmost necessity given the intractable nature of global pandemics, in general, as
well as the complex array of challenges that emerge from such a pervasive global
phenomenon. It requires us to be aware of how deeply interconnected our world is
and how solidarity and cooperation are becoming more and more indispensable.
South Africa is deeply concerned about the potential adverse effects of
the COVID-19 pandemic on conflict situations that are currently the focus of the
Council, particularly the potential to delay or reverse vital gains in peace and
political processes. It is crucial for the international community to continue to
support countries affected by conflict in order to preserve those gains and sustain
investments in stabilization and peacebuilding.
Another impact area that will continue to require more attention is postconflict reconstruction and sustaining the hard-won peace that has been achieved
through the Council’s efforts and those of the broader international community over
many years. We must not lose sight of what it has taken to assist those in conflict
situations to extricate themselves from violence, destruction and insecurity, and
what the adverse effects of renewed instability and the re-emergence of conflict
would entail. These may be especially pronounced due to the adverse humanitarian
impact of coping with conflict amid a global pandemic.
In that regard, South Africa will continue to support the Secretary-General’s
call for a global ceasefire and a humanitarian pause in order to give due attention to
the pandemic and attempts to mitigate its impacts, a call that has been reiterated and
emphasized by the African Union.
At this stage, we must acknowledge and commend the leadership and
proactive action of the United Nations, which put in place measures to protect the
health and safety of peacekeepers and to help navigate the effects of the pandemic.
In that connection, we commend in particular the leadership and critical role of the
World Health Organization (WHO) and its Director-General, Mr. Tedros Adhanom
Ghebreyesus, in preventing and mitigating the broader public health emergency in
which peacekeeping and other peace-related activities are embedded. The WHO
has also been working with affected countries and regional organizations such as
the African Union to address the spread of COVID-19, thus exemplifying a global
cooperative effort.
16/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

While it is important to focus on post-conflict support in all peacebuilding
efforts, we must be wary not to provide support, on the one hand, while inhibiting the
adequate responses of Governments to protect their people from the pandemic and
weather the economic difficulties and implications, on the other. It is for this reason
that South Africa strongly supports the Secretary-General’s call for the waiving of
unilateral coercive measures and sanctions in order to allow affected Governments
and societies to have the requisite resources to secure the much-needed life-saving
and medical supplies, and personal protective equipment to respond to the pandemic.
We also support calls for debt relief and deferral, and robust support for recovery
in Africa.
South Africa has consistently held the position that sanctions should be used
to support peace processes and not as a means of collective punishment, which is
made all the more devastating in the context of a pandemic that even the most capable
economies have been struggling to deal with.
The notion of a comprehensive response to the pandemic, which includes
both additional efforts and resources, and the enhanced engagement of the Security
Council in areas such as sanctions, will be key to the Council’s role in the broader
global effort. It is for this reason that South Africa believes that sustaining peace
amid a global pandemic requires concurrently addressing the confluence of factors
that determine the context for peace to endure in these trying times.
For Africa, in particular, countermeasures against the threat posed by the
COVID-19 virus, such as stay-at-home and social distancing laws, have adversely
affected informal economies on which many people’s livelihoods depend. Family
incomes, in particular, have been jeopardized, deepening the social plight of
countless people across the continent. In mostly developing nations, this scenario is
likely to pit distressed citizenry against national Governments through heightened
national protests, thereby threatening national security, peace and stability.
Given the challenges that many African countries face with weak health
systems, the implications of the COVID-19 pandemic on public health and peace and
security in the COVID-19 landscape are dire. The linkages between public health,
societal well-being, politics and the performance of national health systems are well
documented in Africa, particularly in post-conflict countries and those experiencing
protracted conflicts.
Furthermore, considering the economic toll the virus has taken on both lowand middle-income African countries due to resources to contain the effects of
COVID-19, African countries may not be able to manage the debt service for a few
years to come. These conditions undermine peace, stability and prosperity. South
Africa maintains that it is in our collective interests for the United Nations to begin
setting its sights on this grim reality by focusing the attention of United Nations
agencies on the disruptive socioeconomic effects of COVID-19 on developing nations.
In conclusion, sustaining peace depends on the overall political, social,
economic and physical health of societies. In addition, we inhabit a world that is
increasingly global and interconnected. We must therefore come to terms with the
necessity of prioritizing sustainable peace through forums such as the Peacebuilding
Commission, in cooperation with regional organizations and their peacebuilding
counterparts and mechanisms, while also drawing on a system-wide United Nations
multilateral effort. That is especially necessary as we work to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals, which seek to address the root causes of many conflicts we
are facing.
It is only through cooperation in the face of the temptation to look inward that
we will emerge from the current pandemic the better and confront a new world with
a renewed spirit of global cooperation.
20-1078617/120

S/2020/799

Annex 8
Statement by the Minister of State of Germany, Niels Annen
I thank you, Sir, for convening today’s open debate on pandemics and the
challenges for sustaining peace. I would also like to thank Secretary General António
Guterres, Mr. Ban Ki-moon and Ms. Sarah Cliffe for their insightful briefings.
Six weeks ago, the Security Council held an open debate on pandemics and
security (see S/2020/663), chaired by the German Foreign Minister. Recently, we
also had an informal exchange of Council members, with representatives of the
Peacebuilding Commission, on the impact of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) on
peacebuilding. In both meetings, we called on the Council to adopt a comprehensive
understanding of peace and security. I am therefore grateful to Indonesia for
providing us with an opportunity to build on these discussions today.
A comprehensive approach to peace and security means also addressing root
causes and mid- and long-term challenges, as opposed to only acute crises. It means
needing to find integrated solutions for interconnected challenges and strengthening
prevention, peacebuilding and sustaining peace — no matter if we are facing the
multidimensional challenges related to human rights violations, pandemics or
climate change.
COVID-19 continues to rage across the world. It is a multidimensional
challenge that adversely affects humanitarian, health, political, social, economic
and environmental aspects. It also affects peace and security and undermines
peacebuilding efforts in conflict-affected countries and countries in transition.
What needs to be done? Allow me to focus on four brief points. First, the
Security Council needs to be active and engaged. It must follow up on resolution 2532
(2020), in which it explicitly recognized that COVID-19 might reverse peacebuilding
gains. We should encourage the Secretary-General to fully integrate in his reporting
the impact of the pandemic on security. Such reporting would support prevention
and early warning.
The Council should further empower the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
which has a unique mandate within the United Nations system, to enable integrated
and cross-pillar approaches. We commend the PBC for its rapid response and
excellent track record since the outbreak of the pandemic.
We need to ensure that the United Nations and its presence on the ground,
especially its peacekeeping operations and special political missions, are sufficiently
equipped and mandated to address the direct and indirect challenges of the
pandemic. This is particularly important in the context of transitions, such as those
currently taking place in Darfur and Guinea-Bissau. This is the Security Council’s
core business.
Secondly, we underline the need for coordination and coherence. We need
integrated peacebuilding efforts to respond to challenges such as COVID-19.
The Secretary-General’s briefing today (see annex 1) and his recent report on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace (S/2020/773) have demonstrated how the United
Nations system as a whole has adapted to the pandemic. However, we need to ensure
further progress in achieving better coordination and coherence within the United
Nations system, its agencies, funds and programmes.
There are lessons to be learned from the impact and response to the pandemic.
We believe there is value in incorporating those lessons in the ongoing process of
reviewing the United Nations peacebuilding architecture.

18/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

Thirdly, peacebuilding and sustaining peace urgently need funding. The
COVID-19 pandemic has had massive, immediate socioeconomic repercussions.
Peacebuilding needs are underfunded even now, despite the fact that a prevented
crisis is much less costly than an acute crisis.
Germany continues to contribute to peacebuilding and prevention. For
instance, we continue to support the Secretary-General’s Peacebuilding Fund (PBF),
to which we have just made an initial contribution of €15 million for 2020. With
its flexibility and catalytic function, the PBF plays a crucial role in meeting such
critical peacebuilding needs as those relating to gender and inclusivity, crossborder collaboration and, in particular, in contexts of transition. On a bilateral level,
Germany has contributed to the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire by
supporting additional efforts of its mediation partners on the ground.
Gender equality gains are at a risk of being lost as many Governments are
diverting funds that were originally earmarked for the support of women and girls
and their participation in peace processes. As a member of the Funding Board of the
Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund, Germany supported the establishment of
an emergency response window within the Fund and made $2.5 million available
to this emergency window. Through this window, local women’s organizations in
countries in Asia, sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, the Middle East and Europe
can apply for funding that enables them to sustain themselves through the crisis and
for programmes responding to the pandemic and its gendered dimensions.
But these efforts are not enough. To create sustainable and predictable
financing for peacebuilding, we need strengthened partnerships with international
financial institutions, regional banks and the private sector. Further, as donors, we
should not forget: to make a difference: donors should coordinate better, use pooled
funding if possible, and engage in good peacebuilding donorship.
Fourthly, inclusive approaches are needed to build resilience. All efforts
will be in vain if they are not based on national ownership. We will be able to
build resilient societies that can better withstand the impact of pandemics only by
working in lockstep with affected countries. Respect for human rights and political
processes that are inclusive and allow all parts of society, especially women, youth
and marginalized groups, to participate in a meaningful way, are crucial in building
up such resilience.
Let me conclude on a hopeful note. This pandemic, just like other
multidimensional challenges, is providing us as an international community with an
opportunity — an opportunity to strengthen cooperation, reinforce multilateralism
and show international solidarity. If we manage to overcome traditional thinking and
siloes and find integrated and coherent solutions, we will be able to defeat a deadly
virus, eventually halt climate change and hopefully realize a world where everybody
can live in peace and security.

20-1078619/120

S/2020/799

Annex 9
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Belgium to the
United Nations
Sustaining peace, which is both a comprehensive process and a goal, has
never been an easy task for conflict-affected countries. The coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic has only magnified this challenge: human and health costs
have soared, socioeconomic problems have proliferated, and the challenges of
planning, implementing and following up on peacebuilding efforts have multiplied.
Indeed, over the last couple of months, we have witnessed unprecedented
needs and repeated calls for an urgent and coordinated response. Moreover, on 1 July,
we unanimously adopted resolution 2532 (2020), recognizing that the pandemic
could reverse peacebuilding gains made by countries in transition and post-conflict
countries and calling for all relevant parts of the United Nations system to accelerate
response to the pandemic.
Now is the time to further reflect upon our approach and draw out some best
practices and lessons learned. In this regard, we would mention four points. First,
multilateralism, international cooperation, collaboration and collective responsibility
are and remain essential. As long as the pandemic affects one of us, it will affect
all of us. Collective problems require collective answers, and such answers can and
will only be found if we — the United Nations and its Member States, regional and
subregional organizations, international financial institutions, the private sector and
civil society — work together.
Secondly, if effective multilateralism is based on respect for shared
principles and values, the same should be true for our next steps in addressing
the pandemic. COVID-19 should not be used as a pretext to infringe upon human
rights or international humanitarian law. COVID-related restrictions are indeed
sometimes disproportional, unlimited in time and taken without much — or any —
scientific backing.
Thirdly, the whole conflict cycle has been negatively affected by the
pandemic. We therefore need to be innovative in all aspects of conflict prevention,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and sustaining peace in order to preserve the hard-won
gains of the past, build resilience and lay the groundwork for a better future. The
Peacebuilding Fund, for instance, was able to add additional funding to an accessto-justice project in Haiti, to allow for virtual hearings and facilitate legal arbitration
for the release of detainees.
Being innovative requires paying adequate attention to known thematic
challenges that are closely linked to the pandemic, but which are intensifying, for
example, climate and security or mental health. Furthermore, innovation consists
in finding new ways to secure adequate funding to tackle these challenges, such as
exploring additional budgetary partnerships with international financial institutions
and the private sector.
Fourthly, best practices and lessons learned in addressing the pandemic should
reinforce our ongoing review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture.
Given its function as both a platform and a bridge across the whole United Nations
system as well as its early engagement in responding to the COVID-19 pandemic,
the Peacebuilding Commission, together with the Peacebuilding Fund, has been in a
unique position to help tackle the pandemic. It is therefore appropriate to incorporate
their views and recommendations in the review.
Efforts undertaken in the context of peacebuilding and sustaining peace can
help to further increase national and local ownership, counter fragmentation in
20/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

the United Nations system and its pillars and help to foster additional partnerships
between the United Nations and other stakeholders. In short, we need to be more
strategic, focused and unified in tackling the pandemic. The peacebuilding
architecture can play a crucial role to this end.

20-1078621/120

S/2020/799

Annex 10
Statement by the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Zhang Jun
China welcomes Foreign Minister Retno Marsudi of Indonesia as she presides
over today’s open debate. I thank the Secretary-General and Mr. Ban Ki-moon for
their briefings (annexes 1 and 2, respectively). I listened carefully to Ms. Sarah
Cliffe’s briefing (annex 3), as well.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) poses an unprecedented threat to the
lives and health of people of all countries. The world economy is heading into a
recession. The international community’s efforts aimed at sustaining peace are
facing great challenges. As noted in resolution 2532 (2020), the pandemic could
reverse the gains in peacebuilding and development made by conflict-affected
countries. We must step up our efforts to prevail over the pandemic and build back
better at an early date.
Solidarity, together with cooperation, is the most powerful weapon in the
global fight against COVID-19. Conflict-affected countries are the weakest link in
this fight. Helping them build a strong line of defence is most important for ensuring
victory over the pandemic and consolidating peacebuilding gains.
China calls on all parties to conflict to respond to the Secretary-General’s
appeal for a global ceasefire as soon as possible, not only to lay down their arms
and silence the guns, but also to coordinate actions against COVID-19. We should
support the United Nations and the World Health Organization in mobilizing
countries to further strengthen policy coordination and increase resources to help
with the preparedness and response of the conflict-affected countries.
China appreciates and supports the assistance to relevant countries by the
United Nations peacekeeping operations. We support the Peacebuilding Commission
in providing tailored responses and reconstruction programmes for these countries,
and we encourage the Peacebuilding Fund to reprioritize its projects and resources
for that purpose.
As we have seen, unilateral sanctions are seriously undermining the basic
capacity of targeted countries to respond to the pandemic and safeguard livelihoods,
making innocent civilians the greatest victims. We once again strongly urge relevant
countries to acknowledge the negative humanitarian consequences of their unilateral
coercive-measures actions and immediately move to lift them.
Since the outbreak of COVID-19, China has been actively engaged in the
global fight against the disease. China has been doing its utmost to support and
assist countries in need, including many on the Security Council’s agenda. In June,
President Xi Jinping chaired an extraordinary China-Africa summit on solidarity
against COVID-19, which demonstrated the determination of China and Africa to
fight COVID-19 together. China has decided to cancel the debt on interest-free loans
made to relevant African countries that is due by the end of 2020. China has also
announced that COVID-19 vaccine development and deployment in China, when
available, will be made a global public good. China is ready to continue providing
medical supplies to affected countries, share experience in diagnosis and treatment,
and send medical experts to assist in countries’ response.
Facing the impact of COVID-19, we need to better understand sustaining
peace, improve and strengthen our approaches to peacebuilding. First, we should
always be people-centred. The experience of many countries has shown that as
long as we put people and life first, we can develop a set of effective methods for
fighting the pandemic. In peacebuilding, we should also put people’s interests front
22/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

and centre, respect people’s ownership in host countries and promote an inclusive
peace process.
Secondly, we should promote sustaining peace through development.
Peacebuilding processes in conflict-affected countries can easily go back to square
one after one or two crises owing to those countries’ weak socioeconomic foundations.
Development is the master key to solving all problems. The international community
should attach great importance to the impact of COVID-19 on the socioeconomic
situation of conflict-affected countries, help them improve their capacity for
sustainable development, strengthen public-health systems and preserve and advance
peacebuilding gains in order to build a solid foundation for sustaining peace.
Thirdly, we should strengthen political leadership and the participation of the
whole of society. In many countries, strong political leadership and social cohesion
have made it possible to undertake early detection, isolation, diagnosis and treatment
of COVID-19 cases. Rebuilding political consensus, mutual trust and social cohesion
is also an important underpinning for national reconstruction. We need to support
strengthening the authority of the legitimate Governments of conflict-affected
countries, so that they can lead their respective societies to safeguard the hard-won
gains of peacebuilding and achieving long-term security and stability.
There is no doubt that the COVID-19 pandemic has had a tremendous impact
on the world and brought great challenges to it. However, we have every reason to
believe that humankind will eventually prevail and make the world a better place.
To make that happen, we must be united and uphold multilateralism. Countries
are dependent on each other and have a shared future. No one can artificially sever
the ties that connect us. Unilateralism is a one-way train heading to a dead end, and
there is no other option but to turn back from it. We should give stronger support to
the United Nations, better meet challenges and pursue common development through
multilateral cooperation. We must uphold justice and the rule of law. Justice is the
hope of all and is rooted in the hearts of people.
International law and the norms of international relations are important
guarantees for international fairness and justice. All countries should honour their
commitments and fulfil their due responsibilities and obligations. We cannot allow
the practice of power politics, bullying and exceptionalism to take the world back to
the age of the jungle. We must respect science and support technological progress.
Advances in science and technology are the common pursuit of humankind.
Everyone is entitled to a better life, including those living in developing
countries. The practice of putting up artificial barriers to hinder other countries’
scientific and technological development and to interfere with market competition
for selfish gains is immoral, irresponsible and against one’s own interests. It is
our sincere hope that States Members of the United Nations and the international
community will act together, shoulder responsibilities together, share the benefits
together and jointly build a better future for all.

20-1078623/120

S/2020/799

Annex 11
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Dominican Republic to
the United Nations
I would like to thank the Secretary-General and Mr. Ban Ki-moon — and
welcome him home — and Ms. Cliffe for their comprehensive briefings (annexes
1, 2 and 3, respectively). We would also like to express our appreciation to Foreign
Minister Marsudi for her leadership on this issue and for organizing today’s debate.
As the Secretary-General has pointed out, coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
is more than a health crisis. It is a multidimensional occurrence, with complex and
intertwined consequences and challenges for peacebuilding. It could, unfortunately,
exacerbate drivers of conflict. As resolution 2532 (2020) recognizes, peacebuilding
and development gains made by post-conflict countries and countries in transition
could be reversed as a result of the pandemic.
COVID-19 has triggered a devastating human toll well beyond challenges to
public health. In fragile, conflict-affected countries, it is upsetting economies and
societies by aggravating the causes of conflict, and the shrinking of the humanitarian
space is worrisome. Gender-based violence is escalating, as is the number of human
rights violations. The foregoing illustrates the significance of this debate while we
are also getting closer to the 2020 peace architecture review.
This pandemic has uncovered both structural inequalities within societies and
existing disproportionalities in access to basic services, including education. People
affected by conflict are among the most vulnerable and the most at risk.
Of particular importance is the strengthening of international cooperation,
including South-South and triangular cooperation, work across the humanitariandevelopment-peace nexus and putting into practice what the Secretary-General set
forth in his report entitled “Shared responsibility, global solidarity: responding to
the socioeconomic impacts of COVID-19”.
Sharing lessons learned and good practices within and across countries and
regions is key. In this context, one of the main concepts that needs to be incorporated
in any recovery and response to COVID-19 is the peacebuilding dimension. The
Dominican Republic has consistently stressed how crucial a global, coordinated and
unified response among countries and regions is.
Partnerships for peacebuilding and sustaining peace is also crucial, precisely
with civil society, international financial institutions, academia, the private sector,
donors, decision makers and local communities. All these actors must come together
to better articulate their comparative strengths and develop mechanisms that will
ensure a strong peacebuilding capacity.
The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) has served as an exemplary platform
in this regard. It is constantly brainstorming with different actors on how to enhance
a response and support specific countries and regions. We reiterate the importance
of the PBC’s advice to the Security Council in this area, as well as the importance of
amplifying the United Nations system-wide engagement.
Funding partners must aim at achieving the long-term benefits of peace, and
not at offering mere short-term support. We commend the work of many international
financial institutions in supporting risk mitigation in the most fragile settings.
We commend the Peacebuilding Fund for providing timely assistance through its
interventions to support countries in addressing COVID-19.
Part of the solution to the pandemic is responsive programming that is sensitive
to conflicts and informed about risks. It should be context-specific and in line with the
24/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

needs of local communities, in particular of the most vulnerable and marginalized.
This is crucial to keeping the pandemic from bringing detrimental consequences to
peacebuilding efforts and from letting gains in this respect be undermined.
Responses that are excessively focused on security must not be deployed, nor
should any measures that curtail or shrink civic space. Every approach should be
undertaken in the spirit of doing no harm and reflect conflict- and gender-sensitivity.
While they must also be people-centred, they should take advantage of the expertise
arising from civil society, particularly women’s groups and youth groups. Women’s
participation is central to achieving sustainable solutions. The pandemic has
shed more light on how critical the women and peace and security agenda is to
peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
As we celebrate International Youth Day today, under the theme of youth
engagement for global action, it is relevant to recall in the Security Council that,
as reaffirmed in resolutions 2532 (2020) and 2535 (2020), young people play a vital
role in building and sustaining peace. Their vision is not to bounce back from this
pandemic but to build back better.
Following this approach, learning from past examples that opened up spaces
for actors to achieve central peacebuilding objectives, for example, the Ebola crisis,
we should view COVID-19 as presenting a window of opportunity for peacebuilding,
identifying pathways to be reinforced and ways to make the pandemic contribute to
strengthening peace and social cohesion.

20-1078625/120

S/2020/799

Annex 12
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of France to
the United Nations, Anne Gueguen
[Original: English and French]
I thank Indonesia for taking the initiative to convene today’s very timely
meeting. I also thank the briefers for their briefings.
The recent adoption of resolution 2532 (2020) on the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, facilitated by Tunisia and France, was a crucial step forward.
It highlighted our collective responsibility and unity in the face of this unprecedented
crisis. The Security Council sent a clear signal in support of the Secretary-General’s
appeal and renewed demand for multilateral collective action.
The call of the Secretary-General for a leap forward in multilateralism and
international solidarity has shown the way. Seventy-five years after the adoption
of the Charter of the United Nations, there is an urgent need to revive the spirit of
San Francisco.
We must now move from words to deeds. Accordingly, together with Tunisia,
France calls for the collective, integrated and coordinated implementation of
resolution 2532 (2020), which is the responsibility of not only of the members of the
Security Council, but also of the United Nations as a whole, particularly in terms
of their commitment to conflict prevention, mediation and humanitarian activities.
The Peacebuilding Commission also has an important role to play in this, and the
Peacebuilding Fund is a tool that has proved its relevance and its effectiveness. We
fully support that.
Furthermore, I would like to refer to our responsibility with regard to fragile
and crisis-stricken countries. Whether in conflict or post-conflict situations,
those countries are particularly at risk in the context of the pandemic. COVID-19
and the measures taken to contain it may have fuelled tensions, hate speech and
even violence. They have generated false rumours, anxiety-provoking stories and
misinformation, and some have been tempted to take advantage of the pandemic to
restrict civil liberties. The pandemic has also undermined confidence in institutions
and the economic resilience of the most vulnerable. It is incumbent upon us to think
collectively about how to address these threats.
A key element of stability in these countries is the resilience of their health
systems. In that regard, we must support the efforts undertaken by the United Nations
and the World Health Organization (WHO). The WHO must be strengthened in its
normative, warning and coordination roles. That does not exclude, when the time
comes, drawing lessons from the management of the current crisis and undertaking
the necessary reforms.
Together with the United Nations, France is committed to supporting
vulnerable populations affected by COVID-19. France has committed €500 million
to the Access to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator project, which it initiated, to
accelerate the development of and access to treatment, diagnostics and vaccines to
fight COVID-19.
Finally, I wish to reiterate the importance of integrating a gender perspective
into the response to the crisis we are experiencing and to give special attention to
women and youth. We must take their specific needs into account in the response to
the pandemic and guarantee their full, active and effective participation at all levels
of decision-making in order to rebuild in a sustainable and egalitarian manner. France
will actively contribute to this reflection, in particular through organizing in the
26/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

coming months the Paris Peace Forum in November 2020, and then, in partnership
with UN-Women and Mexico, the Generation Equality Forum.
As we and the Secretary-General know, the solution to this crisis and, in
the longer term, the construction of lasting peace, lie not in turning inward, but in
increased cooperation and in the revitalization of the multilateral system. He can
count on France’s support and determination to these ends.

20-1078627/120

S/2020/799

Annex 13
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
My delegation would like to welcome the Foreign Minister of Indonesia to
the Security Council today and thank her country for making this debate possible.
Today’s meeting is timely, as it comes on the heels of several discussions on the
pandemic within the Security Council and Peacebuilding Commission, and most
recently following the informal interactive dialogue that Niger co-organized with
Indonesia and Germany.
But first, allow me to take a moment to acknowledge the Secretary-General,
whose call for a global ceasefire and solidarity was a catalyst for the adoption of
resolution 2532 (2020). I would also like to thank Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and Ms. Sarah
Cliffe for their thorough and insightful briefings.
Unfortunately, the Secretary-General’s ceasefire appeal is mostly not being
heeded by belligerent parties on the ground. As shown from the recent attacks by
Boko Haram and the Islamic State West Africa Province in the Lake Chad basin
and the Sahel, violent extremists are trying to take advantage of the pandemic to
destabilize Governments by ramping up their attacks on civilian and military targets.
That trend was corroborated by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mohamed Ibn Chambas, during his briefing in April on the impact of coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) COVID-19 on the Peacebuilding Commission. Those attacks
have resulted in the loss of innocent lives and major disruptions to the delivery of
basic social services to the population.
In addition to being both a public health and a humanitarian crisis, the pandemic
is seriously affecting the economy of fragile countries, like those in the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). It is estimated that the gross domestic product in
some G-5 Sahel countries could contract by 7 to 8 per cent in 2020. As of June, the
economic negative impact in the Niger had already reached $339 million in lost tax
customs and non-tax revenues, far more than my country’s annual defence budget.
In terms of impact on the ground, peace operations are being heavily affected
by the freeze in rotations and the risk of the spread of the disease among the troops
and the population they are protecting. I would like to take this moment to once
again commend the United Nations, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel for putting in place strict and effective measures aimed at minimizing
and mitigating the impact of the pandemic in the Sahel. Even though the operations
of the United Nations peace, special and political missions are themselves heavily
impacted, the current crisis offers opportunities to adapt, repurpose and even
transform the responses of United Nations missions so that no one is left behind and
the hard fought gains made in peace processes are duly maintained.
That starts, first and foremost, by ensuring that adequate levels of funding
and financing for peacekeeping missions are maintained at their current level and, if
possible, boosted, as the pandemic will further exacerbate the crisis in some regions
of the world. Doing so will allow for the adequate troop and personnel levels to be
deployed and essential activities to be carried on. Financing also means providing
adequate support at the multilateral level to those countries in order to preserve the
gains made towards the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals.
Moreover, the extent to which the current pandemic has impacted the
economies of countries will more likely than not lead to a world recession for
the next year and beyond. It is therefore imperative that, besides the traditional
28/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

funding mechanisms, we encourage innovative means by reducing fragmentation
in peacebuilding activities and integrating new tools into current approaches. We
should support funding approaches that put forth countries’ own priorities and allow
those countries to develop locally grown innovative financing mechanisms.
When it comes to adaptation, this crisis has shown us that, going forward, a
meaningful participation of communities — including women, youth, persons with
disabilities and traditional, religious and civic leaders — is necessary. In times like
this, they can be the relay for peacekeeping operations, as they have not only firsthand knowledge of the local customs and traditions, but also the necessary network
and the trust of the local population. We should therefore strive to provide them with
the necessary tools with regard to capacity-building, technology and mentoring so as
to ensure that peacebuilding efforts continue in all situations.
In conclusion, as we celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of
the United Nations, and given the non-traditional nature of this pandemic as a threat
to peace and security, thinking outside the box and transforming our approach to
peacekeeping might yield positive results. The drivers of conflicts today are different
from what they were in 1945, and they involve socioeconomic, environmental, health,
transnational and technological actors. The adaptation and transformation of peace
operations to prevent and mitigate tomorrow’s conflicts are therefore necessary.

20-1078629/120

S/2020/799

Annex 14
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
We welcome the participation in today’s discussion of the Indonesian Foreign
Minister and other dignitaries who spoke earlier. We thank you, Sir, for convening
this meeting and welcome it. We also wish to express our appreciation to today’s
briefers — Secretary-General António Guterres; Mr. Ban Ki-moon, former SecretaryGeneral and Deputy Chair of The Elders; as well as Ms. Sarah Cliffe, Director of
the Center on International Cooperation of New York University, for assessing
and providing information on the impact of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
One of the speakers used today’s debate to introduce a topic that is completely
extraneous to the subject of today’s discussion. We would encourage you, Mr.
President, to discourage speakers from abusing Security Council meetings and call
on all to limit their remarks to the announced agenda.
We are seeing the COVID-19 pandemic adversely impact the humanitarian
situation in armed conflict and post-conflict countries. That leads to a wide range
of challenges, including food insecurity, the degradation of national public health
systems, difficulties in peacekeeping and special political missions and a slowdown
of peace processes.
We recall that in its response to the Ebola outbreak several years ago, the
Security Council introduced specific measures into resolutions on Liberia and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo that contributed to containing the dissemination
of the virus and mitigating its consequences, with the assistance of the United Nations
and the international community. That proves the effectiveness of the Council’s
country-specific, rather than global, responses to pandemics.
Professional response, mitigation and recovery efforts should be made by
the competent United Nations bodies responsible for those aspects. In particular,
we wish to underline the crucial role of the World Health Organization (WHO) in
ensuring the coherence of the multilateral response to the COVID-19 pandemic and
its impact, especially the medical aspects of the global response to the outbreak
of the coronavirus disease. We believe the international community should jointly
support the work of the WHO.
Undoubtedly, the implications of pandemics impede the ability of some
countries to fully implement their planned peacebuilding programmes and policies,
and the gains achieved prior to the COVID-19 outbreak are at risk of being reversed,
due specifically to unpredictable long-term socioeconomic consequences.
In his March 2020 report entitled “Shared responsibility, global solidarity:
Responding to the socio-economic impacts of COVID-19”, the Secretary-General
proposed specific measures concerning the response to the potential impact of the
COVID-19 pandemic. We supported most of those measures.
We have also fully supported the Secretary-General’s appeal for a global
ceasefire. At the same time, we are concerned by reported attempts of illegal armed
groups trying to take advantage of the pandemic situation to obtain benefits on the
ground and undermine peace processes. In particular, increased terrorist activity was
reported in the Sahara-Sahel region. It is therefore important that the humanitarian
pause and cessation of hostilities do not apply to counter-terrorism operations, in
accordance with resolution 2532 (2020).

30/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

We appreciate the Secretariat’s efforts to promote the health and safety of
United Nations personnel in the field, thereby contributing to the domestic COVID-19
response and recovery efforts in countries emerging from conflict.
It is necessary to ensure the continuity and effectiveness of the United
Nations peacebuilding efforts, while strictly adhering to the applicable public
health guidance. In that regard, the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) could help
in mobilizing financial support to strengthen overstretched national health systems,
at the request of host Governments. A comprehensive analysis of the adverse
socioeconomic impact of the pandemic and its possible implications for the overall
situation and humanitarian needs in a specific country on the PBC’s agenda,
conducted in conjunction with the national authorities, could also be valuable.
One of the urgent measures set out in the Secretary-General’s report on shared
responsibility is the need to waive sanctions, which seriously limit the capacity of the
affected countries to respond to challenges related to the pandemic. We reaffirm our
support for the proposals of the Secretary-General and wish to stress the dangerous
and aggravating socioeconomic effects of unilateral sanctions on sustaining peace,
primarily in developing countries. Such restrictions impede the ability of countries
to finance their peacebuilding and development activities. Lifting such sanctions
would allow those countries to respond more effectively to the challenges posed by
COVID-19. We propose that the Secretariat prepare a policy brief on the impact of
sanctions on the fight against COVID-19, which could include an assessment of the
negative consequences of coercive measures for peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
Russia continues to contribute to the global efforts to counter the current
pandemic and its consequences. We are working with the World Health Organization
in order to financially support its COVID-19 responses and promote compliance with
the International Health Regulations. Our country also collaborates with the World
Food Programme and the United Nations Development Programme in that respect.
Through multilateral channels, Russia has allocated more than $30 million to foster
responses to the pandemic. We also continue our bilateral assistance to countries
in need by providing personal protective equipment, test systems and laboratory
supplies and sending medical teams upon request.
Yesterday the Russian Federation officially registered the first COVID-19
vaccine in the world. Clinical trials have shown its high levels of effectiveness and
safety. Several other promising vaccines are being prepared for clinical trials. In
addition, several Russian antiviral drugs for the treatment of COVID-19, as well as
diagnostics, have already been registered in our country.
We are ready for international cooperation with all interested partners in
developing and introducing vaccines and medicines to ensure a coordinated global
response to the spread of COVID-19 and a joint victory over the pandemic.

20-1078631/120

S/2020/799

Annex 15
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines to the United Nations, Inga Rhonda King
At the outset, I thank Secretary-General António Guterres, His Excellency
Mr. Ban Ki-moon and Ms. Sarah Cliffe for their insightful remarks, and we commend
the Indonesian presidency for convening this timely discussion.
These are extremely challenging times. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic continues to claim lives and livelihoods as it tests our collective resolve
as nations, regions and an international community. Supply chain disruptions and
sharp declines in economic activities have exacerbated inequalities within and
among countries, while prolonged lockdowns have produced disastrous implications
for humanitarian operations, education sectors and other social protections that are
critical to sustaining peace.
For conflict-affected countries, the pandemic has accentuated security risks,
as delicate peace agreements have become increasingly fragile, while many warring
parties, including armed groups, continue to disregard our shared calls for a global
ceasefire, as articulated in resolution 2532 (2020). Under such tenuous circumstances,
persons in vulnerable situations have been disproportionately affected by food
shortages, high levels of displacement, increases in sexual and gender-based violence
and other humanitarian and protection concerns that threaten to reverse the hardwon peacebuilding gains in countries affected by or emerging from conflict.
Amid those immense challenges, the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture has played a crucial role in strengthening the institutional arrangements
between Member States and the international financial institutions in order to
safeguard national development plans, reinforce social contracts and bolster national
ownership over peace processes. These institutional arrangements, geared towards
strengthening partnerships and providing predictable and reliable financing,
are critical to preventing conflict in many fragile contexts. In that regard, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines welcomes the Global Humanitarian Response Plan for
COVID-19 and the work critical to building and sustaining peace financed through
the Secretary-General’s Peacebuilding Fund. However, both remain significantly
underfunded, and we urge donor countries and the international private sector
to renew their efforts to provide financial support to those essential institutional
mechanisms, which provide a critical lifeline for many in precarious situations.
In order to ensure that conflict-affected countries are able to mend their social
fabric, advance political processes, strengthen institutions, restore State authority
and provide justice and prosperity to all in accordance with the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, we encourage the international donor community to
honour their overseas development assistance commitments and explore additional
pathways for providing debt relief. We also echo the joint appeals of the SecretaryGeneral and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, as well
as the recent calls by a group of Special Rapporteurs on human rights, for the
discontinuation of all unilateral coercive measures that impede countries’ abilities
to address the pandemic. Sanctions create unnecessary suffering in vulnerable
societies. They serve to undermine national ownership and global cooperation,
which are the most basic tenets of sustaining peace.
While we continue to grapple with the peacebuilding implications of COVID-19,
we must renew our efforts to protect the most vulnerable. Concurrently, we must also
maintain a watchful eye on other menacing threats that add further complexity to our
twenty-first-century security landscape, such as climate change. As we look towards
the intergovernmental phase of the 2020 review of the peacebuilding architecture,
32/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

we must work to further strengthen the synergies across the United Nations system,
including by exploring new modalities through the Economic and Social Council for
mobilizing comprehensive development responses to peacebuilding challenges at the
national and regional levels. Only by strengthening and mainstreaming a cohesive
and integrated approach across the peace, security and development nexus can we
provide the inclusive, people-centred and climate-informed solutions needed to
sustain peace.
I conclude by echoing what the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia said
earlier today, “crisis may also create an opening for peace”. (see annex 4). Let us not
waste this opportunity.

20-1078633/120

S/2020/799

Annex 16
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Tunisia to
the United Nations, Tarek Ladeb
At the outset, I would like to thank Indonesia for convening this timely debate.
I also thank the Secretary-General for being with us today and for his tireless efforts
in mobilizing the United Nations system and international efforts to address the
impacts of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. And I also thank former
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Ms. Sarah Cliffe, Director of the Center on
International Cooperation at New York University, for their briefings.
The pandemic caused by the coronavirus disease is a massive global crisis
and an unprecedented challenge that poses a significant threat to international peace
and security and entails a health catastrophe, a profound economic downturn and
serious risks of instability. It is affecting food security, employment, incomes and
livelihoods. It also contributes to the erosion of social cohesion and potentially
exacerbates underlying tensions.
Despite the global nature of the pandemic, which is affecting all countries
without exception, it is mostly hurting those already suffering from conflicts,
violence and unrest. It poses grave risks to traumatized and vulnerable populations
of refugees and displaced people and, as the Secretary-General has observed, it
threatens to highlight the typical root causes and underlying fragilities that can
lead to, or exacerbate, conflict, which are the focus of peacebuilding interventions.
All those aspects of the crisis contribute directly or indirectly to amplifying the
challenges of sustaining peace.
In that connection, the pandemic has posed serious threats to the peace
processes and transitions to peace and stability now under way. Moreover, there have
been disruptions to and difficulties for United Nations peacekeeping operations and
an upsurge in armed conflict in some hotbeds of tension during the pandemic, which
further drives displacement and compounds already dire humanitarian situations.
On 23 March, the Secretary-General called for an immediate global ceasefire
to “silence the guns” and “focus together on the true fight of our lives”. Since
the very beginning of the pandemic, Tunisia has warned of the unprecedented
and multidimensional impacts of the pandemic and the challenges that it poses to
sustaining peace and security, especially in war-ravaged countries and those in
post-conflict situations or facing humanitarian crises. Tunisia therefore expressed
its full support for the Secretary-General’s appeal and believed its immediate
implementation to be a crucial priority.
In that connection, Tunisia focused on the pivotal role of the Security Council
in such critical circumstances in preserving peace and security, silencing the guns
in all corners of the world, ensuring the continuation of peacekeeping and special
political missions and creating conditions for the delivery of life-saving medical aid
to people in places of high vulnerability.
Accordingly, together with France, Tunisia initiated resolution 2532
(2020), which was unanimously adopted on 1 July. The resolution states that
the unprecedented extent of the COVID-19 pandemic is likely to endanger the
maintenance of international peace and security and recognizes that the peacebuilding
and development gains made by countries in transition and post-conflict countries
could be reversed as a result of the pandemic. It also requests the Secretary-General
to provide updates to the Security Council on the impact of COVID-19 on the ability
of peacekeeping operations and special political missions to deliver their mandated
priority tasks.
34/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

We believe that mitigating the impacts of the pandemic and addressing
the challenges it poses to sustaining peace should be within a comprehensive
multidimensional approach and guided by our firm collective political will and our
interest in enhancing solidarity and cooperation at the international, regional and
national levels.
In that context, we stress the importance of the implementation of resolution
2532 (2020) and the exploration of more effective support for war-devastated and
post-conflict countries in order to contain the impacts of the pandemic and make
positive progress on stabilization efforts and the peaceful resolution of conflicts.
Considering that peace is more sustainable when it is locally owned, led
and implemented, it is crucial to focus on strengthening local conflict-resolution
mechanisms, political peace processes and engagement of women and youth in
peacebuilding initiatives, COVID-19 responses and inclusive dialogues.
In the same vein, we stress the importance of promoting cooperation and
partnership between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
given their knowledge of the factors and specificities of conflicts and their ability to
deal with the parties concerned, in addition to their role in achieving and monitoring
peace agreements.
In conclusion, we reiterate Tunisia’s firm commitment to continuing its active
engagement in supporting all initiatives and efforts aimed at addressing the impacts
of the pandemic and maintaining peace and security throughout the world.

20-1078635/120

S/2020/799

Annex 17
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations, Jonathan Allen
I thank Indonesia for convening this debate at this time.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) presents a crisis of unprecedented scope
and complexity. It has triggered health, humanitarian, economic, social, development,
political and security challenges with both immediate and long-term ramifications.
We are seeing how interwoven those challenges are. To quote from a recent article
by the International Crisis Group:
“[I]t would be a brave Ambassador at the UN who would bet that the
health, economic and social fallout from COVID-19 will not lead to more
political instability.”
That is why we have to get the response right, because, if we do not, we may end up
in a scenario that sees decades of progress on peace and development reversed amid
protracted turmoil and human suffering.
As a member of the Council and the only leading economy that meets the
0.7 per cent official development assistance target, the United Kingdom is committed
to doing everything that it can to avoid countries tipping into crisis. In the case
of COVID-19, that means playing our part to ensure coordinated, comprehensive
and collaborative multilateral action. It means prioritizing support to the countries
that are the most vulnerable to shocks. It means ensuring risk-informed, calibrated
responses and mobilizing to prevent crises in a spirit of solidarity.
The United Kingdom is concerned about the impact of COVID-19 on the
world’s most vulnerable people, and we are reprioritizing many of our existing
programmes accordingly. Despite pressures on the global economy, we must
mobilize resources for the countries most in need. That is why, working with India,
the United Kingdom pushed for an ambitious Group of Twenty action plan, including
a $200 billion package of support from the World Bank and regional development
banks for investment in health programmes and emergency fiscal support for the
poorest countries. As our work on a vaccine continues at a pace, we should also
keep striving for a framework that ensures equitable access for the world’s most
vulnerable people.
As I mentioned during the recent dialogue between the Security Council and
the Peacebuilding Commission — co-hosted with Germany, the Niger and your
country, Sir, as President of the Council — the United Kingdom believes that the
United Nations system still needs to do more to integrate peacebuilding and conflict
sensitivity into the global humanitarian, economic and development responses to
COVID-19. This means the United Nations and its partners supporting countries
in order to generate a shared appreciation of conflict risks so as to ensure that
responses do not inadvertently exacerbate drivers of instability. It means continuing
to prioritize issues that we know to be central to a social contract, which underpins
resilience, good governance, inclusion, respect for human rights and the rule of law.
It also means seizing opportunities for dedicated efforts to defuse conflict and build
on peace initiatives.
We should all be ready closely in the Council to take whatever action we can
to support the United Nations in ensuring that countries do not tip into instability or,
if we can, help them to build a pathway to that end.
I want to reiterate the request that the Secretary-General provide further
guidance to the United Nations system on this matter in the form of a policy
36/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

brief on such an approach. The United Nations cannot prevent the loss of peace
and development gains single-handedly. We need to work together to prevent
destabilization. The United Kingdom is gravely concerned about the rising risk of
famine in 2020, hastened by the impact of COVID-19. We will work closely with our
partners to do everything that we can, not only to prepare for, but also to prevent,
catastrophic food insecurity and related instability.
But the complexity of the COVID-19 crisis makes collaboration between the
United Nations and the international financial institutions critical for an effective
international response. The macroeconomic responses led by the international
financial institutions and the socioeconomic responses spearheaded by the United
Nations should be playing complementary roles. Again this requires, as a starting
point, a shared understanding of risks and opportunity based on common analysis
and with that common approach mainstreamed throughout, not only at the very top,
not only at field level, but at all levels in between.
We have said previously that COVID-19 represents a real test of the United
Nations reforms initiated by the Secretary-General. It has brought into even sharper
relief the importance of a One United Nations approach and cross-pillar work to
build and sustain that.
Those concerns have been at the heart of our engagement with the 2020
review of the peacebuilding architecture, and I take this opportunity to thank the
Secretary-General for his 2020 report (S/2020/773). I also take this opportunity to
recognize the work of Canada as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission. We have
been impressed with the agility of the Peacebuilding Commission in its response
to COVID-19 at a time when other United Nations bodies, including, dare I say it,
the Council have been rather slower. As this debate highlights, the peacebuilding
approach is not just a nice to have. It is critical — it is fundamental — to responding
effectively to the most pressing challenges of our time.

20-1078637/120

S/2020/799

Annex 18
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations, Cherith Norman-Chalet
I thank and we very much appreciate you, Minister Marsudi, for holding the
meeting this morning. We also appreciate Indonesia for continuing the Security
Council’s discussion on the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. I also
thank Secretary-General Guterres and former Secretary-General Ban for their
briefings today.
It is difficult to put into words the deep and profound sorrow we feel over
the deaths, illnesses and other terrible consequences that have resulted from the
COVID-19 pandemic, including those affecting health-care and humanitarian
personnel who put their lives on the line every day. They have given to a cause far
greater than themselves, and our hearts and prayers go out to their families and
communities during this difficult time.

Statement by the Political Adviser of the United States to the
United Nations, George Ward
We adopted resolution 2532 (2020) a little over a month ago, supporting
the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire to secure a respite for countries
and regions that, weakened by violence and conflict, are especially vulnerable to
the virus. We should now reflect on how the pandemic has affected particularly
sensitive areas.
I will start by saying we were pleased that several armed groups declared
ceasefires to heed the Secretary-General’s call even before the Security Council
adopted the resolution. As early as April, fighters in 12 countries had put down their
weapons, including those involved in some of the world’s most intractable conflicts.
Unfortunately, as we know, many of these ceasefires are beginning to fall
apart, including in the Philippines. We also note with deep concern the recent
escalation of violence between Armenia and Azerbaijan, and have called on the
sides to resume substantive negotiations to resolve the Nagorno Karabakh conflict as
soon as possible. We strongly urge Governments and other actors around the world
to respect existing ceasefires, or to agree on new ceasefire arrangements so that
they may focus on addressing the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and protecting
their citizens.
We strongly condemn the terrorist organizations that seek to take advantage
of this difficult situation. What a terrible thing, in the middle of this pandemic, as
legitimate Governments focus on containing the virus, that those organizations are
working to advance their recruitment efforts and carrying out criminal, unjustifiable
acts. For example, we have seen racially and ethnically motivated terrorist groups
and actors advancing their interests by spreading disinformation and conspiracies
regarding the virus outbreak and spread of the virus. It is inconceivable how anyone
can be so evil — that is what we are up against.
The Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) has exploited security gaps
in Iraq caused by the pandemic to relaunch a sustained insurgency. Through
propaganda, ISIS, Al-Qaida, and other terrorist groups have used the pandemic as
a recruiting tool. We will continue our legitimate and lawful operations and actions
against those terrorist groups that threaten peace everywhere.

38/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

As the world’s largest humanitarian donor, the United States remains
unwavering in responding to the COVID-19 pandemic; we continue to support critical
programmes in health, water and sanitation, and protection. We take seriously the
Secretary-General’s warning of a generational catastrophe due to ongoing school
closures that have affected more than 1 billion students. We are working directly
with those on the ground combating the virus, including Governments, multilateral
organizations, faith-based organizations, non-governmental organizations, the
private sector, research institutions and other organizations. At the same time, we
look to meaningfully address other risks that may be exacerbated by the pandemic.
The United States has already announced more than $1.6 billion dollars in
additional economic, health and humanitarian aid towards our commitment of nearly
$2 billion in United States foreign assistance to combat COVID-19. That assistance
is part of more than $12 billion provided by the United States Government to benefit
the global response, including through vaccine and therapeutics development,
preparedness efforts and humanitarian assistance. That is in addition to more
than $170 billion in United States investments in global health and humanitarian
assistance over the past 10 years. Indeed, the United States has been the world leader
in such assistance by a large margin.
The international community must remain equally committed to maintaining
its responses to other ongoing humanitarian crises as well. The virus has not only
claimed lives, but crippled economies around the world. Vulnerable and marginalized
populations, including in the United States, have been hit particularly hard by those
secondary effects.
When we consider how best to manage future pandemics and limit their
impact on international security, we must learn from our experiences of COVID-19
and recognize the vital importance of transparency. It is also crucial to ensure
protections are in place for populations in conflict areas and for at-risk groups.
We must not let this virus stall long-standing efforts towards peace and
security. We must not let it divide us. Together with the United Nations and other
international partners, the Trump Administration will continue leading the fight
against this virus during this critical time. And we will do all we can to ensure a
world that is safer and more secure, now and in the future.

20-1078639/120

S/2020/799

Annex 19
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Australia to the
United Nations
The global pandemic has impacted the whole world profoundly and poses
particular risks for fragile and conflict-affected countries. We are seeing hard-won
peacebuilding and development gains jeopardized, economic challenges exacerbated
and societal tensions increased. Responding to the health, economic and social
ramifications of the pandemic is now a central challenge, not just for individual
States, but for the multilateral system. The United Nations, international financial
institutions, regional organizations, non-governmental organizations and Member
States need to work together and ensure that a conflict prevention perspective is
incorporated into all responses to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19).
Australia supports the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire and
continues to provide long-term core funding to the United Nations peacebuilding
agencies. We welcome the adoption of resolution 2532 (2020) and commend the
important contribution of United Nations peace operations and country teams to
local and national COVID-19 efforts around the world.
In this crisis, we must continue to recognize the importance of social cohesion,
resilience and inclusive approaches. We commend the United Nations peacebuilding
agencies for consistently promoting gendered and youth perspectives, as well as the
long-term peacebuilding efforts of the United Nations in the Pacific, particularly
in Papua New Guinea and the Solomon Islands. We urge the United Nations and
Member States to intensify efforts to support the meaningful inclusion of women and
youth as agents of change in shaping our global pandemic response. This is essential
given the evidence that the negative impacts of COVID-19 are disproportionately
affecting already vulnerable groups in society, including women and youth.
We must not let the pandemic or our responses to it undermine gender equality,
development, peacebuilding or human rights gains. We must use its disruption and
urgency as an opportunity to build back better, including through taking forward
United Nations reforms. This debate is particularly timely in the context of the
peacebuilding architecture review. We welcome the Secretary-General’s report on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace (S/2020/773), which highlights good progress in
a number of areas, particularly in relation to the resident coordinators’ offices, which
have a critical role in managing the COVID-19 response of the United Nations. We
urge all stakeholders to continue to drive the implementation of the sustaining peace
agenda. That work is vital, not only to combating the pandemic, but to creating
resilience for other global challenges to come.

40/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

Annex 20
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Azerbaijan to the
United Nations, Yashar Aliyev
At the outset, I would like to congratulate the delegation of the Republic of
Indonesia on assuming the presidency of the Security Council and warmly welcome
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, Her Excellency Mrs. Retno Marsudi.
I would also like commend the Republic of Indonesia for convening this high-level
open debate on the theme “Pandemics and the challenges of sustaining peace”.
The current situation demands common action to address effectively and in a
timely manner the difficulties the international community is facing while carrying
out peacebuilding efforts amid the pandemic. As stated in the concept note for this
high-level open debate, “International cooperation, collaboration and collective
responsibility with regard to principles-based multilateralism are essential.”
(S/2020/765, annex, para. 6)
Azerbaijan spares no effort in contributing to enhancing international solidarity,
promoting multilateralism and mobilizing support and resources. The Government
of Azerbaijan has made two donations to the World Health Organization and has also
provided urgent humanitarian aid to 29 countries affected by the pandemic.
The initiative of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan, His Excellency
Mr. Ilham Aliyev, put forward in his capacity as Chair of the Non-Aligned
Movement, to convene a special session of the General Assembly on the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic at the level of the Heads of State and Government,
has received overwhelming support from more than two-thirds of Member States
from all regions and political groups. Accordingly, on 10 July, the thirty-first special
session of the General Assembly commenced its proceedings.
Azerbaijan welcomed the adoption this July of resolution 2532 (2020), which
recognized that the unprecedented extent of the COVID-19 pandemic is likely to
endanger the maintenance of international peace and security, demanding, in
particular, a general and immediate cessation of hostilities in all situations on its
agenda and calling upon all parties to armed conflicts to engage immediately in a
durable humanitarian pause.
Being an important tool for the cessation of hostilities and humanitarian action,
ceasefire accords must be implemented in good faith to achieve a speedy political
settlement. Unfortunately, in some situations of armed conflict, spurious peacefulness
and declared commitment to truce and ceasefire, along with misinterpretation of
the objectives of the humanitarian principles, are among the means that aggressors
frequently employ in attempts to freeze military gains achieved as a result of the
unlawful use of force and other actions in contravention of the Charter of the United
Nations and international law.
Therefore, over the years passed since the establishment of the ceasefire
between Armenia and Azerbaijan in 1994, the armed forces of Armenia have regularly
violated the ceasefire, targeting the towns and villages in Azerbaijan situated along
the front line and the border between the two States to direct and indiscriminate
attacks. Such attacks continue notwithstanding the appeal of the Secretary-General
for a global ceasefire. Furthermore, Armenia has pursued the deliberate policy
of consolidating the status quo of the occupation, including by strengthening its
military build-up in the seized territories and changing their demographic, cultural
and physical character, in clear violation of international law. Neither the ongoing
peace process nor a global public health emergency have convinced the aggressor to
halt illegal activities.
20-1078641/120

S/2020/799

On the contrary, even the devastating impact of the COVID-19 pandemic
has not prevented Armenia from continuing its armed provocations. On 12 July, in
blatant violation of international law, Armenia launched a cross-border attack against
Azerbaijan in the Tovuz district, with the use of artillery and mortars, resulting
in a number of casualties, including civilians, and necessitating a strong response
in order to neutralize Armenian fire and deter it from further acts of aggression.
Therefore, Armenia’s statement on its alleged support for and adherence to the appeal
of the Secretary-General for a global ceasefire is nothing other than utter falsehood.
No doubt, Armenia’s objective is not to save lives and alleviate the sufferings of
people in need, but to prevent more than 700,000 forcibly displaced Azerbaijanis
from returning to their homes and colonize the territories it has ethnically cleansed
and occupied.
Over the past few decades, the United Nations leading role in strengthening
international efforts to sustain peace has produced notable progress in settling
disputes, resolving conflicts, eradicating colonialism and restoring hope to those
affected by war and instability. However, serious challenges remain, with the
continued resurgence of conflict, increased levels of displacement and hate-driven
violence. People throughout the world continue to suffer from prolonged foreign
occupation, ethnic cleansing and the lack of accountability for serious violations of
international law. Protracted conflicts and their political, military and humanitarian
consequences must be addressed properly. Guided by the spirit of the Charter of the
United Nations and international law, a comprehensive approach must be adopted
to address the multidimensional risks to sustained peace posed by the global
COVID-19 pandemic.

42/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

Annex 21
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Bangladesh to the
United Nations, Rabab Fatima
I thank the Indonesian presidency for organizing today’s high-level debate
on this important topic. Let me also take this opportunity to express my sincere
appreciation to Her Excellency Mrs. Retno L.P. Marsudi, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Indonesia, for presiding over this meeting. I thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-Moon and Ms. Sarah Cliffe for their insightful briefings.
The spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and the multidimensional
disruptions caused by it is proving to have profound and long-lasting implications
for societies, including, in some contexts, inflaming existing grievances and threats
facing communities. In particular, this has intensified the challenges of peacebuilding
and sustaining peace in countries which are already affected by fragility, conflict and
violence. Tackling COVID-19 is doubly hard in countries where social and economic
conditions were already unstable because of weak governance and State institutions,
and unequal access to services for vulnerable populations. Many among them also
face compounding challenges, including climate change shocks, forced displacement
and food insecurity. In some contexts, Government responses to the unfolding crisis
have exposed the existing structural inequalities. We have seen a noticeable increase
in gender-based violence and a decline in access to basic services, alongside justice
and health care, which disproportionately affects women and girls.
It is therefore important that countries’ immediate response and longer-term
investments address these realities in order to avoid exacerbating existing sources
of fragility and instead help build resilience, to both this crisis and future shocks.
To achieve this, a major reorientation of peacebuilding approaches to respond to this
multidimensional threat is required. Such approaches need to be conflict-sensitive
and risk-informed, and should incorporate provisions for the most vulnerable and
marginalized in society. If not addressed appropriately, our apprehensions are
that efforts undertaken may undermine the peacebuilding gains made to date, and
complicate future efforts to build more peaceful and inclusive societies.
National Governments in conflict-affected countries are doing their best
to save lives and mitigate the worst socioeconomic impacts. However, efforts by
national Governments alone will not be enough to tackle the crisis; they need to
be complemented through responsible and collaborative approaches from the
international community.
Let me share my thoughts for addressing the many impacts of the COVID-19
pandemic on peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
First, a system-wide implementation of the sustaining peace approach is
critical to ensure that the United Nations response contributes to decreasing risks
of violent conflict in the longer term, including efforts to build back better. In
this context, the value of the humanitarian-development-peacebuilding nexus in
particular gains more relevance. The United Nations system, national Governments
and international partners should avoid focusing only on emergency response;
rather, all should collaborate to work across the three pillars. Given that the risk
factors for violence may be increasing during this crisis, building back better is also
an opportunity to promote peaceful societies.
Secondly, the activities of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in
supporting conflict-affected countries must factor in the need for investing more
in State institutions, including those dealing with health, law enforcement, disaster

20-1078643/120

S/2020/799

management, food security and education. Peacebuilding Fund projects should take
this duly into consideration.
Thirdly, in the changed situations on the ground brought about by the pandemic,
peacebuilding efforts can draw upon the adjustments already being exercised by
peacekeeping in certain common areas. Reorientation in community outreach, the
implementation of the women and peace and security agenda, addressing infodemics,
and the protection of civilians could be some such areas to consider.
Fourthly, the Secretary-General’s global ceasefire appeal and resolution 2532
(2020) could be used as the leveraging tools for rallying national Governments
and warring parties to peacebuilding efforts. In that regard, the Security Council’s
explicit support for the work of the PBC will be crucial.
Fifthly, as recommended in the Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2020/773)
on the comprehensive review of the peacebuilding architecture, the Peacebuilding
Commission should enhance its partnership with regional and subregional
organizations, including the African Union Peace and Security Council. That has
become more relevant in the context of the pandemic. Greater engagement between
the Council and such regional and subregional peace and security organizations
could be the way forward. That would help customize peacebuilding activities to
regional and subregional realities, and hence make them more effective.
Sixthly, specific initiatives could be piloted in countries on the agenda.
Current movement restrictions provide an opportunity to think about how to be
more inclusive, since we have been able to work from home but still connect to
each other. New actors can be included in the conversation as we create more robust
virtual platforms. It can also change dynamics within societies. For example, since
the disease affects young people to a lesser extent, it gives them an opportunity to be
more active and meaningful contributors to building peace in their societies.
Finally, the Peacebuilding Commission could play a more concrete role
in mobilizing funding to respond to increased peacebuilding challenges linked
to the COVID-19 crisis in the most fragile countries and vulnerable sectors of
societies, including women and girls, by deepening partnerships with international
and regional financial institutions, as well as with non-traditional actors such as
private corporations and philanthropic organizations. Attracting private-sector
funding for peacebuilding may not be easy when the global economy as a whole is
contracting, let alone when it comes to the economies of countries emerging from
conflict. Yet sectors that flourished during the pandemic — such as e-commerce,
telemedicine, online education, as well as building the digital backbone — are areas
where such partnerships could potentially be envisaged. The Security Council can
play a convening role in such contexts to facilitate a system-wide push towards the
sustaining peace agenda.
In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm Bangladesh’s commitment to peacebuilding
and sustaining peace and our willingness to remain engaged in further strengthening
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture at a time when peacebuilding and
conflict prevention have become more challenging.

44/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

Annex 22
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Brazil to the United Nations
Brazil is thankful to the Indonesian presidency of the Security Council
for organizing this high-level open video-teleconference on pandemics and
the challenges of sustaining peace. We also thank Secretary-General António
Guterres, former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and all the other briefers for their
insightful considerations.
Brazil attaches great importance to the effectiveness of United Nations efforts
to build and sustain peace. Within our collective peace and security paradigm,
investment in sustaining peace has proven to be most cost-effective approach.
Particularly when considered in comparison with crisis-oriented approaches
to maintain peace and security, the long-term engagement provided under the
peacebuilding framework tends to be better suited to addressing underlying causes
of conflict and strengthening national ownership and capacities to sustain peace.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic poses additional challenges to
already vulnerable populations in conflict-affected countries. Brazil has supported
the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire in the wake of this crisis, as, in our
view, the historic humanitarian pause proposed by resolution 2532 (2020) deserves
our full unwavering support. Bearing the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, the Security Council has a crucial role, under
the terms of the Charter of the United Nations, in contributing to strengthening
international cooperation efforts to alleviate the socioeconomic impacts of the
pandemic in the context of sustaining peace.
Brazil encourages the United Nations and its Member States to enhance
support of nationally defined responses to the pandemic. It is important to speed
up cooperation projects tailored to the specific needs of populations on the ground
and to prioritize initiatives that generate concrete results for those communities. In
that context, promoting access to safe, quality, effective and affordable medicines,
vaccines and medical products and supporting a multisectoral approach are essential
elements in the fight against COVID-19 that can contribute to lasting peace.
Special attention must also be given to the balance between short- and longterm support. Similarly to security threats, humanitarian and health crises tend to
focus our attention on the most immediate needs of populations at risk in conflictstricken countries. Even though some of that emergency assistance can fall outside
of the domain of development cooperation, it is essential that new humanitarian
pledges be appropriately integrated into broad peace efforts and converge with the
long-term goal of promoting structural development and lasting peace.
Since the beginning of April, the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) has
redoubled its efforts to counter the possible negative impacts of COVID-19 in
peacebuilding efforts. The PBC is particularly well-positioned to help conflictaffected and post-conflict countries address multidimensional challenges pertaining
to the intersection between development and peace. The PBC should therefore
continue to offer its platform to host discussions on the specific needs of countries
engaged in peacebuilding, at their request. By making full use of its advisory
capacities, the PBC can also assist the Security Council, the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council to coordinate their efforts and better serve the
interests of Member States.
Peacekeeping missions have also offered relevant contributions in assisting
national efforts in response to the pandemic. Together with Indonesia, Brazil
has chaired the working group responsible for discussing the peacebuilding
20-1078645/120

S/2020/799

and sustaining peace pillar of the Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping
initiative. Through the Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations, Member States have agreed that the role of peacekeepers
as early peacebuilders should be further enhanced and properly funded. Given the
emergence of the COVID-19 crisis, there is an urgent call for peacekeeping missions
to strengthen these components and improve their coordination with other forms
of United Nations presence in the field in order to ensure that nationally defined
peacebuilding and development goals can be fully realized. The continued support
from the international community throughout the whole peace continuum is also
especially important during mission transitions and drawdowns, with the aim of
preserving hard-won peacebuilding gains and preventing countries from relapsing
into conflict.
Finally, as we recall the commitments under the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative, as well as the upcoming anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), on women and peace and security, Brazil would like to acknowledge the
disproportionate toll that the pandemic has taken on women and girls, especially in
the context of conflict-affected countries. In this sense, we call on the international
community to recognize the challenges facing women peacebuilders and local
women’s organizations during the crisis, including those caused by a lack of funding,
some of which has been diverted to projects dealing directly with COVID-19. As
established by the Security Council, the presence of women on the ground has a
positive impact on peacekeeping and peacebuilding initiatives, including the
protection of civilians, a role made only more crucial in these trying times. Brazil
extends its support to international initiatives under way to mitigate the additional
difficulties brought about by the pandemic on the work of women on the ground.

46/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

Annex 23
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Chile to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
We thank the Indonesian presidency of the Security Council for organizing
this debate, as well as the Secretary-General, former Secretary-General Ban
Ki-Moon, representing, The Elders, and Ms. Sarah Cliffe, Director of the Center for
International Cooperation at New York University, for their briefings.
It is particularly timely that the Council take up this topic, especially as a
robust and coordinated multilateral responses are required across the United Nations
system and relevant specialized agencies, delivering on time and where needed most
during the current global coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
We therefore believe that, alongside urgent responses to tackle the pandemic,
it is essential to work towards peacebuilding and sustaining peace in areas at risk,
to appropriately tackle emerging threats and preserve the gains made through years
of international efforts and United Nations presence on the ground, as well as to
lay the foundation for solid and comprehensive post-pandemic recovery, including
preventing associated risks to international peace and security.
In this way, together with the people-centred preventative approach adopted
within the United Nations, we have come to better grasp the multidimensional
complexity that such emerging threats entail, since the possible ripple effects of the
pandemic as a catalyst for violence and instability in areas of high volatility are of
great concern to the Council’s work.
Chile joined the Secretary-General’s global ceasefire call last March, especially
in the light of reports of the disproportionate impact of COVID-19 on vulnerable
populations, above all on women and girls — because of both the prevalence of
sexual and gender-based violence in situations of conflict of tension, and the crucial
role played by women on the front lines of the pandemic as essential health workers.
We therefore underscore the role of women in peace and security processes
in addressing such new threats, and, moreover, almost 20 years on from the
adoption of the resolution 1325 (2000), we continue to recognize the key role
women play in sustaining peace through their participation in building resilient and
cohesive societies.
Let me reiterate, on behalf of my country, that one of the main requirements
in mounting an adequate response to these new threats necessarily involves
international solidarity, and, although we understand that peaceful conditions would
be the ideal context in which to tackle a pandemic, we recognize that conditions on
the ground often pose adverse challenge to solidarity. It is therefore vital to count
on the commitment of all relevant actors to guarantee safe and secure access for the
delivery of international assistance, with due regard to the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations.
In conclusion, we would like to acknowledge in particular how, through
discussions such as this and the resolution adopted last month, the Security Council
is contributing to the most urgent efforts and interests of the Organization and
its Member States. We hope that discussion will continue on the various aspects
identified during this debate, as well as on lessons learned previously, to address
the challenges pandemics pose on the ground, including to peacebuilding, and with
regard to mandates for the maintenance of international peace and security.

20-1078647/120

S/2020/799

Annex 24
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Colombia to the
United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
I thank Indonesia for convening this open debate, as well as SecretaryGeneral António Guterres, former Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon and Sarah
Cliffe, Director of the Center on International Cooperation at New York University,
for their briefings.
Today I would like to discuss the activities undertaken by the Government
of Colombia to respond effectively to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and to
continue making decisive efforts towards peacebuilding. I also wish to share our
vision of the important role that the Peacebuilding Commission is playing and the
challenges it faces in the midst of the pandemic.
My country firmly believes that our response to the situation we currently
face must be guided by the principles of solidarity, inclusion and respect for human
rights. COVID-19 is not only a public health emergency; it is also a socioeconomic
one, affecting the most vulnerable around the globe. In this regard, we must ensure
the protection of citizens’ lives by strengthening the response capacity of our health
institutions and by offering economic alternatives.
Like other countries, Colombia is facing monumental challenges. My
Government has implemented comprehensive measures to safeguard public health,
provide support to the most vulnerable, safeguard jobs, protect productive sectors
and guarantee the well-being of our citizens.
In the context of the pandemic, Colombia is proceeding with its firm
commitment to implementing the terms of the 2016 Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. We have continued to make
progress in the areas of work under the Peace with Legality policy. Its implementation
is a priority for the Government of President Duque Márquez.
Among the main challenges that this situation has brought to light in a
country such as Colombia is finding a balance between health care and economic
activity. Efforts to foster social cohesion and resilience, as well as empowering local
communities in all sectors by effectively supporting initiatives by women, young
people and other key actors, are important in meeting the socioeconomic challenges
resulting from the pandemic.
In Colombia, all the agencies in charge of implementing the policy on peace
with legality have adopted measures for the prevention, care of and mitigation of the
risks posed by COVID-19. The beneficiaries of those measures include ex-combatants,
victims and farmers committed to the comprehensive national programme for the
substitution of illicit crops.
We also continue to work hard in the area of the approval, financing and
execution of development projects in the 170 municipalities most affected by violence
and poverty, in which development plans with a territorial approach are being carried
out. The stabilization efforts undertaken in those municipalities are financed mainly
through the national budget, complemented by other public and private funds as well
as international cooperation. The international community remains committed to
providing support and has expressed its confidence in the results achieved.
I would like to underline that the Government has placed special emphasis
on the participation of women in the consolidation of peace. The implementation
48/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

of that policy offers women, particularly rural women, better living conditions that
translate into their empowerment and economic autonomy, as well as the creation
of workspaces in conditions of dignity and equality, with the aim of breaking the
cycles of violence that violate women’s rights. I would highlight in particular the
work being done by the gender group on the approval of productive projects within
the framework of the reintegration processes set out in the 2016 agreement.
With regard to gender violence, in the context of the pandemic the Government
has worked to mitigate the impacts of COVID-19 on women’s rights, including
specific guidelines to prevent and address such violence.
I would like to highlight the role of the Peacebuilding Commission during these
months. Colombia, in its capacity as Vice-Chair of the Commission, is convinced that
the Commission has made clear the added value that its convening power brings to
the table, and, as such, we have met to discuss and advance peacebuilding priorities
in the framework of the pandemic. The lessons shared in the Commission represent
a vital input for the decisions that the Security Council must take and the work that
it must carry out at this difficult time for humankind.
In that context, the commitment of international financial organizations and
public and private donors is key in order to ensure the smooth flow of resources
and information in order to achieve a more effective response. We need to reach a
global consensus with the international financial institutions in order to increase the
resources necessary to reduce payments on emerging countries’ debt and contribute
to their development. Financing for peacebuilding is linked to development and
addressing the root causes of conflict.
Without economic growth, countries emerging from conflict situations and now
facing the crisis resulting from the pandemic cannot generate enough opportunities
for their citizens. For that reason, coordinated work among Governments and all
the United Nations institutions on the ground is essential. In the case of Colombia,
we have a country team of extraordinary professionalism in addition to the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia. Cooperation on the part of the Mission
and the country team with the Government has been very positive and constructive
over the years.
It should be stressed that international donor funds can never be enough for a
country in the process of peacebuilding that is also facing a pandemic. Such funds
work better as catalysts than as ongoing sources of funding.
I want to emphasize that peacebuilding is not an easy task even in normal
times. Reaching an agreement is only an initial step. Achieving the transformations
necessary to make those agreements a reality is the difficult, lengthy and most
challenging part.
In that respect, neither individual countries nor the United Nations system can
ignore the implications of complex contexts such as the pandemic or a socioeconomic
crisis, which could threaten peace and security. This is a time for multilateral
cooperation and international solidarity. We have to aim for two goals: humanitarian
care and economic recovery.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the commitment of the Government
of President Iván Duque Márquez to the construction of a peace with legality. The
support of the United Nations is decisive in order to achieve development in the
territories most affected by violence and poverty.
In the midst of the current global crisis, we will spare no effort to continue
to dedicate all possible resources to achieving the results that our citizens deserve.

20-1078649/120

S/2020/799

Annex 25
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Costa Rica to the
United Nations, Rodrigo A. Carazo
[Original: Spanish]
Costa Rica thanks Indonesia, as President of the Security Council during the
month of August, for having convened this debate, as well as Mr. António Guterres,
Secretary-General, and briefers Mr. Ban Ki-moon, former Secretary-General, and
Ms. Sarah Cliffe, Director of the Center on International Cooperation, New York
University, for their contributions to this debate.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has impacted all sectors of society,
creating multiple crises that threaten peace and stability. Its impact is and will
continue to be greater in countries in conflict or emerging from it, hence the
importance of this debate.
Even though the Security Council has not recognized the new coronavirus
pandemic as a threat to international peace and security — which does not mean
that it is not — the Council must ensure that it does not pose yet another threat
to peace processes and undermine the gains already made. In the Council are the
world’s main arms exporters, and Costa Rica would remind those countries of the
need to carry out international arms transfers in a responsible manner, thus helping
to prevent violent conflicts and alleviate tensions.
It is largely up to the Council to respond to the Secretary-General’s call for
a global ceasefire and to redouble its efforts to ensure that in those conflicts in
which it has not yet been possible to silence the guns, that goal can be achieved in a
timely manner.
The most vulnerable and unprotected are those who are suffering twice, as a
result of both the conflict and the health emergency. Boys, girls and women require
special protection at this time. It is not acceptable for hospital facilities and care
centres for COVID-19 patients to be targeted by groups in conflict, especially when
health systems cannot cope with the pandemic. The Governments of the world and
their resources have to be focused on fighting the virus that has caused this crisis.
Silencing the guns will help bring immediate humanitarian relief but will
not ensure the consolidation of the peace to which we all aspire. Lasting peace will
be achieved if the only fight waged is against the pandemic and the socioeconomic
effects of the prevention measures taken, mainly in areas where conflicts prevail and
in countries with fewer resources.
That will be achieved only if we comply with the mandate of the Charter of the
United Nations as contained in Article 26, which demands that the Security Council
promote the establishment and maintenance of international peace and security with
the least diversion for armaments of the world’s human and economic resources.
Costa Rica fully supports the Secretary-General’s call for solidarity and the
creation of a fund dedicated to COVID-19, as well as General Assembly resolution
74/270, but we must guarantee that such resources are used only for sustainable
development and peacebuilding.
The steps that we take to recover from the impact of the pandemic must
involve building and rebuilding egalitarian and inclusive societies, in keeping with
the commitment that we made when, as Members of the Organization, we adopted
the Sustainable Development Goals. We must not lose sight of the fact that where
there exist inequalities such as those suffered by young people and women, which are
50/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

accentuated in crisis and conflict situations, organized crime and extremist groups
will exploit them for their own gain, threatening lasting peace.
To conclude, the Security Council must remain vigilant so that the achievements
made in terms of international peace and security are not reversed, as COVID-19
has pushed many countries to the brink of a societal crisis and revealed political
discontent in others. Some States will not be able to face those consequences on their
own, and therefore the response they require must come from the United Nations
system as a whole, based on international cooperation and the spirit of solidarity
reflected in the purposes and principles of the Charter and expanded on in the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.

20-1078651/120

S/2020/799

Annex 26
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Denmark to the
United Nations, Martin Bille Hermann
I have the pleasure to submit this statement on behalf of the Nordic countries:
Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and Denmark.
Today’s debate on peacebuilding and pandemics is timely, as we are
about to embark on the formal phase of the 2020 review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture.
The impact of the pandemic constitutes an additional threat multiplier
that risks reversing the hard-won peacebuilding gains. For many communities in
conflict-affected countries, the pandemic is a catastrophe on top of a crisis. Fragile
and conflict-affected countries face the challenge of having to address the urgent
health and humanitarian impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) while
continuing to implement peacebuilding efforts in increasingly complex conflict
scenarios. We have also seen how the pandemic and its devastating socioeconomic
repercussions can deepen the root causes of fragility and conflict, such as inequality,
food insecurity and the consequences of unmitigated climate change. In combination
with a growing number of human rights violations and abuses, increasing racism
and discrimination and rising incitement to hatred and violence, as well as countless
examples of the spread of misinformation and disinformation about the pandemic,
this threatens to escalate ongoing conflict and displacement, foment new tensions
and reverse humanitarian, development and peacebuilding progress.
We, the Members of the United Nations, must therefore resolve to take
immediate and coordinated action to effectively mitigate the escalatory potential
of the pandemic while strengthening long-term foundations for lasting peace.
Sustaining peace is one of the core tasks of the United Nations and must be a shared
responsibility that flows across the entire peace continuum and all three pillars of
the United Nations engagement.
We encourage the Security Council in particular to leverage all the tools at
its disposal to support an integrated and coordinated United Nations response to the
various phases of often complex conflicts, including prevention and peacebuilding.
In particular, we hope to see even closer and more timely cooperation between
the Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). We welcome the
recently convened informal interactive dialogue between the PBC and the Security
Council and encourage continued engagement between these two bodies going
forward. The PBC can offer valuable advice, including during the early stages of
mandate formulation through to review and drawdown strategies.
The impact of the ongoing pandemic on conflict dynamics has underlined
the need for peace operations’ mandates to be adaptable to changing political and
operational challenges through the various stages of United Nations missions’
engagement. Member State commitment, solidarity and flexibility are essential for
peace operations to deliver on their mandate. We therefore reiterate our support
for the Secretary-General’s sustaining peace agenda as well as the Action for
Peacekeeping agenda.
United Nations special political missions and peacekeeping operations play
an important role at the country level in addressing the root causes of conflict by
building capacity and fostering continued progress on peacebuilding processes,
thereby increasing resilience to ongoing and future crises. What we do today has
bearing on the longer term. We encourage a renewed commitment to integrating the
efforts of United Nations peace operations with responses by the United Nations
52/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

country team and to ensure coherence between humanitarian, development, human
rights and peacebuilding efforts under the stewardship of an empowered Resident
Coordinator. That includes engaging all relevant actors in the design of the United
Nations sustainable development cooperation frameworks, as well as adopting a
conflict-sensitive approach to humanitarian and development programming. These
efforts are crucial to reinforcing the link between the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the sustaining peace agenda.
Human rights must not become a casualty of the pandemic. The obligation to
respect, protect and fulfil human rights must be front and centre in our response.
Democracy and the rule of law must be upheld. The Secretary-General’s February
call to action on human rights is a tool at our disposal that we must apply in order
to ensure that efforts to address the ongoing crisis do not exacerbate existing
inequalities and the root causes of conflict but rather contribute to strengthening
resilience and sustaining peace. We welcome the recent convening of an informal
exchange between the Security Council and the Human Rights Council and hope to
see similar exchanges happen more frequently.
From the onset of the pandemic, women have been on the frontlines as
responders, caregivers and leaders in their communities. Alongside the COVID-19
crisis, a pandemic within the pandemic is happening, with increased levels of abuse
and sexual and gender-based violence perpetrated against women and girls. Making
sure that women are included in decision-making and that a gender-transformative
approach is applied at all stages of peacebuilding must be our common priority.
We now have an opportunity to constructively advance the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda as part of the short- and long-term
response to the pandemic. To ensure effective and context-specific advances on
the women and peace and security agenda on the ground, we urge the Security
Council to further utilize the recommendations provided by the Informal Expert
Group on Women and Peace and Security. We also welcome the recent brief from the
Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and UN-Women on COVID-19 and
conflict. Ensuring a holistic multi-stakeholder approach that advances the inclusive
and meaningful participation of women, youth, indigenous peoples and persons
belonging to marginalized groups, such as minorities and persons with disabilities,
is key to sustainably addressing the long-term implications of the pandemic in
conflict-affected settings while sustaining momentum on peace processes.
Partnerships are essential both in dealing with the immediate consequences of
the current pandemic in the context of sustaining peace and in working to strengthen
resilience to future crises. To that end, it is important that both the Security Council
and United Nations peace operations harness a broad range of capacities and
expertise by collaborating with local peace actors, as well as regional and subregional
organizations. Such entities have proved critical in the face of the access restrictions
imposed during the pandemic, and they provide a long-term presence, remaining
well beyond mission drawdown.
In a similar vein, we would like to see the United Nations and the World
Bank deepen their alignment of capacities, tools and resources in support of national
Governments. There is a need for integrated analysis and joint strategies. Such a
strengthened partnership between the United Nations and international financial
institutions could be leveraged to reduce the risk of conflict, sustain peace and
mitigate the long-term negative impacts of the pandemic by building back better and
greener as a result of the crisis, in line with the commitments of the Paris Agreement
on Climate Change.

20-1078653/120

S/2020/799

The economic fallout from the pandemic, combined with the reversal of peace
gains, makes it as important as ever to galvanize efforts to leverage new financing
and foster collaboration with new partners. We need to think innovatively about ways
to increase sustainable, predictable, more coherent and better coordinated financing
for peacebuilding. On the one hand, we need to mobilize additional funding for the
Peacebuilding Fund, which plays an important role as a catalytic and flexible tool
for peacebuilding. But there is also an opportunity to further engage the private
sector, where relevant, in conflict prevention and peacebuilding efforts. Beyond
funding, the private sector can also support entrepreneurial action in communities
to better recover from the crisis, while mobilizing support for peacebuilding efforts.
As countries emerge from the crisis, it is critical to support skills development and
create opportunities for decent jobs in more resilient and less vulnerable sectors
and industries.
In conclusion, the ongoing pandemic serves as a stark reminder of the need
for global solidarity and reinvigorated multilateral cooperation, not least in support
of the peacebuilding agenda. Our collective response will determine how fast and
how well the world recovers. In recent years, the international community has made
important progress towards a shared commitment to the sustaining peace agenda.
The different branches of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture must now
be adequately empowered to urgently do their part to translate those principles into
tangible results on the ground. The only way to emerge stronger from this crisis
and prevent future ones is through a cross-pillar approach that prioritizes conflict
prevention and addresses the root causes of conflict.

54/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

Annex 27
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Ecuador to
the United Nations, Helena Yánez Loza
[Original: Spanish]
Let me begin by congratulating Indonesia on having accepted the request
from several countries, including Ecuador, for the ongoing consideration of the risks
to international peace and security posed by the pandemic. This dialogue should in
fact be included in the formal agenda of the Security Council throughout the year so
that we can assess the evolving situation.
I would also like to highlight the briefings by Secretary-General António
Guterres (annex 1), former Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon (annex 2) and Ms. Sarah
Cliffe, Director of the Center on International Cooperation at New York University
(annex 3).
By adopting resolution 2532 (2020), on the coronavirus disease (COVID-19),
on 1 July, the Security Council decisively joined the global efforts to combat the
pandemic and those to mitigate and overcome the challenges that it is posing to
peace and security. It is now crucial that the Security Council and all States Members
of the Organization promote the effective implementation of the resolution, which
calls for an immediate and comprehensive cessation of hostilities in all situations
and calls on all parties to armed conflicts to engage immediately in a humanitarian
pause for at least 90 days.
It is particularly important to implement the global ceasefire in order to
facilitate humanitarian access and as a first step towards sustainable peace, as
proposed by the Secretary-General and endorsed by 172 countries through the
ceasefire statement co-sponsored by Ecuador.
Ecuador advocates that it be complied with now and that the call for a
humanitarian pause be renewed for another 90 days, by 1 October. It would also be
useful for the Security Council and the Secretariat to be regularly informed where
the resolution is being implemented and in which areas greater support is needed to
ensure its effective implementation.
The COVID-19 pandemic has already marked a turning point in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding efforts, and it is occurring in the very year of the peacebuilding
architecture review. Once the formal part of the review begins, we will need to take
into account the outcome of this debate and acknowledge that pandemics exacerbate
crisis conditions on the ground and undermine security and stability, thereby
threatening peace. We need to promote efforts to improve the security conditions
surrounding health systems and infrastructure. We also need to make progress on a
coordinated international response.
Moreover, we should redouble our efforts to ensure that this and future
pandemics do not affect the Organization’s new approach to preventive diplomacy.
For example, we must therefore support the border areas of countries suffering
from conflicts, as well as their neighbours, as Ecuador has been proposing in the
consultations on implementing resolutions 2282 (2016) and 2413 (2018).
Advancing the sustainable peace agenda did not anticipate a global crisis
such as that resulting from COVID-19. However, it now requires cross-cutting and
coordinated measures to combat COVID-19 and capacity-building so as to better
address pandemics in the future, including through more robust and resilient peace
and security frameworks.
20-1078655/120

S/2020/799

Annex 28
Statement by the Permanent Mission of El Salvador to the
United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
El Salvador thanks the presidency of the Security Council for its interest in
continuing to address the challenges posed by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, particularly those related to global peace and security, as well as all the
efforts to hold this open debate.
At the outset, my country commends the outstanding work of peacekeepers
around the world and pays tribute to the men and women who have given their
lives for peace and whose work and commitment will endure over the years in the
history of the Organization and of the countries that they so honourably represent.
El Salvador reaffirms its commitment to peacekeeping operations by contributing
its highly trained police and military personnel. Given the great challenges posed by
the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, the importance of that mechanism, which
has given hope to thousands of people around the world, has been highlighted now
more than ever.
The Salvadoran military and police forces will continue to support the efforts
undertaken by the Secretary-General and the Governments of the countries that have
a peace operation on their territories.
As mentioned above, El Salvador believes that the pandemic represents a
serious threat to peace and security and could mean a setback in the achievement of
economic and social development. Furthermore, it highlights the fragilities of many
peace processes, threatening the population’s access to basic services, unfortunately
opening the door to stigmatization and hate speech, and increasing economic
differences among the population.
The pandemic also jeopardizes the population’s levels of trust in public
institutions, which may be further eroded in places where authorities are perceived
to have not addressed the pandemic effectively or to have not been transparent
about its impact. As institutions lose trust, they become more vulnerable and fuel
social unrest, which could lead to even greater conflict because of the limited scope
for action by States and the eroded political capital of Governments to address
this challenge.
The pandemic requires considerable attention to mitigate its consequences
and care for the population so that irreparable loss of life and a health system crisis
in affected countries can be avoided. At the same time, it could create a major
distraction from addressing all the threats to peace and security, which could be
used by terrorist, extremist and organized crime groups to advance their illegal
operations, exploiting the uncertainty created by COVID-19 as a tactical advantage.
El Salvador has taken note of the humanitarian difficulties in different
countries and regions of the world and is paying close attention to how these have
increased over the past few months as a result of the pandemic. My country calls for
respect for international humanitarian law, improving systems for the protection of
civilians in conflict regions and ensuring access to humanitarian assistance, through
the principles established by the Organization. The pandemic cannot be a pretext for
putting democracy and the rule of law at risk, which is why it calls on all political
forces to take the necessary measures to guarantee the scheduled elections and
reproaches all those attempts to ignore these important agreements, which will only
fuel political tensions.
56/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

The threats posed by the pandemic require an urgent and unique response,
based on understanding among all parts of this Organization, cooperation and
international solidarity. El Salvador welcomes the fact that some 180 States have
joined the international community in supporting the Secretary-General’s call for a
global ceasefire and in unanimously adopting resolution 2532 (2020). We hope that
this understanding of the Security Council will be translated into genuine action by
all parties to put an end to the conflicts and provide a true humanitarian response to
the consequences of the COVID-19 outbreak.
The challenge for the Members of the Organization, together with other relevant
actors, will always be the protection of millions of people affected by conflict and
who are in situations of serious vulnerability. For this work, the Security Council, as
the guarantor and protector of international peace and security, has a fundamental
duty to make its voice heard and to make its influence felt at this juncture, through
clear guidelines and by coordinating the support that should be given to operations
on the ground, as well as the resources necessary to meet this challenge on a
global scale.
El Salvador calls on the Security Council to continue to address this public
health emergency. Political interests should not take precedence while the pandemic
is spreading on the ground and endangering the situation of millions of people in
areas of conflict and affected areas. Furthermore, the door should be opened for
subsequently taking economic measures, which should be effectively promoted by
the United Nations system and the General Assembly.
El Salvador appreciates all the efforts undertaken by the Secretary-General
and the United Nations system in support of mitigating the spread of COVID-19
among peace operations personnel, and further welcomes the support that these
missions provide to the Governments of countries that have a peace operation on
the ground.
My country stresses the importance of protecting the health and wellbeing of all peace operations personnel, and calls for further efforts to provide all
personnel with the necessary protective equipment to effectively and safely carry out
their work.
Finally, El Salvador calls for all assistance plans to be developed ensuring
support for the most vulnerable groups and sectors of the population, including
migrants, displaced persons, civilians residing in areas controlled by non-State
armed groups, detained persons and those working in the informal sector of the
economy. It is also essential to ensure such assistance for older persons, a group
highly affected by the pandemic, racial minorities, children and youth, and women,
among others. The protection of civilians and actions that enable the building of
community trust must be protected and maintained.

20-1078657/120

S/2020/799

Annex 29
Statement by the Permanent Delegation of the European Union to
the United Nations
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
Member States.
The candidate countries the Republic of North Macedonia, Montenegro and
Albania; the country of the Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina’ as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and
Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
Let me start by thanking Indonesia for organizing this high-level open debate
of the Security Council on pandemics and the challenges of sustaining peace, in
continuation of the high-level debate organized last month by Germany on pandemics
and security (S/2020/663) and the very welcome adoption of resolution 2532 (2020),
signalling the continuity of the engagement of the Security Council on this issue.
The EU and its member States have been staunch supporters of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture since it was first established in 2005, and of
subsequent United Nations reforms to ensure that institutions, structures and
instruments are fit for purpose. The peacebuilding architecture has come to play
a key role in enhancing the integrated cross-pillar approach and bringing together
political, security, humanitarian and developmental partners. Today’s discussion is
timely, as Member States are about to embark on the formal part of the review of the
peacebuilding architecture.
The EU is committed to the 2016 twin resolutions (Security Council resolution
2282 (2016) and General Assembly resolution 70/262) on peacebuilding and
sustaining peace, understood as an inherently political process aimed at preventing
the outbreak, escalation, recurrence or continuation of conflict. While progress has
been made towards what is set out in the 2016 twin resolutions, concerted efforts
must continue to ensure their full implementation, with a comprehensive approach
to sustaining peace.
The United Nations peacebuilding architecture needs to adapt to the new type
of challenges that the world is facing, such as the consequences of climate change,
environmental degradation and global public health crises, as well as emerging
challenges and opportunities associated with new technologies.
We are witnessing every day the direct and secondary consequences of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic interacting with pre-existing crises. The
pandemic adds another layer of complexity to already fragile situations affected
by years of conflict but engaged in peacebuilding processes. It is creating new and
amplifying existing problems and exacerbating existing human rights concerns and
socioeconomic and gender-based inequalities, increased insecurity for women, girls
and persons in vulnerable situations, as well as mental health and psycho-social
concerns. Fast-moving complex emergencies such as COVID-19 require a whole-ofsystem and whole-of-society response through coordination, partnerships and the
efficient use of a combination of multilateral tools.
There is a strong complementarity between working towards sustainable
development, poverty reduction, the protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms, and preventing violent conflicts. The EU is rallying behind the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts to coordinate a United Nations-wide response and welcomes the
comprehensive proposals enshrined in his policy papers addressing the impact of
COVID-19. We are putting our full weight behind his call for action for human
58/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

rights, his appeal for a global ceasefire and his call for building back better, as
reaffirmed by High Representative Josep Borrell.
The United Nations should lead a coordinated, collaborative and inclusive
approach at all levels, based on the comparative advantages of all relevant
humanitarian, development and security actors. Focus should be on addressing
needs and respect for human rights, reducing risks and vulnerabilities and increasing
the resilience of communities and States in the longer term. The humanitariandevelopment-peace nexus, applied with attention to conflict prevention, and the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development should become the working method for
the response to the pandemic. Indeed, a strong humanitarian-development-peace
nexus in the design and implementation of the response, in line with United Nations
reform, is indispensable. This should also be reflected in the work of the Executive
Boards of the United Nations funds and programmes.
The pandemic can tip the balance from unstable peace to violent conflict.
The economic impact may rapidly translate into other threats to sustainable peace,
ranging from food insecurity to an escalation of pre-existing tensions. We are in
regular contact with United Nations and World Bank colleagues to prepare for postdisaster needs assessments and recovery and peacebuilding assessments to be carried
out as part of the multilateral approach. We are also adapting ongoing activities to
the changed circumstances on the ground.
This global crisis is likely to exacerbate many of the challenges that the world
was facing before the outbreak at the local and regional levels, as well as at the global
level. The crisis may also bring opportunities for advances in peace processes and
for multilateralism. We have to be ready to seize these opportunities, promoting a
sustainable and green recovery guided by human rights, fundamental freedoms and
gender equality that accelerates the achievement of the Sustainable Development
Goals and the objectives of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change.
In that respect, we believe that the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) can play
a key role, including in its advisory capacity to the Security Council, promoting
clarity and raising attention to and awareness of the particular threats that the
pandemic is posing in peacebuilding and sustaining peace contexts.
We also see this as an opportunity for the PBC to strengthen its ties with other
relevant United Nations bodies, such as the Human Rights Council, as well as with
civil society organizations and communities on the ground. We welcome the recently
convened informal interactive dialogue between the PBC and the Security Council,
as well as the informal meeting between the Human Rights Council President and
the Security Council. We all know that an effective response to the challenge will
need to draw upon cross-pillar United Nations coherence to ensure a one-United
Nations mandate delivery at the country level, with full respect for human rights,
gender equality and the principle of non-discrimination. It will also call for regional
cooperation and regionalized responses, as well as innovative approaches to dialogue
and mediation support.
Respect for and the protection and fulfilment of human rights, gender equality,
democracy, the rule of law and transitional justice play a central role in ensuring
security, stabilization and sustainable peace. The consolidation of political and
social institutions and core Government functions is essential. The Peacebuilding
Architecture should more systematically integrate human rights and protection of
civilian structures, tools and actors for conflict prevention purposes.
We need to ensure that the longer-term effect of the COVID-19 crisis is a
strengthened multilateral global partnership that is better prepared to respond to
global health crises and their aftermaths, while taking into account measures taken
20-1078659/120

S/2020/799

at the national level. We can turn some of these unprecedented challenges into
opportunities for peacebuilding and peacebuilding partnerships at all levels.
However, we also need to ensure sustainable, predictable and coherent
funding for United Nations peacebuilding activities and peacebuilding efforts in
general. The Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund — through its
flexible and catalytic nature — have unique roles to play in supporting a conflictsensitive international response to the pandemic, supporting the efforts of local
peacebuilders and ensuring a coherent and mutually reinforcing peacebuilding
response to COVID-19. The PBC’s flexible working methods and ability to raise and
sustain attention can bolster coordination and capacity-building and enhance longterm effectiveness.
The EU and its member States have been at the forefront of the global
response to the new pandemic. Under the Team Europe approach, we have mobilized
a package of over €36 billion, combining contributions from the EU, its member
States and financial institutions for the global COVID-19 response and recovery.
This package supports and will continue to support partner countries in addressing
the immediate humanitarian consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic and its health
and socioeconomic impact and strengthening the health systems and preparedness
and response-capacity of partners, including for the benefit of populations already
affected by conflict and displacement. Beyond the immediate emergency, this
response is also tailored to help sustain the peacebuilding processes of fragile
societies in the long run.
We are adapting existing programmes not only to help communities cope
with the consequences of the crisis and mitigate its security impacts, but also to
support them in maintaining their efforts to sustain peace. For instance, the EU
recently launched a €10-million project to maintain and reinforce child-protection
mechanisms in sub-Saharan Africa during the COVID-19 crisis. In this regard, it
is fundamental to continue ensuring humanitarian access and working together to
remove access obstacles related to COVID-19.
Women, who represent the majority of health workers, have been at the
forefront of the response and will be the backbone of recovery in communities.
Their role needs to be further recognized and promoted. At the same time, women
and girls have been more prone to immediate risks linked not only to sexual and
gender-based violence, but also to their sexual and reproductive health and rights
or the unequal sharing of responsibilities. This is a major challenge to sustaining
peace processes. The closure of schools during COVID-19 hinders the development
of quality education.
We also echo the Secretary-General’s call for action on mental health and
psychosocial support in order to ensure the full integration of that component in the
COVID-19 response, to help people better cope with the crisis and to foster sustaining
peace processes. At the global level, we also need to address disinformation with
due respect for citizens’ freedom of expression as well as public order and safety,
while also ensuring that effective and factual communication reaches all facets of
societies. Social media plays a central role in such efforts.
As we celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, we
commend the Secretary-General’s leadership and multiple initiatives to address
the multifaceted COVID-19 pandemic. We reiterate our full support for the
coordinating, normative and operative role of the World Health Organization (WHO)
in the global public-health response and in its role to ensure the implementation of
the International Health Regulations as well as in supporting the most fragile and
vulnerable countries.
60/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

The EU and its member States reiterate the need to ensure full respect for
international law, including international humanitarian law, international human
rights law and international refugee law.
In matters of sanctions and restrictive measures, the EU’s targeted approach
reflects the key principles guiding the EU in the use of sanctions, in particular
compliance with international law and human rights, and proportionality. In
principle, when sanctions include export restrictions, such prohibitions do not cover
the export of food, medicines or medical equipment. In addition, the EU policy
of targeted measures is underpinned by a system of exemptions. That exemption
system applies also in the context of a crisis such as the current one caused by
COVID-19. The EU will continue following closely the matter and is always open to
listening to the observations of experts on the ground, also with regard to any need
for mitigating measures.
Global health and sustaining peace go hand in hand. An efficient response
to outbreaks is possible through proper coordination and leadership, respect for
the International Health Regulations, a comprehensive public health response
and inclusiveness.
We can recover from the hazards that create health emergencies and insecurity,
but only through a coordinated One-United Nations approach. The EU remains a
strong supporter of multilateralism and a rules-based order with an effective and
efficient United Nations at its core. The Council can count on our continued support.

20-1078661/120

S/2020/799

Annex 30
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Georgia to the
United Nations, Kaha Imnadze
Let me begin by thanking the Indonesian presidency for having organized
today’s open debate.
Georgia aligns itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the European
Union (annex 29). Let me add a few remarks in my national capacity.
The unprecedented health crisis caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic poses a formidable challenge to the United Nations peacebuilding and
sustaining peace agenda. It has already left a lasting imprint on all three pillars
of the United Nations, including by exacerbating the underlying root causes of
armed conflicts, placing limitations on existing peacebuilding action and putting
additional pressure on already fragile security, political, socioeconomic and
humanitarian environments. The negative consequences of the pandemic have had
a disproportionate impact on conflict-affected women and girls, children, forcibly
displaced populations, older persons and persons with disabilities. In addition,
the direct effects of the pandemic have been reflected in the disruptions caused
to United Nations peacekeeping operations, special political missions and the
Peacebuilding Commission.
It is equally important to ensure that the COVID-19 pandemic does not
distract us from our efforts to address the aforementioned root causes. Failure in that
respect could cause irreparable damage to international peace and security. While,
regrettably, there are many examples illustrating such a scenario in today’s world, I
wish to focus on the one that my country is experiencing these days.
Amid its efforts to fight the spread of coronavirus in the country, Georgia’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity have been targeted by one of the permanent
members of the Security Council. In blatant violation of its international obligations
and commitments, as well as in contravention of the Secretary-General’s appeal for a
global ceasefire, the Russian Federation has heightened the scale of its provocations
directed against Georgia. Intensified military exercises and a military build-up, the
continued fortification of the occupation line by erecting barbed-wire fences and
other artificial barriers, the illegal practice of arbitrary detentions and kidnappings of
conflict-affected people, and the denial of humanitarian access to both the Georgian
regions of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia have further aggravated
the security, human rights and humanitarian situation on the ground.
To make matters worse, the process of intensified ethnic discrimination and
grave human rights abuses, coupled with lengthy closures of so-called crossing points,
have compounded the already fragile situation in the occupied regions, ending in the
deaths of 15 people who were denied the possibility of an urgent medical evacuation.
On top of that, the Russian Federation has amplified its hybrid-warfare tools and
disinformation campaign, attacking one of the laboratories of Georgia’s National
Centre for Disease Control and Public Health, the Richard Lugar Center and even
the European Union Monitoring Mission, the only international mechanism on the
ground mandated to facilitate peace and security throughout the whole territory
of Georgia.
Notwithstanding the aforementioned harsh reality, Georgia remains committed
to doing its utmost to ensure humanitarian relief for those conflict-affected people,
who have been carrying the heavy burden of the grave consequences of Russia’s
illegal occupation in the time of the pandemic.

62/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

Let me conclude my remarks by once again calling on the international
community to urge the Russian Federation to immediately ensure the complete and
unconditional elimination of any impediments to the effective delivery and access
of emergency humanitarian assistance to the civilians living in the occupied regions
of Georgia and to start fulfilling its international obligations, first and foremost the
European Union-mediated 12 August 2008 ceasefire agreement.

20-1078663/120

S/2020/799

Annex 31
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Guatemala to the
United Nations
Guatemala would like to thank the Republic of Indonesia, as President of
the Security Council, for having convened this high-level virtual open debate on
pandemics and the challenges of sustaining peace, as well as the Secretary-General,
António Guterres; Mr. Ban Ki-moon, former Secretary-General; and Ms. Sarah
Cliffe, Director of the Center on International Cooperation, New York University,
for their presentations. We also would like to welcome the concept note (S/2020/765,
annex) as a basis for our deliberations.
Globally, according to the World Health Organization, there are more than
19 million confirmed cases of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), including more
than 700,000 deaths worldwide. The COVID-19 pandemic is an unprecedented
crisis that has affected us all. Efforts to flatten the curve could give rise to huge
but unquantified costs for the most vulnerable people on the ground. For fragile
and conflict-affected countries, the pandemic represents an enormous challenge in
various pivotal areas for development, including health, the economy and politics.
This experience has shown us that pandemics cannot be addressed solely as
a health issue. Beyond its immediate health and humanitarian impact, COVID-19
risks deepening pre-existing social, economic and political fissures. At the same
time, the pandemic is leading to an increase in social violence and conflict. It is also
a threat to the achievements made in the area of international peace and security and
exacerbates existing grievances and inequalities, affecting in particular the most
vulnerable in conflict-affected areas.
In that regard, Guatemala would like to emphasize the importance of paying
special attention to a fundamental element for a peace consolidation strategy —
addressing violence against women, which has increased significantly during the
pandemic. We issue a call to action to eradicate all forms of gender violence, in
line with resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2467 (2019), as well as General Assembly
resolution 65/69.
It is evident that the pandemic has affected the work of the United Nations
system, including peacekeeping operations, special political missions, and
peacebuilding mandates on the ground. In that regard, the attention and support
of the Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission are crucial if we are to
address the sustaining peace implications of this pandemic. We need to address not
only the conceptual elements, but also the main needs in order to avoid a relapse to
previous situations.
The current crisis is also creating opportunities for immediate ceasefires that
could become permanent and ultimately lead to peace. In that regard, we welcome
that the Secretary-General has called for a global ceasefire, which enjoys the support
of various countries and relevant stakeholders around the world, thus creating the
conditions for the delivery of humanitarian assistance, open space for diplomacy and
hope for those most vulnerable to COVID-19. Guatemala concurs with SecretaryGeneral António Guterres that
“[t]he most effective way to protect civilians is to prevent the outbreak,
escalation, continuation and recurrence of armed conflict. As the world
confronts the monumental challenge of the COVID-19 pandemic, the need to
silence the guns could not be more acute” (S/2020/366, para. 67).
In that regard, the international community needs to mobilize a concerted,
collective response in conflict-affected countries. It is critical that in crafting
64/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

responses to the pandemic, policymakers consider social fractures. It is crucial that
policymakers adopt a proactive approach to mitigate the impacts of both the health
crisis and the response to it, based on an assessment of pre-existing conflict risks.
Building peace is never a straightforward mission. We live in a time when
the Security Council needs to adapt to the current crisis. Unless effective policy
actions are taken to support highest-risk countries, the hard-won gains on the ground
in peace, security, development and human rights may be reversed. The Security
Council should continue exploring ways to strengthen prevention, early detection
systems and operational action to avoid conflicts, on the basis of an approach that
considers the interconnected elements of peace and security, development and
human rights.
The international community and the United Nations system must see the
coronavirus disease pandemic as an opportunity to address risk factors for violence
in conflict-affected countries. It is important to identify opportunities to strengthen
national institutions.
Health and peace are interdependent. We must recognize that while peace is
a precondition for a healthy society, health could also be a bridge towards peace by
delivering services equitably.
In conclusion, Guatemala attaches great importance to peacebuilding efforts
worldwide. The prevention of conflict is critical for sustaining peace and achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals while implementing a whole-of-system approach
that bridges the three pillars of the United Nations. The pandemic has shown us the
importance of pooling efforts worldwide to build resilient societies and of investing
in social schemes, particularly health and economic systems, in order to meet the
needs of our populations.

20-1078665/120

S/2020/799

Annex 32
Statement by the Permanent Mission of India to the United Nations
We thank the Permanent Mission of Indonesia, as President of the Security
Council, for convening today’s important discussion under the agenda item
“Peacebuilding and Sustaining Peace”, on the theme “pandemics and the challenges
of sustaining peace”.
The briefings by Secretary-General António Guterres, former SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon and Ms. Sarah Cliffe, Director of the Center on International
Cooperation of New York University, have provided us useful insights into the
various dimensions of the challenges we face today.
We are in the midst of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic,
which has caused global disruption on a scale that had not been experienced by
this generation. The pandemic is still raging and its implications, though hard to
foretell in exact terms, is certain to be profound and multidimensional. We do,
however, need to remember that while pandemics can exacerbate the humanitarian
consequences of any conflict situation and present obstacles to traditional tools for
conflict resolution and maintenance of peace and security, including United Nations
peacekeeping operations, COVID-19 is a health crisis with far-reaching economic
and humanitarian implications.
In a 9 April Security Council meeting, the Secretary-General outlined several
trends related to the pandemic, with implications for conflict prevention. Those
include erosion of trust in public institutions, a rise in societal tensions associated
with national Governments’ response measures, conflicting public health risks posed
by the desire of Governments to contain the spread of virus and easing lockdowns in
order to soften the impact on economies. Some conflict actors are also exploiting the
current climate of uncertainty to press their agendas, including through the spread
of misinformation to foment discord and violence and even sponsor opportunistic
terrorist attacks.
Peacebuilding, as a concept, essentially involves a range of initiatives,
including conflict prevention, peacekeeping, reconciliation, institution-building,
strengthening democratic frameworks, the protection of rights and development.
A combination of several factors is needed to finally ensure the success of any
peacebuilding effort. We must use this paradigm to look at peacebuilding in the
context of the pandemic.
COVID-19 has adversely impacted almost all initiatives that usually help
contribute to peacebuilding. In some ways, it has served to exacerbate conflict
situations to the extent that we now have to tackle more strife and conflict, as well
as a growing humanitarian crisis rather than address some of the other important
issues relating to peacebuilding. That is where our current challenge lies. How do we
prioritize between various needs?
National peacebuilding efforts and attempts to address the various facets
of peacebuilding have been weakened by the diversion of national resources to
tackle more immediate humanitarian issues of life and death. Opportunities for
innovative solutions have also shrunk. For example, the use of digital solutions to
bring communities closer together, especially through the sharing of life-saving
information on how to survive the pandemic, and the involvement of women and
young people to strengthen social cohesion need to be enhanced but require strong
international support.
COVID-19 has also impacted internationally driven support for peacebuilding
approaches due to interruptions in international travel and global trade and decreasing
66/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

resources of even the wealthiest nations. Consequently, it is important for international
players to look at models of international development and humanitarian action that
will strengthen not just the national response to COVID-19 but also promote the
essential pillars of peacebuilding. When national and international resources are
dwindling, prioritization becomes essential.
Let us not forget that conflict and violence are the single biggest impediments
to development and the fulfilment of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
If tensions over scarce food, a breakdown in civic trust or rumours about the virus
fuel violence and discord, then the core efforts to curb the spread of the virus will
be undermined and progress towards the SDGs will be reversed. According to the
Sustainable Development Goals Report 2020, an estimated 71 million people are
expected to be pushed back into extreme poverty in 2020.
India has been a positive contributor to international peace and security. We
are a major troop-contributing country to United Nations peacekeeping operations,
including through women peacekeepers. As a responsible stakeholder in globalhealth supply chains and despite the pressures to guarantee medical supplies
domestically, India has ensured timely access to essential drugs, medical services
and medical equipment for over 150 countries in order to combat the pandemic. India
has also responded to the Secretary-General’s demand for an immediate upgrade
to the medical facilities of United Nations peacekeeping missions by agreeing to
deploy additional medical personnel and equipment to the military hospitals in Goma
and Juba, which are affiliated with the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan, respectively.
Given the context of the pandemic, India has the following ten suggestions
to offer.
First, our immediate focus should be on ensuring that the humanitarian needs
of a community in a conflict are met so that lack of availability of goods and services
to fulfil minimum needs itself does not become the basis for greater conflict.
Second, national Governments should support and engage local peacebuilders
to help design and lead COVID-19 sensitization and response efforts to help mitigate
further conflict, prevent violence, adapt and sustain peace processes and rebuild
social cohesion.
Third, if peacebuilding is to endure then it must rest on institutions and not on
individuals. Consequently, the strengthening of national institutions combined with
the strengthening of democratic structures should not be compromised in the face of
the crisis brought about by the pandemic. It is only when institutions are strong can
other factors, like equitably addressing the needs of the communities in conflict and
the strengthening of human rights, be effective.
Fourth, it is clear that human-centred and cooperative approaches, which are
at the core of peacebuilding work, are needed. We also need resilient approaches
that can enhance local capacities, skills and attributes, and enable communities not
just to bounce back but to build back better. These locally owned, conflict-sensitive,
gender-sensitive and trauma-informed peacebuilding approaches are highly costeffective and sustainable. They must not be sacrificed due to short-term reallocation
of funds to what are deemed immediate pandemic responses. Short- and long-term
responses to COVID-19 must be aligned.
Fifth, donors and international organizations should sustain financial support
to and partnership with local peacebuilders during the crisis. They should also

20-1078667/120

S/2020/799

provide flexibility for rapid programme redesign, as well as redirection of resources
to respond to emergency situations.
Sixth, performance in peacekeeping must be ensured. The Secretariat needs
to carry out realistic assessments of contingents being selected and deployed in the
mission areas. Troop competencies need to be a critical requirement of selection
criteria. Troop-contributing countries should guarantee adherence to training plans,
including with respect to predeployment and mission training, so that key mission
tasks are not left to learning on the job.
Seventh, it is of vital importance that our efforts are focused towards
preventing a lapse or relapse into conflict. Poverty and lack of opportunity pose
some of the most formidable barriers to sustainable peace. Development is therefore
critical and should have the attention of the international community.
Eighth, ensuring women’s participation in peacebuilding is not only a matter
of women’s and girls’ rights. Women are crucial partners in shoring up three pillars
of lasting peace: economic recovery, social cohesion and political legitimacy. Gender
capacity should be deployed in peacebuilding initiatives, gender-responsive analysis
of key issues mainstreamed across mediation work and gender-inclusive language
incorporated in peace agreements.
Ninth, peacebuilders must mobilize to identify and counter misinformation.
Community engagement and effective communication are critical to combatting the
“infodemic” of false information that often drives fear and division.
Tenth, increased support for psychosocial and trauma-healing programmes
during the crisis and through the recovery process needs to be provided.
While we are still in the early stages of adapting to the new reality of
peacebuilding during a global pandemic, we must build back better to regain
stability and spur peace and prosperity in a world that may have been changed
forever. Ensuring a strong social-cohesion and peacebuilding focus and learning
how societies and institutions recover from a crisis such as this is at the heart of
turning the tide on the greatest reversal of human development and making it into a
decisive leap forward.

68/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

Annex 33
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Ireland to the United Nations
Ireland aligns itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the European
Union (annex 29).
As the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic emerged at the beginning of
2020, the world was already facing record levels of humanitarian need, with conflict
as a primary cause. Today, beyond the immediate health crisis, Ireland remains
deeply concerned about the interlinked political, social and economic impacts of
the disease and the potential for these shocks to cause new, or exacerbate existing,
conflicts. We therefore want to thank Foreign Minister Marsudi and Indonesia for
organizing today’s important open debate and for ensuring a continued focus on
these challenges. We also thank Secretary-General António Guterres, His Excellency
Mr. Ban Ki-moon and Ms. Sarah Cliffe for their insightful and informative briefings.
First, Ireland strongly welcomed the Secretary-General’s call for a global
ceasefire and the adoption of resolution 2532 (2020). As an incoming member of the
Security Council, Ireland will continue to support United Nations efforts aimed at
addressing the COVID-19 pandemic in countries and situations of armed conflicts or
those affected by humanitarian crises, as mandated by the resolution.
COVID-19 affects us all. However, its potential negative impacts are
significantly multiplied in conflict-affected and fragile States, where pre-existing
vulnerabilities in health and governance systems, as well as in community cohesion,
are amplified, placing additional pressures on already vulnerable regions. For
example, in East Africa, the ongoing impact of climate change and the locust
outbreak are now compounded by COVID-19.
As the secondary impacts of this global crisis begin to hit, prevention and early
response will be key. The importance of a coherent and joined-up United Nations
system focused on peacebuilding and sustaining peace cannot be overstated. The
pandemic will test the United Nations system and its ability to act collectively and
build on the success of recent reforms that we have all worked hard to make happen.
To rise to the challenge posed by COVID-19, we need to maximize the existing
mechanisms, whether for coordination or flow of funds, to their greatest effect,
including United Nations country teams and the strengthened resident coordinator
system. We urge the Council to step up support for the work of all United Nations
special representatives and political missions, regional organizations, national actors
and local communities in building and maintaining peace, including through robust
conflict analysis and early mediation.
As a member of the United Nations Peacebuilding Commission, we welcome
the Commission’s early efforts aimed at discussing the impact of the COVID-19 crisis
on peacebuilding efforts both globally and as part of ongoing country discussions,
and at briefing the Security Council on those discussions. In collaboration with
resident coordinators, the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) has been proactive in supporting
United Nations country teams, such as in Guatemala, Côte d’Ivoire and Mali, to
adjust existing projects to address the peacebuilding and prevention dimensions of
the pandemic. As the Organization’s instrument of first resort for sustaining peace
in situations at risk or affected by violent conflict, the PBF must be adequately
funded. In recognition of this, Ireland is committed to providing multi-annual and
predictable funding for the Fund. Our contribution of €6 million over the past three
years was double the original commitment made in 2017.
The disproportionate impact of the pandemic on women and girls is visible in
many ways, including adverse effects on their health, education, livelihoods, food
20-1078669/120

S/2020/799

security and nutrition, and increased risk of gender-based violence. This must not
be ignored. In the twentieth anniversary year of the women and peace and security
agenda, we must continue to amplify women and girls’ voices during peacebuilding
and recovery processes.
Supporting local ownership, improving leadership and broadening inclusion
in conflict and fragile settings, with special attention to gender and youth, remains
critical to an effective COVID-19 response and recovery. We have numerous examples
of the effectiveness of this approach in the Ebola response in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Sierra Leone and Liberia, and we commend the efforts of civil society
to highlight and address these critical issues.
COVID-19 presents unique and complex challenges to peacekeeping missions.
United Nations contingents must continue to be sensitive to the needs of the host
nation and local population while implementing mandates. It is critically important
that the United Nations be seen as part of the solution rather than as part of the
problem. The measures that the United Nations has put in place to protect local
populations and our peacekeepers from COVID-19 are welcome, and we urge full
compliance with them. The current crisis is testing us all but it is also demonstrating
that the security of each of us is inextricably interlinked. In the words of Mike Ryan
of the World Health Organization, “none of us are safe until all of us are safe”.
While there are heavy domestic demands on resources, we must not lose sight of the
benefits we all reap from conflict reduction and prevention. We must ensure that our
missions are fully resourced to carry out the tasks we ask of them. Within missions,
addressing the pandemic through a protection-of-civilians lens is vital. Missions
must leverage all capabilities, including strategic communications, outreach and
engagement, civil-military cooperation, medical assets and key leader engagement,
to address protection-of-civilian concerns in a holistic and integrated manner.

70/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

Annex 34
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Italy to the United Nations
Italy aligns itself with the statement submitted by the European Union (EU)
(annex 29).
Italy wishes to thank Indonesia for organizing this high-level open debate of
the Security Council on pandemics and the challenges of sustaining peace.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has shown us the need
to promote a coordinated multilateral response. Global health is a fundamental
precondition for peace, stability and prosperity and interacts with the tripartite
nexus of peace, humanitarian aid and development.
That is why, from the very beginning of this global emergency, Italy strongly
supported international solidarity and an international alliance to advance research
on a COVID-19 vaccine. Italy has made it a consistent priority to promote universal
equitable access to the vaccine and other life-saving treatments, such as therapies
and diagnostics, to make sure that no one is left behind.
We were proud to be among the promoters, in partnership with the EU and
other key partners, of the Coronavirus Global Response pledging conferences held
on 4 May and on 27 June, which collected almost €16 billion for fair universal access
to vaccines, treatments and diagnostics to fight COVID-19. We were also among the
pioneers of the Access to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator and the main contributors to
the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access Facility through the Gavi Alliance advance
market commitment, which will ensure access for developing countries to the vaccine.
Italy believes that increasing our support to the most vulnerable countries
remains an absolute priority, which we will also promote in the context of the
upcoming Italian presidency of the Group of Twenty in 2021.
In addition to its severe impact on public health, human rights and
socioeconomic conditions, the pandemic has aggravated existing threats to the
maintenance of international peace and security and hampered the delivery of
necessary humanitarian aid. A multidimensional crisis requires a multidimensional
approach and response from the United Nations, which is at the heart of the sustaining
peace agenda. As we celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations,
we commend the Secretary-General’s leadership and multiple initiatives to address
the multifaceted COVID-19 pandemic. We welcome the adoption of resolution 2532
(2020), which calls for a global ceasefire.
In the coming months there are several priority areas to which Italy is ready
to contribute.
In the present state of emergency, it is of paramount importance for everyone
to have access to safe, nutritious and sufficient food. In that spirit, Italy is committed
to supporting the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the
International Fund for Agricultural Development (FAO), the World Food Programme
and all the relevant United Nations actors in their efforts to prevent a global food
crisis. We have been promoting a food coalition through FAO to mobilize expertise,
provide policy support, establish a space for dialogue and promote initiatives focused
on the creation of more resilient and sustainable food systems.
The pandemic has also reminded us of the importance of fully implementing
the women and peace and security agenda, as well as the youth, peace and security
agenda. Women and girls have been particularly exposed to sexual and gender-based
violence, including domestic violence, and to an unequal sharing of responsibilities.
At the same time, women, who represent the majority of health workers, have been at
20-1078671/120

S/2020/799

the forefront of the response and will be the backbone of recovery in local communities.
We must redouble our commitment to achieving gender equality and to ensuring that
women participate meaningfully in decision-making processes. COVID-19 is also
exacerbating the already tragic condition of people living in conflict-affected areas,
in particular vulnerable groups, such as children, women and girls. That is why it
is fundamental now more than ever to ensure respect for international humanitarian
law and to support the United Nations efforts for a global ceasefire.
In these difficult times, United Nations peacekeeping operations have a special
role to play in supporting local communities in their handling of the pandemic.
The support that troop- and police-contributing countries have provided to local
communities — as in the case of our national contingent in the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon — shows how peace operations can serve as a flexible
tool to preserve peace and stability. In that perspective, together with the other EU
troop-contributing countries, we have committed to keeping all our military assets
at their current levels and to complying with the guidelines set out a few months ago
by the Secretariat in order to avoid spreading the virus in missions. The Action for
Peacekeeping initiative has constituted a fundamental step forward in modernizing
United Nations peacekeeping missions.
The unprecedented challenges posed by COVID-19 must be transformed into
opportunities for sustaining peace at all levels and inform the process of reviewing
the peacebuilding architecture. The upcoming peacebuilding architecture review
should therefore stress the importance of strengthening existing partnerships
between the United Nations and various international financial institutions and
regional organizations and developing coherent comprehensive responses to
complex interrelated challenges. It is crucial to involve local communities and the
private sector in that effort. The only effective way to address the consequences of
the current crisis is a truly concerted effort at the global level.
The COVID-19 pandemic must further drive our search for a whole-ofsystem response based on coordination, partnerships and the flexible use of existing
platforms. The Peacebuilding Commission, which, under its current Chair, has
proactively adapted its programme of work to address the challenges of the current
situation, and a better financed Peacebuilding Fund have a crucial role to play. They
must mobilize a conflict-sensitive international response to the pandemic, support
efforts by local communities and foster a coordinated peacebuilding response to
COVID-19.
Italy will continue to contribute to the current discussions on the review of
the peacebuilding architecture. We must avoid any reversal in the hard-won gains in
peace, security, development and human rights. Our collective effort in tackling the
effects of the pandemic must remain focused on advancing our peacebuilding and
sustaining peace agenda.

72/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

Annex 35
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations, Ishikane Kimihiro
I would like to express my appreciation to the Indonesian presidency for
convening this open debate. I wish to take this opportunity to further elaborate on
Japan’s views regarding the implications of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
on peacebuilding and sustaining peace, discussed during the informal interactive
dialogue between the Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
on 22 July, in which Japan had the pleasure to participate as the PBC’s Vice-Chair
for this year.
This will be a long haul. The adverse effects of COVID-19 are tremendous. In
addition to the acute health threat, there are the economic fallout, the loss of jobs and
income, the disruption of supply chains, food insecurity, the lack of access to basic
social services, increased poverty and inequality, rising communal tensions and the
list goes on, all making this pandemic an unprecedented human security crisis.
Resolution 2532 (2020) recognizes that peacebuilding and development gains
made by countries in transition and post-conflict countries could be reversed owing
to the pandemic and acknowledges the disproportionate negative impact on the
vulnerable. We welcome the adoption of this resolution, which reminds us of our
collective responsibilities to ensure that hard-won gains are not reversed.
Any response to COVID-19 needs to be sought through a human security lens.
The pandemic poses a multifaceted threat to the survival, livelihood and dignity
of people, disrupting social cohesion and exacerbating tensions. Therefore, closer
attention to the interlinkages among peace and security, development, human rights
and humanitarian needs is necessary. Coherent and coordinated engagement by the
United Nations system is crucial to realizing an integrated multisectoral response
across the humanitarian-peace-development nexus. Moreover, partnerships with
international financial institutions, traditional and emerging bilateral donors, regional
organizations, civil society and the private sector should be further strengthened.
The PBC has much to offer. From the outset of the pandemic, the PBC has
worked tirelessly to shed light on the situation in different countries and regions,
leveraging its unique bridging role to facilitate cooperation and coordination among
multiple actors within and outside the United Nations system. The PBC can and
should support the Security Council by providing valuable advice and sharing
compiled diverse lessons learned and experiences. We are pleased to see that the
Council is taking steps to engage more with the PBC, including at a recent informal
interactive dialogue, where we saw Council members’ willingness and readiness to
take on board the PBC’s inputs.
National ownership supported by sensible leadership is crucial for building and
sustaining peace. However, national leadership is being put to the test by COVID-19,
as it attacks weak health systems, impedes access to education and other basic social
services, as well as delays the institutional reforms in the political and security
sectors. A society can be peaceful when people trust their Government. Strong and
sound institutions contribute to strengthening governmental credibility, reducing
vulnerability and nurturing people’s trust in their Government. The 2020 review of
the peacebuilding architecture gives us a perfect opportunity to refocus our energy
on these critical matters, in particular the importance of institution-building, in the
context of peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
We are stronger together. At the PBC, we have seen Member States rallying
around those countries that came to the Commission to discuss their peacebuilding
20-1078673/120

S/2020/799

efforts, exchanging their stories and lessons learned and showing support and
solidarity. Seeing this has made me believe that we can, and we will, get through
this crisis and build back better together.

74/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

Annex 36
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires of Kenya to the United Nations,
Susan Mwangi
As the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic persists, Governments
across the globe are taking measures to address the unprecedented political and
socioeconomic impacts of the pandemic on their populations. For most countries, the
challenges are multifaceted. Kenya therefore commends Indonesia for bringing the
global reality of pandemics and their implications for peacebuilding and sustaining
peace before the Security Council for consideration.
Resolution 2532 (2020), adopted on 1 July and regarding COVID-19, is further
evidence that we need to act together to address the challenges posed by pandemics
in sustaining peace and peacebuilding.
Efforts to flatten the curve are happening amid diverse realities in the
peace-conflict continuum. The multiplicity of these challenges are indeed a test of
international crisis management. It is therefore critical for the Council to have an
established framework to mitigate the threat of pandemics in future, including in
the areas of sustaining peace, health and economic security. Climate change and
environmental challenges have also proved to be additional hurdles that countries
have to overcome during the pandemic. Kenya and other countries in the Horn of
Africa and the Central African region are addressing the pandemic amidst other
competing emergencies, including floods and waves of locust infestations.
The various briefings by Secretary-General António Guterres, former
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Ms. Sarah Cliffe, Director of the Center
on International Cooperation, have further demonstrated that pandemics have
multifaceted implications on peace and security and are spiking humanitarian
needs, not to mention reverting peacebuilding and development gains with a
disproportionate impact on the poorest and most vulnerable. Therefore, pandemics
cannot be addressed solely as health concerns, particularly in conflict-affected
regions and countries emerging from conflict. In that regard, it is indeed critical to
strengthen socioeconomic capacities of countries in alignment with the Sustainable
Development Goals, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and Agenda
2063 of the African Union (AU).
Given the significant impact of COVID-19 on the global economy, there is an
even greater possibility of setbacks to the gains that have been achieved in ensuring
food security, poverty eradication, the growth of domestic industries and regional
integration. We saw significant setbacks during the 2014-2015 Ebola crisis in West
Africa, and therefore there is a need to prioritize, invest and identify new security
partners, including health and technology experts, to build resilient infrastructure.
The role of regional and subregional organizations in addressing the impact
of COVID-19 is critical. The African Union has continued to champion the region’s
work in solidarity with the ongoing mitigation efforts through the Africa Centres for
Disease Control and Prevention to ensure Africa is not left behind when it comes to
production of vaccines and essential equipment.
Existing fragility and conflict situations are some of the triggers that can
transform a health crisis into a security threat. The pandemic’s impact in fragile and
conflict-affected countries, for example, in the Sahel, the Horn of Africa and other
regions that are in protracted conflict situations, is proof that pandemics can be an
evolving threat to peace. This health crisis also has the potential to create a platform
where violent extremism and terrorism can further thrive, and has proved to create
interruptions to ongoing peace negotiations. In that regard, Kenya stands behind the
20-1078675/120

S/2020/799

Secretary-General’s call, on 23 March, for silencing the guns globally. We also fully
align ourselves with the call of the AU Commission Chairperson, His Excellency
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat’s, on 8 April, that all of us focus on collectively fighting
COVID-19 as a united global community.
The COVID-19 pandemic is also having a huge impact on peace operations in
mission settings. Similarly, humanitarian aid flows and ongoing peace negotiations
between warring parties have also been negatively impacted, particularly in refugee
and internally displaced persons camps. In that regard, my delegation wishes to
recognize the sacrifice of peacekeepers, local peacebuilders, community leaders,
women and youth organizations, civil society and health personnel in Africa
and globally.
The implementation of a global ceasefire will ensure that peace operations
continue to deliver on their mandates in times of health crises. National and regional
policies that include transparency and accountability measures during pandemics
will further ensure the safety of all personnel, including the free movement of
humanitarian aid to the most vulnerable.
We have also witnessed the essential contribution of women in peace
operations. namely, women as community leaders and also as front-line health
responders. However, women and girls have also been disproportionately hit by
the health, economic and social impacts of the pandemic. The pandemic-related
security situation creates an important opportunity to broaden and hasten the
implementation of the existing recommendations contained in the resolutions on
women and peace and security and on youth, peace and security, particularly with
respect to the pillars of participation, protection, prevention and partnership within
the pandemic framework.
Additionally, the international community, upon request from national
stakeholders, can rally around fragile countries and offer support in building resilient
critical governance infrastructure, particularly health-care systems, and ensure the
training of personnel and the provision of essential equipment. Access to functioning
health facilities can mitigate the risk posed by the health and insecurity nexus.
The pandemic has also put tremendous strain on national health-care systems
and economies across the globe, no matter the country’s development level.
Consequently, the health crisis also has the potential of exacerbating underdevelopment
as a trigger to instability, particularly in already weak economies. Sustainable
funding is therefore essential for the sustainability of essential infrastructure. An
interdisciplinary approach is needed to harmonize medical, public and political
responses to pandemics.
In conclusion, the Council also needs to start looking ahead in terms of what
the world post-COVID-19 will look like for women, children, displaced persons and
marginalized and vulnerable populations in conflict-affected and fragile countries
and regions. In partnership with other United Nations bodies, funds and agencies,
particularly the Peacebuilding Commission, it will be critical to start building on
and centralizing the findings and reports of national, regional and international
stakeholders on this dynamic of health and peace, including the gendered and
disproportionate impact of COVID-19, in order to have informed and contextualized
guidelines and recommendations moving forward.

76/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

Annex 37
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Kyrgyzstan to the
United Nations, Mirgul Moldoisaeva
Let me first of all express my gratitude to the Republic of Indonesia for the
invitation to today’s open debate of the Security Council. We commend you, Sir,
for having chosen to put this very timely and critical issue on this month’s agenda
for consideration during your presidency. I would like to thank António Guterres,
Secretary-General; Mr. Ban Ki-moon, former Secretary-General; and Ms. Sarah
Cliffe, Director of the Center on International Cooperation, New York University,
for their very informative statements.
Let me thank the organizers of today’s event for the opportunity to speak on
this important topic, entitled “Pandemics and the challenges of sustaining peace”.
We note with deep concern the threat to human health, safety and well-being
caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), which continues to spread throughout
the world, and we would draw attention to the unprecedented consequences of the
pandemic, including serious disruptions to public life and economic development as
well as challenges in the area of travel and global trade, climate change, humanitarian
and migration crises, rising poverty and increasing inequality, and its detrimental
effects on both human well-being and international security, which will reverse the
hard-won development gains and hamper progress towards achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals and other internationally agreed development goals, within their
given time frames.
The advent and rapid spread of COVID-19 on a global scale has had a severe
impact on conflict-affected States. We note with deep concern the continued spread
of the coronavirus pandemic in all regions of the world, which poses a major threat
to human health and safety. It is obvious that peoples in conflict-affected States are
paying the highest price in the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic, and this is
happening against the backdrop of ongoing armed conflicts.
The current situation requires the immediate unification of our efforts and the
adoption of decisive actions by the whole international community. In this matter, the
central role of the United Nations and its Security Council cannot be underestimated.
Considering this, the Kyrgyz Republic supports the call of the Secretary-General,
António Guterres, for a global ceasefire and enhanced international cooperation to
successfully counter the COVID-19 pandemic. We welcome resolution 2532 (2020),
which demands a general and immediate cessation of hostilities in all situations on
the Council’s agenda and supports the efforts undertaken by the Secretary-General
and his Special Representatives and Special Envoys in that respect.
There is a need to strengthen development cooperation and to increase access
to concessional finance, especially in the context of the global pandemic, and we call
upon donors that have not done so to intensify their efforts to fulfil their respective
official development assistance commitments, particularly to least developed
countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States.
We reaffirm General Assembly resolutions 74/270, on global solidarity
to fight COVID-19, and 74/274, on international cooperation to ensure global
access to medicines, vaccines and medical equipment to face COVID-19. We are
deeply concerned about the impact of high debt levels on the ability of developing
countries, particularly countries in special situations, to withstand the impact of
the COVID-19 shock and to invest in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.

20-1078677/120

S/2020/799

We welcome the steps taken by the Group of 20 to provide a time-bound
suspension of debt-service payments and by the International Monetary Fund and
the World Bank to provide liquidity and other support measures to ease the debt
burden of developing countries, and we call upon all relevant actors, including the
international financial institutions, to address debt vulnerabilities, with special
consideration given to countries in special situations, and to assist with the response
to and recovery from the pandemic. We call in particular on all donors to consider
allocating funds for the purchase of the necessary medicines and equipment and
the implementation of additional assistance measures to the most vulnerable States.
Also, owing to the acute shortage of the medical personnel during the COVID-19
pandemic, all United Nations Members need to take serious response measures for
the protection of medical personnel and medical infrastructure and consider sending
medical volunteers and groups to the countries most affected.
During this challenging time for the international community, the Kyrgyz
Republic fully supports the vital role of the United Nations and its Security Council
in solving problems related to the maintenance of international peace and security,
developing friendly relations among nations, cooperating in resolving development
problems, reducing poverty, promoting respect for human rights, protecting the
environment and fighting disease and the COVID-19 outbreak response in relation
to peace and security in the world today.
We believe that, given the existing and emerging issues related to the COVID-19
pandemic around the world, the role of the Security Council should be strengthened
as much as possible. In that regard, we fully support the peaceful resolution of
ongoing conflicts and crises around the world by promoting dialogue between all
political and military forces under the auspices of the United Nations. In particular,
the Kyrgyz Republic pays close attention to preventive diplomacy, peacebuilding
and peacemaking, and civilian protection. We call upon the international community
as a whole to actively participate in the settlement of international and local
conflicts, in United Nations peacekeeping operations and within the framework of
the Peacebuilding Fund.
The spread of COVID-19 has added an additional burden to achieving the
goals of United Nations peacekeeping operations. Nevertheless, today it is very
important to continue to ensure peace in the respective territories, as United Nations
peacekeeping missions do. In that regard, the timely rotation of peacekeepers plays
an important role so that they can perform the assigned tasks efficiently. It is also
necessary to provide them with appropriate means in order to protect them from
infection by the coronavirus.
The COVID-19 pandemic has reminded us in the most powerful way that
we are closely interconnected and only as strong as our weakest link. Only by
working together and in solidarity can we end the pandemic and effectively tackle
its consequences. Only together can we build resilience against future pandemics
and other global challenges. The United Nations must be at the centre of our efforts.
The Government of the Kyrgyz Republic intends to continue to support and
actively to work in cooperation with all Member States, the United Nations system
and all international partners to achieve our goals.

78/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

Annex 38
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of Liechtenstein to the
United Nations, Georg Sparber
Liechtenstein conveys its gratitude to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Indonesia, Retno L.P. Marsudi, for having convened this second open debate on the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The Council thereby has set a basis for a
hopefully regular engagement on the primary security topic worldwide.
Sooner rather than later, that engagement should also yield tangible results,
building on resolution 2532 (2020). In addressing the pandemic, the Council is taking
an important but insufficient step to revise the paradigm of peace and security, which
has been proved inadequate to deliver on the expectation of the membership that the
Council act comprehensively and preventively against all threats to international
peace and security. The Council should prioritize upholding human security and
analyse how threats to it can be best prevented or resolved, an imperative given the
increasing evidence that crises of a similar nature are likely to recur.
With its peace operations, the Security Council has a powerful tool at its
disposal to foster sustainable peace and comprehensive security. Unfortunately,
the use of that tool diverges greatly in terms of political aspirations and technical
quality. In some contexts, such as in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic, the Council has been able to
articulate a more comprehensive approach to security in its peacekeeping mandates.
But its handling of peacekeeping mandates remains inconsistent and is dominated
by a militarized approach. The ongoing pandemic offers an obvious opportunity to
review that approach.
Many States already stated the obvious in the Security Council in July (see
S/2020/663): never in the history of the United Nations have more people felt more
insecure as a result of not only the virus itself but of its devastating knock-on
impacts. The world has seen wide-ranging human rights restrictions and increased
risks of mass poverty and hunger, a massive negative impact on education, increased
inequality and heightened social tensions.
For that reason, Liechtenstein appreciates the fact that the Council has chosen
to look at COVID-19 through the lens of sustaining peace. In this way, the Council
has an opportunity to embrace and build on the work of other organs and agencies of
the United Nations. The exceptionalism often displayed by the Security Council is as
much outdated as its restrictive agenda setting. Both need to change if the Council is
to retain relevance and legitimacy in the light of the present security threats. Formats
for cooperation across the United Nations system should be expanded; some already
exist, most notably the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). The Security Council
could contribute constructively to the work of the Commission in helping to reassess
the criteria to establish configurations. It should also have an interest in introducing
a clear justice component into the PBC’s work — an omission that has prevented the
Commission since its inception from maximizing its potential and that should be
rectified also in the light of the parameters for sustainable peace given in the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.
In the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), the international community
has agreed on the most ambitious and most comprehensive human development
programme, and indeed human security programme, ever devised. They include a
clear acknowledgement of the need to sustain peace based on international law, in
particular human rights, cooperation, solidarity and multilateralism. They would
20-1078679/120

S/2020/799

indeed have provided a model to significantly limit the pandemic’s impact had there
been better progress towards their achievement before the outbreak of COVID-19.
But the SDGs are also the blueprint for how to build back better in a way
that remedies vulnerabilities in our current system. The Security Council and its
peace operations can play a key role in that regard. Human rights and the rule-of-law
components of peace operations can help lay the foundations for more accountable
institutions, enhancing inclusion and strengthening democratic processes and the
fight against corruption, in accordance with SDG 16. Accordingly, the mandates
of all United Nations peace operations should systematically include strong and
effective human rights and rule-of-law components. While standards in this respect
vary significantly within the various peace operations, Liechtenstein sees room for
improvement across the board. Moreover, Liechtenstein is concerned at the sustained
efforts being made by certain States to weaken this dimension of peace operations,
including regularly during budget negotiations.
Where the Security Council takes a broader and deeper look at security, it
can have positive impact, such as with its current thematic agendas. The Council
should draw the right conclusions from that and ensure that it contributes to systemwide discussions on the negative security impacts of the pandemic, including but
not limited to the areas of climate and biodiversity, poverty and hunger, health,
education, gender, freedom of expression and information and privacy. The Council
has laid a foundation on a limited number of these issues, including through its
women and peace and security as well as climate and security agendas. These should
be expanded and complemented by a similar engagement in all other securityrelevant areas.
A more open attitude on the part of the Council towards the work and expertise
of the rest of the United Nations system is a necessary first step in this regard and
would be a welcome sign that the Security Council understands itself to be an integral
part of the United Nations that contributes to the overall goals and purposes that the
international community has committed to through the Charter and the countless
important agreements developed on its basis.

80/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

Annex 39
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Malta to the United Nations
Malta thanks the Indonesian presidency of the Security Council for having
organized this high-level open debate on pandemics and the challenges to sustaining
peace following the high-level debate organized last month by Germany on pandemics
and security and the very welcome adoption of resolution 2532 (2020), signalling the
continuity of the engagement of the Security Council on this issue.
Malta fully aligns itself with the statement submitted by the European Union
(annex 29) and would like to add a few remarks in its national capacity.
At the outset, we would like to share the view expressed by colleagues that
pandemics are not simply a health crisis and cannot be addressed solely as health
issues. Important signs are already visible that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
risks the deepening of pre-existing social, economic and political fissures. The
pandemic is raising known risks for intensifying conflict, including food insecurity,
hate speech, mass migration, instability in border areas and the unequal delivery of
basic goods and services.
Before the pandemic, 135 million people were already experiencing crisis
levels of acute food insecurity. COVID-19 has exacerbated socioeconomic problems
and pushed countries to the brink of famine. The importance of food security and
agriculture has been highlighted in the global humanitarian response plan and has
been recognized as one of the strategic priorities to mitigate the situation.
If farmers do not have access to their fields or do not have the means or
access to buy seeds and other inputs to plant or buy food for their animals, planting
seasons will be missed, cultivation will drop significantly and animals will be
lost. That means less food to nourish populations in both rural and urban areas.
We must urgently recognize that our efforts need to be stepped up if we are to get
back on track to fulfilling our commitments under the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. The agricultural sector is key to the provision of nourishment and to
ensuring healthy living, and is the fulcrum if we want to end hunger. We need to
continue working on achieving more sustainable agriculture through the adaptation
of sustainable practices that respect our ecosystem and our environment.
Earlier this year, at the height of the pandemic, Malta was facing an agricultural
export crisis. A decision was taken to send 500 tons of potatoes to Namibia as an
act of solidarity with its people because of the severe drought it experienced. That
initiative fed around half a million persons in Namibia, prevented food waste in
Malta and yielded an opportunity for the long-term benefit of both countries.
COVID-19 is our common enemy, which requires us to do more together. Our
actions today will affect tomorrow’s generations. Our vision for a better tomorrow
will become a reality only if we all work together today. We have to recognize that
the only way we can overcome the challenges we are currently facing is by taking an
innovative approach and adapting to the new circumstances.
We cannot but support the view shared in the statement (annex 29) submitted
by the observer of the European Union that the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture needs to adapt to the new type of challenges that the world is facing, such
as climate change and environmental degradation. In that context, Malta welcomes
the recent report of the Secretary-General on Peacebuilding and Sustaining Peace
(S/2020/773), which covers the continued implementation of resolution 70/262, on
the review of the peacebuilding architecture.

20-1078681/120

S/2020/799

Above all, Malta believes that we need to maintain a high level of transparency
with the Peacebuilding Commission, United Nations agencies and other actors to be
better equipped with the necessary and correct information to better support efforts
by conflict-affected countries to advance peacebuilding and sustaining peace during
this and any future pandemic. That transparency can be achieved through sharing
best practices, exchanging information and combating disinformation. That will
ensure and further enhance mutual solidarity during these challenging times.
We are now witnessing the direct and secondary consequences of the COVID-19
pandemic interacting with pre-existing crises, adding another layer of complexity to
already fragile situations due to years of conflict that are engaged in peacebuilding
processes. The pandemic is creating new problems and amplifying existing ones,
such as socioeconomic division, gender inequality, increased insecurity for women
and girls and other vulnerable groups, and mental health and psychosocial concerns.
Fast-moving, complex emergencies such as COVID-19 require a whole-of-system
and whole-of-society response through coordination, partnerships and an efficient
use of our tools.
We agree that there is a strong correlation between preventing violent conflicts
and working towards sustainable development, poverty reduction and the protection
of human rights and fundamental freedoms. Malta supports the EU’s efforts in
rallying behind the Secretary-General’s initiative to coordinate a United Nationswide response, and welcomes the comprehensive proposals enshrined in his policy
papers addressing the impact of COVID-19.
As highlighted by colleagues, COVID-19 represents a dramatic threat to life
in war-torn countries. The impact of an outbreak of the virus could be nothing short
of catastrophic. COVID-19 poses yet another serious obstacle to the well-being of
the already-vulnerable civilian populations of war-stricken countries such as Libya,
Syria and Yemen, particularly when one takes into account the state of the weakened
health infrastructure and the over-crowded conditions in camps for refugees and
internally displaced persons. The recent outbreak has additionally exacerbated the
economic situation in conflict regions, resulting in a decline in aid deliveries and
the drying up of remittances, which has led to spikes in poverty rates and hindered
access to basic necessities, including food and medicine.
In order to overcome those challenges, it is crucial for all relevant parties to
desist from ongoing hostilities, take immediate action to protect civilians within
their areas of effective control and ensure the depoliticization of the humanitarian
infrastructure through the lifting of restrictions imposed on humanitarian workers
and life-saving aid deliveries.
Pandemics do not respect borders, functions or ranks. They pose a risk to the
entire human race and further complicate the work of United Nations peacekeepers,
who already serve in difficult environments. International efforts that seek to address
this precarious situation, such as the EU’s support for the Secretary-General’s
23 March appeal for an immediate global ceasefire in the light of the pandemic, as
well as the adoption of resolution 2532 (2020), are to be welcomed and provide a
solid platform upon which further action needs to be considered.
As the Secretary-General underlined in his report on peacebuilding and
sustaining peace, the world’s population continues to face increased poverty,
inequality, exclusion, as well as threats to peace and security. Unfortunately, the
situation has been further exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic. Refugees and
other people displaced because of conflict are among to the most marginalized and
vulnerable, and are particularly at risk during the COVID-19 pandemic.

82/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
reported that, as of 13 July, the crisis in Syria, combined with the COVID-19
pandemic and the closure of a number of commercial crossings, is significantly
jeopardizing the protection of displaced communities, who already face obstacles in
securing livelihoods. Persons with disabilities, particularly women and girls, are at a
heightened risk of experiencing violence, abuse and neglect. UNHCR and its partners
must continue to be supported to ensure that the needs of the most vulnerable are
met, for the benefit of all.
During such unprecedented times, the impact of this crisis is disproportionally
felt by women, with far-reaching consequences that are amplified in contexts of
fragility, conflict and emergencies. The full, equal and meaningful participation
of women must be at the centre of recovery efforts if we are to build a more
peaceful, just and resilient world, ensure an effective pandemic response and
promote peacebuilding.
Malta joins the Secretary-General in calling on all States Members of the
United Nations to forge a common and multilateral vision, show solidarity and use
our common systems and capacities across the United Nations to adequately support
Member States in their efforts to achieve inclusive, sustainable development and
sustain peace. An integrated approach is key if we are to mitigate the effects of
pandemics, and the inclusion of partners is more critical than ever. We need solidarity
and must enhance our capabilities.

20-1078683/120

S/2020/799

Annex 40
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Mexico to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
Mexico would like to thank Indonesia for convening this debate. The
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is, without a doubt, one of the greatest
challenges the international community has faced since the founding of the United
Nations 75 years ago.
The devastation resulting from the pandemic is a global challenge that
requires global solutions. It is not only a health crisis, but also an economic, political
and social challenge that has challenged progress towards poverty eradication, food
security, gender equality and many other Sustainable Development Goals. We face
unprecedented multidimensional disruption, which is exacerbated in conflict and
post-conflict situations.
We reiterate Mexico’s unequivocal support for the Secretary-General’s call
and for resolution 2532 (2020), on a general and immediate cessation of hostilities.
The humanitarian truce is essential to addressing the pandemic.
Effectively addressing the pandemic is imperative in order to preserve the
peacebuilding and development gains in transition and post-conflict countries. The
effects of the pandemic are likely to magnify existing challenges in the areas of
violence, inequality, poverty, unemployment, health services, human rights and
democratic governance systems, among others. We also face a misinformation
challenge, which may hinder strategies to respond adequately to the pandemic.
In addition to the health consequences, the pandemic affects social, economic
and security aspects, and the relevant bodies and specialized agencies must provide
a timely and coordinated response based on their respective mandates.
The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) is the United Nations body best
positioned to assist in addressing some of those challenges, as its action as a hinge
between United Nations bodies and its convening capacity has been helpful in
promoting dialogue between key actors in countries emerging from conflict. That
dialogue, in turn, strengthens the relationship between the Security Council and the
General Assembly, thus contributing to the legitimacy of the former. Mexico urges
the Security Council to continue to take advantage of the advisory role of the PBC.
In order for the United Nations system to overcome the present crisis as a
matter of priority, it must contemplate inclusive and universal access to an eventual
vaccine. We must make vaccines, medicines, preventive instruments, laboratory
tests, reagents, support materials, essential medical supplies and new diagnostics
available to all, since no one is safe until everyone is safe.
Vaccines should be a global public good and — as the Secretary-General
said — should be the people’s vaccine, because the most effective solution lies in the
development, production and distribution of an effective vaccine. In that regard, we
must ensure strict implementation of General Assembly resolution 74/274, submitted
by Mexico and co-sponsored by 179 countries.
The Security Council should maintain its support for the measures that the
Organization has taken to ensure that peace operations can effectively carry out their
mandate under current conditions and remain alert to the impact that the pandemic
may have on the conflict situations under its agenda. Flexibility and speed of action
in a changing context must also be ensured.

84/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

In Mexico’s view, it is important that, in addressing the links between public
health and international security, the Security Council carefully consider the
following questions. How can coordination with the World Health Organization,
other regional bodies and non-governmental organizations be strengthened to
address pandemics and other health challenges in conflict areas? What steps can be
taken to facilitate humanitarian access and ensure the safety of medical personnel
in conflict areas? What measures should be taken to combat radicalization, violent
extremism leading to terrorism and the actions of terrorist groups in the context of
the current pandemic? How can we best use the specialized tools available to the
international community, such as the International Health Regulations, to ensure
that decisions are made on the basis of technical and scientific considerations and
that this agenda is not politicized?
In the face of this multifaceted global health emergency, we must generate
effective multilateral solutions that consider the structural causes of conflict and
include the entire peace continuum, incorporating the concept of sustainable peace
as a guiding thread of United Nations preventive action.

20-1078685/120

S/2020/799

Annex 41
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Morocco to the
United Nations
The Kingdom of Morocco wishes to congratulate the Republic of Indonesia
on its presidency of the Security Council for the month of August in this very
challenging year. We welcome the initiative of the Indonesian presidency of bringing
the Security Council’s focus to pandemics and the challenges of sustaining peace,
and we wish to thank Her Excellency Mrs. Retno Marsudi, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Indonesia, for presiding over this important and timely
high-level open debate.
This meeting undoubtedly constitutes another major milestone for the Security
Council in recognizing the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) on
peacebuilding, following the Council’s landmark unanimous adoption of resolution
2632 (2020) on 1 July.
Over a matter of only a few weeks, we have unfortunately witnessed the
detrimental impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on political and socioeconomic
conditions in different parts of the world. That compels us today to acknowledge that
pandemics such as COVID-19 do bear the traits of modern-day, global, unforeseen
and multidimensional threats to peace and security and should be considered as such,
as this exceptional worldwide scourge has proven to make no distinction between
categories of Member States and populations.
However, the new and volatile challenges triggered by the global health
crisis are particularly harmful for regions and Member States currently battling to
build and sustain peace; safeguard their security, socioeconomic development and
stability; and meet their global sustainable goals.
Indeed, this deplorable reality has pressed the international community to
quickly realize that the propagation of the pandemic has an undeniable exacerbating
effect and acts as a threat multiplier, especially with regard to day-to-day
peacebuilding and sustaining peace challenges. It has had severe socioeconomic
consequences and has led to the imposition of restrictive, but necessary, containment
measures that have hampered daily life and sustenance.
In Member States in transition, post-conflict or peacebuilding contexts, the
combination of pre-existing and emerging challenges has considerably strained
already heavily burdened vital areas, such as the health sector, service delivery and
food security. For other Member States, it has also generated heightened levels of
uncertainty and vulnerability with regard to the implementation of important peace
and political processes.
Unfortunately, the urgency linked to the pandemic has risked shifting the
attention of the international community away from the primacy of the socioeconomic
dimension, especially for Member States in peacebuilding and sustaining peace
contexts. It is worth recalling that the peace-security-development nexus has become
a reality, as consistently highlighted at the United Nations, including within the
Security Council.
It is safe to say today that this pandemic can affect not only future and longterm sustaining peace efforts but is also likely to hamper, stall or even reverse very
hard-won global peacebuilding gains achieved so far. As such, our first collective
step in addressing the question of pandemics and the challenges for sustaining
peace has to be based on the accurate assessment that a pandemic has considerable
destabilizing potential for national, regional and international peace and security.
86/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

Only with an earnest stocktaking can the international community come up
with adequate and efficient comprehensive responses for addressing unpredictable
future global shared threats such as pandemics and their devastating effects. We
therefore wish to take this opportunity to highly commend Governments, women,
men and youth of the Member States affected by both the pandemic and challenges
to sustaining peace for their continuing efforts aimed at containing and preventing
the spread of COVID-19 and at mitigating the socioeconomic effects of the global
health crisis.
However, while striving to sustain peace, Member States cannot fight the
adverse effects of pandemics on their own. The global nature of pandemics dictates
that the international community should act in unison and work towards an integrated
and coordinated response. In this regard, Morocco highly welcomes the great efforts
the United Nations deployed at the earliest stages of the pandemic to mitigate the
scale and severity of the global and borderless crisis, including from humanitarian,
health and development perspectives.
Morocco wishes in particular to commend the proactive engagement and
mobilization of the Secretary-General, who has come up with concrete steps and
initiatives such as his plan to address the potentially devastating socioeconomic
impact of COVID-19, as well as his report Shared responsibility, global solidarity:
Responding to the socioeconomic impacts of COVID-19, of March 2020, which paved
the way for the recent launch of the United Nations framework for the immediate
socioeconomic response to COVID-19. The framework is an important tool that will
also act as an operating arm in the peacebuilding and sustaining peace contexts.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s numerous appeals, including those calling for
people to come together to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic and for an immediate
global ceasefire in all corners of the world.
In addition to praising the major international mobilization, my delegation
wishes to commend in particular the current and the past Presidents of the Security
Council who spared no efforts to ensure business continuity in and transparency of
the work of the Council throughout the succeeding stages of the pandemic. Despite
all the real and virtual complications imposed by the pandemic, important issues
and discussions were advanced throughout busy and challenging times. It is of
paramount importance that the Security Council uphold its mandate by remaining
seized of pressing international peace and security matters and by maintaining a
continuous focus on the specific effects COVID-19 has had on various parts of the
world and on other issues on the Council’s agenda.
The group of actions the Security Council took to shed an appropriate light on
the effects of the pandemic and to help address its implications for sustaining peace
culminated in success with the historic adoption of resolution 2532 (2020) and the
organization of today’s high-level open debate. We once again thank the Indonesian
presidency for making the issue of pandemics and sustaining peace a priority of the
Security Council.
As Chair of a country-specific configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), Morocco cannot but commend the pioneering role the Commission has
stepped up to play since the start of the global health crisis by trying to highlight
the various consequences of the pandemic in different parts of the world. Indeed,
despite the very well-known challenges related to the global crisis today, members
of the international community — and of the PBC — have before them historic
opportunities to come up with new avenues of cooperation and innovative and
effective partnerships in order to help preserve ongoing peacebuilding and peacesustaining processes.

20-1078687/120

S/2020/799

The foresightful 2016 twin resolutions 70/262 of the General Assembly and
2282 (2016) of the Security Council on the review of the peacebuilding architecture
have felicitously created space for the PBC to diversify its working methods and
enhance its efficiency and flexibility, so it can be increasingly engaged in regional
and cross-cutting issues relevant to peacebuilding and sustaining peace. These
resolutions also provided for more coherent and coordinated support for regional
peacebuilding priorities and greater partnership between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations, which has proven critical in the current
global crisis.
Thanks to its unique status within the United Nations system, the PBC has
been, by design, able to play a constructive role in current times, primarily by
maintaining continuous attention on the challenges affecting specific Member States
and regions; taking the mobilization of key partners forward; leveraging its advisory
role, especially to the Security Council and to its country-specific configurations;
and pooling the extensive experience it has gathered so far to come up with innovative
ways to help prevent and mitigate the effects of pandemics, such as the COVID-19,
as it had previously done with the assistance it provided in fighting the adverse
effects of outbreaks, such as Ebola.
However, in the context of the current 2020 review of the peacebuilding
architecture, Morocco wishes to highlight the importance of reflecting on the
disastrous effects pandemics can have on efforts and gains made in sustaining peace,
in order to enable the United Nations to better respond to future occurrences of
unforeseen pandemics or global crises like the present one.
In conclusion, and sharing the same concern about the impact of pandemics
on sustaining peace, the Kingdom of Morocco, under the leadership of King
Mohammed VI, has also reflected on the need for a continental preventive response
to the COVID-19 pandemic in order to overcome the social and economic impacts of
the pandemic. Because Morocco gives the highest priority to the African continent,
in the immediate aftermath of the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, on 13 April
His Majesty King Mohammed VI launched an action-oriented initiative with
African leaders, aimed at enabling the sharing of experiences and good practices
and establishing an operational framework to support African countries efforts in
the various phases of the management of the pandemic. Within the framework of
this initiative, on 14 June His Majesty King Mohammed VI issued his very high
instructions to send essential protective medical aid, equipment and medicines to
20 African countries with a view to supporting their fight against the coronavirus.
All the protective products and equipment were produced in Morocco, complied with
the World Health Organization’s standards and have already been delivered to the
concerned countries. Moreover, Morocco recently decided to make a contribution to
the Peacebuilding Fund with the firm belief that increased cooperation and solidarity
can provide a response to preserve peace and to address the challenges linked to
global crises such as the current pandemic.
As dire as the consequences of pandemics can be for efforts aimed at sustaining
peace and at ensuring global peace and security, the international community has
before it a historic opportunity to reflect on how better to prepare for future global
crises and to build back better, as we have all witnessed how a pandemic can not
only disrupt national and regional peacebuilding processes and social cohesion but
also turn our daily lives and the business-as-usual approach completely on their
heads. We therefore commend the critical reforms engaged in early on by SecretaryGeneral António Guterres with a view to restructuring the United Nations to make
it fit to tackle novel contemporary threats and to serve peace and development in

88/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

all their forms, particularly at a time when the Organization is commemorating its
milestone seventy-fifth anniversary.
More than ever before, the international community must remain committed
to bringing a helping hand to the Member States and regions affected by the twin
challenges of setbacks to sustaining peace and the fight against the pandemic, in full
respect of their national priorities and ownership.

20-1078689/120

S/2020/799

Annex 42
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Netherlands to
the United Nations, Karel van Oosterom
Let me first congratulate Indonesia on assuming the presidency for the month
of August. We thank the Indonesian presidency for convening today’s timely and
important debate.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has acted as a contrast agent that has
brought already visible geopolitical differences into sharper focus. On the ground,
the pandemic has been seen to exacerbate existing tensions in fragile regions,
fuelling popular discontent and putting peacebuilding gains at risk of reversal. In
societies where human rights were already under pressure, we see a reflex to further
curb civic space.
The pandemic and its direct and indirect effects are by definition an issue
of global concern, which means that we must come together as an international
community to address it urgently and comprehensively. That means first and
foremost that we need a strong and effective United Nations, especially in the area
of peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
Accordingly, we wish to draw the Security Council’s attention to three
elements that are essential for the United Nations to be able to deliver: first, United
Nations reforms; secondly, financing for peacebuilding; and thirdly, mental health
and psychosocial support (MHPSS).
With regard to United Nations reforms, in many ways, the COVID-19 pandemic
provides a test case for such reforms. The challenges posed are so multifaceted that
they can be addressed comprehensively only by involving a variety of relevant United
Nations actors, all which would contribute in distinct ways to the aim of sustaining
peace. Achieving sustainable peace requires parallel progress on development,
security and human rights. Therefore, more than ever, United Nations actors on the
ground must pursue cooperation and partnership with the guidance of a resident
coordinator. The fact that the Peacebuilding Fund proves so effective at bringing
United Nations actors together at the country level is one of the reasons why we are
one of its biggest donors. Similarly, we have decided to immediately support the
United Nations COVID-19 Response and Recovery Multi-Partner Trust Fund, as it is
the centralized United Nations response to the socioeconomic consequences of this
crisis, which is a key dimension of sustaining peace.
Secondly, with regard to financing for peacebuilding, peacebuilding efforts
remain greatly underfinanced, unfortunately, even if needs continue to rise as a
result of this pandemic. The Netherlands hopes to continue its substantial funding
of different multilateral peacebuilding instruments, but times are uncertain and
concerted action by States Members of the United Nations is needed in this regard.
We must therefore use the review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture to
discuss in earnest ways to significantly increase means available for peacebuilding.
We expect the Peacebuilding Commission to play a role in this regard.
The financial proposals set forth in Secretary-General’s 2018 report on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace (S/2018/43) are still largely unimplemented.
Based on the imminent report of the Secretary-General, coming later in 2020, we
look forward to joining hands with other Member States to find new and innovative
ways to ensure more structural and predictable funding for peacebuilding, including
good peacebuilding donorship.
Lastly, with respect to MHPSS, the pandemic has laid bare the need for more
attention to be paid to mental health and psychosocial support, as outlined by the
90/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

Secretary-General’s policy brief on MHPSS. MHPSS in peacebuilding settings is
absolutely critical for creating conditions for sustaining peace. To avoid the cycle
of conflict and to counter social disintegration in fragile societies, it is key that we
integrate MHPSS in peacebuilding from the outset. Local and national Government
institutions, including those working on health, grievance management, transitional
justice, dialogue and reconciliation, play a central role in this effort.
From the two consultations on the integration of MHPSS in peacebuilding we
have organized for the review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture —
one with experts and one with representatives of States Members of the United
Nations — it became clear that many participants would like to see an enhanced
inclusion of MHPSS in peacebuilding efforts.
MHPSS needs to be structurally and explicitly taken into account, in
peacebuilding analyses, programming, monitoring, evaluation and learning. The
Netherlands looks forward to continuing to make its contribution to bringing this
issue forth in the formal phase of the 2020 review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture, and to work together with many of the participants in today’s debate.

20-1078691/120

S/2020/799

Annex 43
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of Nigeria to the
United Nations, Samson S. Itegboje
At the outset, let me thank the Permanent Mission of Indonesia for organizing
today’s open debate. Our special appreciation also goes to Mr. António Guterres,
Secretary-General; Mr. Ban Ki-moon, former Secretary-General; Ms. Sarah Cliffe,
Director, Centre on International Cooperation, New York University; as well as all
the other speakers, for sharing their perspectives on this important subject.
My delegation would like to make the following additional remarks in its
national capacity.
The surge of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic in the early
months of 2020 is already reshaping our politics, societies and economies both
domestically and globally. However, owing to lack of immunity within populations,
it is likely to remain a global threat for a protracted period. This situation has also
fundamentally affected the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, with this
impact being more pronounced in fragile and conflict-affected States.
The crisis created by the pandemic is beyond the immediate health impact.
Governments’ initial responses to the deadly virus, which included immediate
shutdown of borders and of formal and informal sectors, have affected economies
worldwide, leading to food insecurity, job losses and deepening inequality. These
issues can intensify pre-existing social-structure challenges in any country, creating
additional layers of grievances, as the most vulnerable populations become more
disproportionately affected. In some situations, these issues create new threats to
international peace and security, particularly when they take place across sensitive
regional boundaries.
The resultant effects of the inequalities created by the pandemic within
societies, across continents and between countries can be seen in the faces of
disadvantaged and vulnerable groups, especially refugees, the internally displaced
and millions of people eking out a living in informal settlements across the globe.
Unfortunately, current responses to the crisis at the international, national and local
levels have not adequately demonstrated conflict-sensitivity or taken an inclusive
peacebuilding approach. Rather, the lockdowns have led to horrific increases in
violence against youth, women and children and had an impact on the social and
political tensions that persist in the absence of any meaningful response to addressing
these inequalities in protecting human rights even where failure to do so undermines
democratic values.
In conflict-affected countries where populations already suffer from multiple
risks associated with the pandemic, the situation is further aggravated by a lack of
access to markets, disruption of supply chains and mobility restraints leading to
closure of markets. The inability to maintain social distancing among populations
where health and sanitary facilities are inadequate, especially in camps, also
presents another challenging security-risk scenario, with a potential for a high rate
of infections that could spread to nearby communities. The COVID-19 pandemic
has therefore unmasked the gradations of inequality as well as the prospects for
resilience and recovery.
Women have perhaps been the most affected by the effects of the pandemic.
While they have been at the receiving end of having to maintain the socioeconomic
fabric of families despite job losses, they have equally been subjected to domestic
violence and other unsavoury conditions. However, women bring a unique perspective

92/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

to the peacebuilding process, which is why gender issues should be institutionalized
in policy frameworks that include decision-making and peace-building initiatives.
All factors associated with the crisis have highlighted new patterns of exclusion
in a very direct way and provide opportunities to create inclusive dialogue around
health and socioeconomic issues and the need for Governments to reach underserved
areas. Although the risk of violence may have increased during the pandemic,
building back better is also an opportunity for the promotion of peaceful societies,
in line with Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 16. This would present a more
deliberate effort by Governments to ensure that countries are able to navigate the
health crisis and its socioeconomic consequences, while minimizing social conflicts.
Furthermore, the challenges posed by the pandemic have significantly
hampered the work of the United Nations system, including peacekeeping
operations, special political missions and the Peacebuilding Commission, whose
peacebuilding efforts have been disrupted. The lockdowns have limited movements
of peacekeeping missions and may have also led to scepticism by local populations
towards the peacekeepers for fear of virus transmission. This has also put on hold
person-to-person dialogues and workshops. Another impediment that has been
highlighted on a more operational level among some agencies is the use of protective
gear, which prevents the facial recognition of the populations being attended to,
thereby increasing a sense of mistrust.
The United Nations system can strengthen the advancement of sustaining
its peace agenda in the COVID-19 response by continuing to adopt a more
integrated and coherent approach. This should involve all United Nations organs
and agencies, along with other crucial entities, including regional and subregional
organizations, international financial institutions, the private sector and civil
society groups. A holistic and systematic approach needs to be harnessed to address
the multidimensional risks to peace generated by the COVID-19 pandemic. All
opportunities should be exploited to unlock the possibilities for strengthening
peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
In order to ensure that no one is left behind and for the 2030 Agenda and
the SDGs to remain a keystone of an international commitment to sustainable
development as the world moves through and beyond the public health emergency
presented by COVID-19, we must continue to work towards building peaceful
societies, as they are a panacea for the 2030 Agenda in its last decade of action.
Nigeria fully supports the Secretary-General’s 23 March global ceasefire
appeal to combat COVID-19 in conflict-affected countries. It is also heartening
to commend the Security Council for finally adopting, on 1 July, resolution 2532
(2020), demanding a cessation of hostilities in all situations on its agenda and calling
for all conflict parties to engage in a humanitarian pause for at least 90 days. It also
calls for all relevant parts of the United Nations system to accelerate their response
to the pandemic, with emphasis on countries in need.
We wish to express our gratitude to the United Nations, the European Union,
the United States of America, Norway, financial institutions, et cetera for their
contributions to Nigeria’s efforts to mitigate the effects of COVID-19. Nigeria, in
coordination with the United Nations, is to set up the Nigeria COVID-19 Response
Fund as a single national platform and financing framework that will foster
coordination, the effective mobilization of resources and the deployment of strategies
for an impactful response. Such palliative funds or facilities by international
organizations and financial institutions could be sustained within short- to mediumterm frameworks, or as dictated by unfolding circumstances, for States in need as

20-1078693/120

S/2020/799

they gradually recover from the economic slowdown occasioned by the pandemic.
This also reduces conflicts related to the vulnerability of weakened economies.
In conclusion, there is no gainsaying the fact that the challenges brought about
by the pandemic are enormous and, since no single country can confront the problem
alone, we urge for the continuation of the ongoing joint and collaborative efforts
towards the mitigation of, and a possible solution to, the effects of the COVID-19
pandemic to allow for the timely realization of the Sustainable Development
Goals. We therefore wish to thank the President-elect of the General Assembly
at its seventy-fifth session, Mr. Volkan Bozkir, for taking cognizance of the need
for sustained multilateral action on COVID-19 by adopting the theme “The future
we want, the United Nations we need: reaffirming our collective commitment to
multilateralism — confronting COVID-19 through effective multilateral action” for
the session.

94/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

Annex 44
Statement by the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Louise Blais
I would like to congratulate Indonesia on its presidency of the Security
Council this month and for organizing this timely high-level debate.
In my capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), I wish to
express my appreciation for the constructive informal interactive dialogue between
the Security Council and the PBC, organized by Germany and co-hosted by Indonesia,
the Niger and the United Kingdom on 22 July, and the enhanced collaboration
between the two bodies, notably to help address the present public health emergency
and contribute to durable peace and sustainable development.
Today I will update the Council on the PBC’s continuing efforts to support
national and regional stakeholders in addressing peacebuilding challenges in
conflict-affected contexts exacerbated by the recent coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic and on observations from the work we have done to date.
As noted in resolution 2532 (2020), this is a critical time for countries affected
by conflict. Hard-won peacebuilding gains are at risk, as in several cases the impact
of the pandemic has destroyed livelihoods, threatened social cohesion, strained the
capacity of governance institutions and contributed to risks of increased instability.
The crisis may potentially exacerbate underlying tensions and inequalities, while
compounding already dire humanitarian situations in affected countries. Overall,
the pandemic risks setting such countries even further behind in attaining the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
The PBC has been extraordinarily active over the past several months,
convening virtual ambassadorial-level meetings and adjusting its work plan to focus
explicitly on the impact of COVID-19 on the abilities of Governments and their
partners to deliver on emergency and national peacebuilding priorities. The PBC was
among the first United Nations bodies to rapidly shift to using virtual platforms in
response to the pandemic. Within a few weeks of the closure of the United Nations,
we were able to convene an ambassadorial-level video-teleconference meeting that
focused on how to mitigate the impact of the pandemic in peacebuilding contexts.
At its thematic meetings on the impact of COVID-19 on peacebuilding and the
socioeconomic consequences of the crisis, the PBC echoed the Secretary-General’s
call for a global ceasefire and urgent action within the framework of his plan and
report Shared Responsibilities, Global Solidarity: Responding to the Socio-Economic
Impacts of COVID-19 in order to fight the pandemic and deliver on national priorities.
The PBC has been advocating for strengthened partnerships in support of coherent,
conflict-sensitive and inclusive responses that recognize the importance of leaving
no one behind and ensuring that the most vulnerable are protected and empowered. In
that connection, it is particularly important to ensure that the impact of the pandemic
does not reverse progress on achieving gender equality and women’s empowerment,
as well as the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda.
In addition, since April, the PBC has convened a series of consultations to
hear directly from countries and regions, including in the Central African region,
West Africa and the Sahel, the African Great Lakes and the Pacific Islands, how they
are affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. Allow me to share some observations on
the basis of those discussions.
First, conflict-affected countries are in crisis, as the challenges they face
in delivering on their national peacebuilding priorities have been exacerbated and
multiplied by COVID-19. Most of the countries and regions where the PBC has
20-1078695/120

S/2020/799

engaged are already confronted with escalating humanitarian crises, high levels of
displacement, food shortages and collapsing economies. It is urgent that we act to
save lives and prevent the reversal of peacebuilding gains.
Secondly, this crisis cuts across the United Nations traditional silos and
requires a coordinated, multisectoral global response. This is also true for conflictaffected countries, where governance capacities and institutions are weak and
societies are deeply divided. Recognizing that an integrated and coherent approach
among relevant political, security and development actors, within and outside the
United Nations system, consistent with their respective mandates and the Charter of
the United Nations, is critical to peacebuilding and sustaining peace and essential to
improving respect for human rights, gender equality, empowering women and young
people, strengthening the rule of law, eradicating poverty, building institutions and
advancing economic development in conflict-affected countries, it is important to
continue cross-pillar support to United Nations peacebuilding activities in the field,
while acknowledging that each pillar has its intrinsic value and specific mandate.
In countries where the PBC has engaged, the impact of the crisis has been most
severe on the poorest and the most vulnerable. If national responses are perceived
to be slow, inadequate, ineffective or unfairly distributed, existing tensions could be
further exacerbated. It is important that Government responses to the pandemic and
international assistance in that regard not replicate or exacerbate existing inequalities
or social division. This means strengthening the United Nations socioeconomic
response, as well as better understanding and addressing the possible root causes of
conflict. Attention is also needed to mid- to long-term efforts to strengthen inclusive
and accountable national institutions.
Thirdly, the socioeconomic impact of the pandemic has been severe. Even
after decades of international peacebuilding support, many countries are only one
or two shocks away from falling into deep crisis. Several countries where the PBC
is engaged are at risk of seeing double-digit contractions in economic growth, and
there is no social safety net or economic stimulus package that can make up for
the destruction of livelihoods of entire communities. Small and medium-sized
enterprises, which employ 90 per cent of the workforce in Africa, are suffering
severe consequences and are often overlooked in recovery plans. This requires us
to pay attention to livelihoods, incomes and inclusive economic development. The
PBC will consider, where relevant, socioeconomic risks in its future advice to the
Security Council.
Fourthly, the news is not all bad. In every country and region where the
PBC is engaged, we have heard remarkable stories that testify to the resilience of
communities, the role of civil society and the innovation of the private sector. The
various consultations have served as a valuable platform for the exchange of lessons
learned, good practices and innovations among countries to build back better,
including lessons from the successful fight against Ebola in West Africa. We must
continue to support, learn from and replicate these success stories.
Finally, it is important to respond to this crisis through strengthened
partnerships and financing. There is great concern that the coming years will see
a global recession and reduction of official development aid flows. Consequently,
resources could be shifted away from longer-term investments in building the
institutions that help sustain peace to short-term humanitarian and emergency
response. Countries affected by conflict are already the furthest behind in attaining
the SDGs, and this pandemic risks setting them back even further. They need
predictable, sustainable, coordinated financial and technical support.
During the consultations, the PBC highlighted the urgent need to support
countries in safeguarding their capacities to fight the pandemic, while continuing
96/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

to accompany them in the advancement of their medium- and long-term national
peacebuilding priorities. The Commission underlined support for a coherent and
coordinated approach among all relevant actors, within and outside the United
Nations system, consistent with their respective mandates, and the Charter. The PBC
also called for predictable, sustainable and coordinated financial support and, in
that respect, welcomed the Peacebuilding Fund’s quick positioning to help address
the peacebuilding and sustaining peace dimensions of its work in the context of
the pandemic.
The constructive nature of those discussions, based on the principles of
national ownership and partnership, have encouraged new countries and regions to
seek consultations with the PBC, leading to the PBC’s first regional discussions on
Central Africa and the Pacific Islands, with the consent of all countries concerned.
The consultations have also encouraged Governments to take into account the needs
of all segments of society concerned when designing their COVID-19 responses and
implementing nationally owned peacebuilding priorities.
The meetings demonstrated the value of the PBC as a flexible, demand-driven
platform that allows for collaboration across the different pillars of the United
Nations system and among diverse actors, such as the World Bank, other financial
institutions, local civil society organizations, the private sector and regional
organizations, so as to ensure multipronged and coordinated political and financial
support to countries in addressing conflict risks and delivering on national priorities.
In that connection, the initiative of the Peacebuilding Support Office to fast-track
support for joint United Nations-World Bank data and risk assessment and analysis
has been welcomed.
At a time when the impact of the multifaceted crises posed by the COVID-19
pandemic on conflict-affected countries is significant and the work of the United
Nations, including in peacebuilding and sustaining peace, has become more
challenging, the PBC’s response to COVID-19 has demonstrated the value of the
convening platform that it provides to foster unity and solidarity among Member
States, the United Nations system and relevant actors to stay the course in their
support to peacebuilding and sustaining peace efforts.
I thank the members of the Security Council for their continuous support to
the work of the Commission.

20-1078697/120

S/2020/799

Annex 45
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Philippines to
the United Nations, Enrique A. Manalo
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has unleashed an
unprecedented crisis that has exposed the fragility of societies and in particular has
threatened the gains already achieved in finding just and lasting peace in conflictaffected areas.
Recognizing the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the work
to achieve peace, President Rodrigo Roa Duterte declared a unilateral ceasefire
with the Communist Party of the Philippines and its affiliates from 19 March to
15 April, days before the Secretary-General issued his appeal for a global ceasefire
on 23 March. Recognizing that initiative, the Secretary-General said that “upholding
these commitments will be crucial to enabling an effective response to, and recovery
from, the COVID-19 crisis”, encouraging “both sides to build on this momentum and
translate these expressions of goodwill into a lasting political solution”. The ceasefire
demonstrated the Philippine Government’s commitment to the swift and unimpeded
provision of public health assistance, especially the safe movement of health-care
workers, to stricken communities in dire need of immediate medical care.
To begin with, conflict-affected regions lag in development — economic,
infrastructure, social, human and sustainable development. COVID-19 prompted
Governments to impose restrictions that affect economic activities in order to protect
public health, while having to reassess needs and redouble efforts and human and
financial resources to assist and support conflict-affected regions in bouncing back
once such restrictions are loosened.
Despite the onset of COVID-19, armed conflicts and violence persist. Clashes
between Government forces and non-State armed groups and between clans still
erupt, displacing populations and affecting civilians and livelihoods.
With the setback in the implementation of peace agreements and communities
beset with new and grave challenges caused by the pandemic, sentiments around
neglect and grievances against the Government are stirred, paving fertile ground for
violent extremism. As such, it is important to catch up on the implementation of the
peace agreements in order to continue the critical work of resolving long-standing
issues of “unpeace” and address the causes of armed conflict.
The impacts of COVID-19 are disproportionately felt by vulnerable groups
in conflict situations, especially women. In conflict situations, the women and girls
are mothers, sometimes of female-headed households as widows or single parents;
daughters, including orphans; and sisters who are not just passive bystanders or only
victims or targets. One will also find women combatants and non-combatants who
are still members of armed groups, both State and non-State.
Women’s existing vulnerabilities prior to conflict — such as a lack of
education, poverty, discrimination, marginalization and non-recognition of rights —
are hundredfold in times of conflict, with the occurrence of internal displacement and
gender-based violence in emergencies. These vulnerabilities are further heightened
during the pandemic because their physical, social and economic capacities to deal
with their multiple roles and burdens as caregivers and breadwinners are further
limited, stretched or weakened, and their access to social services is undermined by
community quarantine restrictions.
To address the impacts of armed conflict and COVID-19 on women and other
vulnerable groups, there is a need to ensure the functioning of mechanisms that
were established to empower, promote and mainstream women and gender equality.
98/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

Institutions accountable for protecting the human rights of women and girls before,
during and after conflict situations and for preventing incidents of violence against
women must remain fully operational to ensure that the gender-responsive and culture
and conflict-sensitive and peace-promoting approaches continue to be observed.
It is important to recognize the important role of women, youth, the elderly, the
differently abled, cultural minorities and other vulnerable groups in peacebuilding
spaces, whether in conflict prevention, conflict management, conflict resolution
or conflict transformation. There must be a commitment to continuously promote
and increase their meaningful participation in all stages of decision-making in
the peace-promoting policies, programmes and projects. As such, responsive and
timely measures must be undertaken to address the impact of the pandemic on these
vulnerable sectors, taking into account their added vulnerabilities caused by the
intersectionality of natural disasters and armed conflict, and to strengthen their
capacities to respond to the impacts of the pandemic.
In the context of the Philippines, peacekeeping operations play a role in
humanitarian assistance. In cases of clashes between clans, which are prevalent
in Mindanao, peacekeeping missions serve as the first responders in mitigating
the armed conflict, directly communicating with the parties to the conflict and
mediating to reduce the tension. They also help build and strengthen capacities on
conflict resolution to address the persistence of violence on the ground and help
reach local peace agreements between those involved.
Strengthened coordination between peacekeepers and local Government
units should be pursued to ensure that communities, particularly the vulnerable
segments of the population, are protected against threats of armed conflict and
from COVID-19 infection. There is a need to sustain capacity-building on conflictsensitive and peace-promoting approaches, including conflict resolution processes
for peacekeepers, Government and humanitarian aid actors involved in peacebuilding
work or who are delivering interventions in conflict-affected areas, to ensure that
stakeholders continue to benefit from the peace dividends of the peace pacts forged.
This will help minimize frequent horizontal conflicts that indirectly affect the
peace process. Moreover, this should be done together with a robust information
and education campaign on minimum public health standards and disease awareness
and prevention.
The Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) community and its
partners, including the United Nations, are being called upon to extend support for
ASEAN member States that are pursuing peace and development in troubled and
conflict-ridden communities through humanitarian support to adapt to the risks of
COVID-19. This humanitarian intervention will serve as a foundation to effectively
resume the implementation of the peace agreements forged.
The United Nations should encourage cooperation among its Member States
in addressing the fissures that were magnified by COVID-19. These are heavy on
development, but have lasting impacts on peace. Channelling resources to health,
education, socioeconomic development and environmental protection will benefit
the quest for peace in the long term must be encouraged.
The United Nations should also continue to offer technical and core support
for the institutional development of States with internal conflicts, and that should
be tailored and context-specific. The Security Council could facilitate knowledge
and experience sharing by harnessing other countries’ good practices and lessons
learned in managing and mitigating these crises.
While we are in the middle of a crisis and we cannot begin to guess its end,
it is never too soon for a post-pandemic recovery plan. We are bracing for a steep
20-1078699/120

S/2020/799

decline in economic output, and a steep rise in the cost of social safety nets to soften
the fall to the ground.
Giving special priority to countries plagued with internal conflict in terms of
financial aid, humanitarian assistance and vaccines against COVID-19 will ensure
that the gains of the peace process and peacebuilding will be sustained.
The reprioritization of programmes and funding should allow for existing
peacebuilding initiatives to continue to mitigate the risks arising from conflict and
the pandemic. Financing strategies should be flexible and informed by conflict
and context analyses, taking into consideration also the secondary effects of the
pandemic. The distribution of support to communities should be based on a conflictsensitive assessment to prevent the escalation of conflict and to give priority to the
most vulnerable and marginalized groups.
To bridge the gap between today’s crisis and the future we want, we must
address the vulnerabilities COVID-19 has exposed. The Philippines believes that
addressing the challenges of sustaining peace in a COVID-19 context must be
anchored on sound strategies, with a clear political vision for United Nations field
missions, and integrated into a culture of accountability.
Given the multidimensional risks to sustaining peace, global leadership and
cooperation are needed more than ever to combat the biggest test that the world has
faced since the Second World War.

100/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

Annex 46
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Poland to the United Nations
We commend Indonesia for convening this timely debate, and we welcome
Her Excellency Mrs. Retno Marsudi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Indonesia. We also thank Secretary-General António Guterres, His Excellency
Mr. Ban Ki-moon and Ms. Sarah Cliffe for their significant contributions to
this debate.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has had an enormous effect
on the work of the United Nations. Continuity has been disrupted for peacekeeping
operations, special political missions and the Peacebuilding Commission. They,
along with United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, have been challenged
in adjusting their operations to assist countries in addressing the pandemic.
This widespread pandemic threatens not only development and peacebuilding
gains, but also creates a high risk of rekindling conflicts or of igniting new ones.
In some countries, fragile peace processes could be hindered by the crisis, if not
disrupted. That is why a call for a global ceasefire, of which Poland was a staunch
supporter, to foster multilateral efforts in addressing the pandemic and its impact as
a matter of priority was launched by the Secretary-General.
We welcome the fact that, in July, the Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2532 (2020), in which the Council recognizes that the pandemic could
reverse peacebuilding gains made by countries in transition and post-conflict
countries and calls for all relevant parts of the United Nations system to accelerate
the response to the pandemic, with particular emphasis on countries in need. Poland
considers the role of the Security Council crucial in addressing the sustaining of
peace in the world crippled by the global pandemic.
COVID-19 is aggravating the humanitarian situation in the world’s perilous
conflicts and threatens to trigger an economic plummet that will most probably
unleash violence. As the most recent report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding
and sustaining peace (S/2020/773) alarmingly mentions, the world’s population
continues to face increased poverty, inequality and exclusion, as well as threats
to peace and security. By the end of 2019, 79.5 million persons had been forcibly
displaced, which is twice as many as 20 years ago. Those numbers are only going to
spike owing to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and climate change.
The current pandemic is hindering aid programmes, drawing away both
the attention and resources of major stakeholders battling the deadly virus on the
ground, and cutting off support to already fragile, war-torn economies. Restricted by
lockdowns, the movements of peacekeeping troops, envoys and non-governmental
agencies are witnessing a hampering of mediation efforts and impediments in the
distribution of urgently needed aid to vulnerable civilians. Humanitarian agencies
struggle to keep up with the demand for help, especially in places where COVID-19
is spreading out of control.
Owing to travel restrictions, United Nations peacekeeping missions have
struggled with the logistics of troop rotations, while for some countries they are the only
guarantors of security and health safety. We welcome mitigation measures to promote
the safety, security and health of all United Nations personnel while maintaining the
continuity and effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Previous reports of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict demonstrate powerful evidence that existing crises have exacerbated
and magnified structural gender inequalities. Recent data have only confirmed an
20-10786101/120

S/2020/799

increased level of gender-based violence. In our response to COVID-19, we must
therefore put the safety of women and girls first.
The verified numbers of violations against children presented in the reports
of the Secretary-General are highly disturbing, though we are aware that they do
not reflect the full scale. Poland expresses its serious concern over the detrimental
and multidimensional impact of COVID-19 pandemic on children, especially those
living in areas of armed conflict.
The present challenge of COVID-19 to global health security could become a
case in point of how it can be managed through multilateral frameworks. Poland is
convinced that the World Health Organization will remain the lead coordinator of
the global response to pandemics.
The best way forward is to continue to build upon its present assets. Among
those, the most important tools are the International Health Regulations and
Solidarity Trial protocol that are aimed at minimizing the burden on countries’
health systems when it comes to effective treatment options against COVID-19.
Poland is engaged and supports financially both the European Union initiatives on
solidarity and leadership in seeking global solutions and the United Nations system
response to the COVID-19 emergency. In this moment of global crisis, we must leave
no one behind.

102/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

Annex 47
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of Portugal to the
United Nations, Nuno Mathias
Portugal aligns itself with the statement presented by the European Union
and, in its national capacity, would like to add the following points.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is having a devastating impact
on communities and economies. Yet again, those who are in the most vulnerable
situations are the ones who suffer the most. Furthermore, the indirect effects of
COVID-19 and some of the actions taken in response can contribute to increasing
tensions, violence and hate speech and may exacerbate existing drivers of conflict
and undermine social and economic resilience, while violence against women and
girls continues to escalate.
Health crises worsen already precarious situations: fragile health systems
become unable to cope and Governments fail to provide basic needs and services,
such as health care, justice, public safety and food security. The erosion of trust in
local institutions leads to increasing instability and unrest.
The reallocation of both financial and human resources to support prevention
and containment measures during the pandemic has had an impact on States’
ability to deal with insurgencies and terrorist groups, but also on States’ capacity to
respond to the needs of their population and communities. The further weakening
of State institutions and their capacity to deliver on public goods could endanger the
medium- and long-term sustainability of hard-fought gains in theatres, such as the
Sahel, the Central African Republic and Somalia. Only a ceasefire, as called for by
the Secretary-General and stressed in resolution 2532 (2020), can fully ensure the
delivery of humanitarian aid and the adoption of protective measures.
Given the transnational reach of pandemics and the increasing interdependence
of States, the greater part of the solution lies in international cooperation.
International support, during and in the aftermath of the pandemic, in countries and
regions affected by conflict must not neglect the importance of State and institutionbuilding. Such support will be decisive in preventing the expansion of terrorist and
armed groups, as well as their recruitment capacities. The economic recovery phase
following the pandemic will also present an opportunity to boost resilience through
focused reforms in key areas, such as health, education, social protection, climate
change, good governance, human rights and the fight against corruption and impunity,
thereby achieving a more sustainable response to instability-inducing factors.
There is a risk that the pandemic could be used as a pretext to restrict the
political and civic space, weaken commitments to peace processes, ongoing postconflict efforts, such as reconciliation and reintegration mechanisms, or transitional
justice mechanisms, under the guise of sanitary requirements. In that context,
careful attention should be given to the possible negative impact of the pandemic
on previously agreed political road maps and electoral processes. A balance must be
found between effective and adequate implementation of health measures and the
preservation of important peacebuilding processes.
We should also advocate for the pursuit of global health security. Previous
health crises have highlighted how coordination among actors across the
development-humanitarian-peace nexus and a whole-of-United Nations approach —
both at Headquarters and in the field — is key to ensuring a coordinated and
effective response. The international human rights framework also provides a critical
foundation for sustaining peace. We welcome the steps taken thus far and encourage
further use of human rights mechanisms — special procedures, treaty bodies and
20-10786103/120

S/2020/799

the universal periodic review — by the United Nations peace and security and
development pillars.
Building inclusive societies, based on the protection and promotion of human
rights and gender equality, remains the best defence against conflict, poverty,
inequality and exclusion. We need to keep focusing our collective efforts on conflict
prevention. The costs — human and financial — of responding to crises instead of
preventing them are evident. Comprehensive cross-pillar approaches are, therefore,
fundamental to sustaining peace.
Peacekeeping operations play a major role also in this regard, alongside
their intensive technical and logistical support to national Governments and their
deterrence effect against actors aimed at destabilizing the political processes.
The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) continues to play a unique role in
bringing together development and security. This linkage is of crucial importance
to ensure that the United Nations, its Member States and other relevant stakeholders
act together in preventing the recurrence of conflicts. The country-specific
configurations are instrumental to implementing the PBC mandate. Their concrete
focus on the field is one of the main reasons. We need this permanent feedback loop
between headquarters and the actors on the ground. It enables the promotion of local
appropriation and a better integration and coordination of regional and international
efforts. Sustaining peace can only be achieved if peacebuilding is implemented in
partnership with local communities, including women and youth.
Therefore, we call for global solidarity and a unified collective effort to
cooperate and deal decisively with the challenges of this pandemic. It is important
to pool resources efficiently, collaborating through pre-existing mechanisms for
emergency humanitarian action and adapting them to the new COVID-19 pandemic.
This threat knows no borders, which means that individualized answers will
inevitably fall short of addressing the challenges we are faced with. We therefore
reiterate the call for global solidarity and a unified collective effort.

104/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

Annex 48
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Qatar to the
United Nations, Alya Ahmed Saif Al-Thani
[Original: Arabic]
We would like to thank Mrs. Retno Lestari Priansari Marsudi, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Indonesia, for convening this important thematic
meeting and giving us the opportunity to participate. We would also express our
appreciation to Secretary-General António Guterres and former Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for their participation, as well as to Ms. Sarah Cliffe, Director of the
Centre on International Cooperation at New York University, for her valuable briefing.
Since the beginning of this year, the crisis caused by the spread of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has been the primary concern of countries and
communities around the world. It has also unexpectedly become the concern of the
United Nations and the Security Council. This is because the disease affects not only
those who contract it but everyone on Earth.
Anyone who reads the reports published recently by various United Nations
bodies and agencies will note that the pandemic has had complex and overlapping
effects on security, economic and social affairs and development. Consequently, the
pandemic will have long-term effects on peace and on the possibility of sustainable
peace. As with peacebuilding and peacekeeping, a sharp focus on security would be
unhelpful; it is necessary to address the social, economic, political and developmental
dimensions of crises. The same holds true for addressing the various dimensions
of the response to the COVID-19 pandemic. That response must be integrated and
coordinated, and the approach taken must be informed by peacebuilding, not solely
by health considerations.
In that connection, from the very beginning Qatar has taken action at the local
level in its response to the COVID-19 pandemic, including precautionary measures
and by marshalling the resources needed to enhance health care, while taking other
steps to mitigate the impact of the disease, such as developing distance-learning
methods for students in the aftermath of school closures.
Alongside those national measures, Qatar has made concerted efforts at
the international level, including by providing emergency financial and in-kind
assistance to help address the threat of the pandemic. Qatar has also continued to
support sustainable development, taking into account the fact that the coronavirus
crisis has diverted the country’s attention from those priorities, which are more vital
now than ever, particularly in order to respond effectively to the coronavirus and
its impact.
The COVID-19 crisis is taking a much greater toll on conflict-affected
countries and communities, as well as on those in the transition and post-conflict
stages, given the fragility of their economies, the deterioration of their health
systems, humanitarian crises and social, security and logistical challenges that make
more difficult or hinder outright preventive and therapeutic measures to counter the
virus and its effects.
In view of the manifold threats posed by the pandemic, it is, at the very least,
imperative to put an end to armed conflicts and silence guns, so that all efforts and
energy can be devoted to combating the common enemy, namely, the coronavirus,
and to prevent the spread of the pandemic from reversing peacebuilding gains.
In that connection, we would like to reaffirm the Secretary-General’s call for a
comprehensive ceasefire and the substance of resolution 2532 (2020).
20-10786105/120

S/2020/799

In the light of the repercussions that this pandemic, and any similar crises
to come, may have for peacebuilding and peacekeeping, the Security Council and
the Peacebuilding Commission have an important role to play in an integrated and
coordinated response. Moreover, the missions that peacekeeping operations carry out
to support peacebuilding efforts are just as important. Therefore, the continuity of
those operations throughout the COVID-19 pandemic must be ensured. Qatar, which
is cognizant of the need to maintain the continuity of the Organization’s work in
these particular circumstances, has facilitated the movement of United Nations staff
to mitigate the impact of the pandemic on the activities of peacekeeping missions.
The coronavirus is a global threat that is not confined to a single country.
As such, it cannot be addressed without a joint international effort. The United
Nations and its agencies and programmes have an indispensable role to play in
coordinating efforts to control the spread of the virus and address its implications for
sustainable peace and development. Qatar is therefore committed to supporting the
Organization’s work and emphasizes the importance of international and regional
cooperation, in spite of unilateral actions that hinder cooperation and coordination
under the auspices of international and regional organizations. What everyone needs
in these extraordinary circumstances is for all efforts and energies to be directed
towards addressing the coronavirus and other global threats to security, peace and
stability for the sake of all, without distinction.

106/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

Annex 49
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Korea to the United Nations, Cho Hyun
My delegation takes this opportunity to commend you, Mr. President, for
having convened today’s timely open debate of the Security Council on “Pandemics
and the challenges of sustaining peace”. We would also like to thank today’s eminent
briefers, Secretary-General António Guterres, former Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon and the Director of the Center on International Cooperation, New York
University, Sarah Cliffe, for their extensive and insightful interventions today.
We are now collectively coming to terms with the understanding that the
challenges facing conflict-vulnerable countries and populations have multiplied
due to the prolonged coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Therefore, the
international community needs to pay increased attention to the unique situations
of such vulnerable countries, and my delegation feels that today’s discussion is
essential, as it reflects a common response to this challenge.
As noted in the unanimously adopted resolution 2532 (2020), it is crucial to
recognize that the COVID-19 outbreak could reverse the peacebuilding gains made
by countries in transition and post-conflict countries. With that in mind, the Republic
of Korea hopes that the Security Council can maintain its focus on this issue and
contribute to strengthening resilience for such countries. We also hope to see more
cooperative and constructive discussions on this critical topic moving forward.
Against that backdrop, the Republic of Korea would like to highlight the
following four points.
First, we must carefully assess the pandemic’s impacts on domestic and
international conflicts. Furthermore, based on the shared assessment of conflict risks,
we must also integrate a conflict-sensitivity lens when we establish international
response strategies for countries in need. Due to the socioeconomic shocks of
COVID-19, we face the possibility of a surge in conflicts. As such, it is high time to
scale up our investment in the United Nations system-wide peacebuilding process
in order to prevent a reversal of the peacebuilding gains that we have accomplished
over the years. At the same time, we also need to consider COVID-19’s impacts
on inequality, which, of course, can also be a driver of conflict on its own. In that
connection, it is critical to adopt an inclusive approach in any response plan to aid
conflict-vulnerable countries. By increasing the engagement of civil society and local
communities, we can also help deal with the root causes of conflict more effectively.
In that respect, my delegation hopes that the 2020 peacebuilding architecture
review can serve as an important opportunity to open up a new chapter for the entire
United Nations system to introduce a conflict-sensitivity lens to the overall systemwide approach.
Secondly, my delegation would like to emphasize that as this unprecedented
pandemic continues, it is crucial to strengthen the coherence of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) with the Security Council and enhance the complementary
relationship between the two bodies. We take this opportunity to commend the
leadership of the PBC in showing agility and flexibility in responding to the crisis.
We also hope that the PBC can catalyse its unique convening power to serve as a
hinge in linking the three pillars of the United Nations system. As noted in the letter
from the group of independent eminent persons addressed to the President of the
Security Council,

20-10786107/120

S/2020/799

“the Peacebuilding Commission and the Security Council would benefit from
enhanced interaction, particularly concerning peace operation mandates”
(S/2020/678, annex II, p. 8).
Thirdly, we would also like to bring more attention to the role of the United
Nations and the importance of its capacity-building, particularly in the areas
of technology and health care. Recently we have been witnessing a trend where
peacebuilding mandates are regarded as an important element of peacekeeping
operations’ missions. The COVID-19 pandemic continues to place restrictions on
implementing peacebuilding mandates such as engagement with the local community.
With that in mind, it is now vital to redouble our efforts in applying the latest
technology, particularly to assist missions in areas related to telecommunications,
intelligence-gathering and enhancing digital technology. Such efforts would go a
long way towards offering timely support to those in the field striving to carry out
their mandates in the time of COVID-19.
Additionally, to support the medical capacities of vulnerable host countries,
peacekeeping operations must go further in building up their own medical capacities.
As the host country of the 2021 United Nations Peacekeeping Ministerial Conference,
to be held in Seoul next April, the Republic of Korea hopes that there will be elevated
interest on these two topics — technology and medical capacity — and looks forward
to further developing in-depth discussions on those issues at the Ministerial.
Fourthly, with regard to the financing situation related to sustaining peace,
my delegation is concerned that financing for peacebuilding could diminish as a
result of the surge in humanitarian aid related to the COVID-19 crisis. We hope to
continue to discuss innovative solutions with a view to achieving a breakthrough on
the issue. In line with Korea’s strong national commitment to peacebuilding, which
includes our tenure as Chair and then Vice-Chair of the PBC, we are proud to not
only contribute to the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) each year but also to increase our
annual contributions. However, we are concerned that funding for peacebuilding
activities, including contributions to the PBF, does not yet meet the current demand
from the countries in need. Therefore, broadening and diversifying the donor base
is essential, particularly alongside continued cooperation with the international
financial institutions.
In his report on peacebuilding and sustaining peace, contained in document
S/2018/43, Secretary-General António Guterres suggested exploring opportunities
for contributions from the private sector. Considering the current fiscal realities, we
hope that that suggestion will be duly considered.
COVID-19 is an ongoing crisis that continues to hit the peacebuilding and
sustainable development sectors of the international community hard. However, we
can also use this crisis as an opportunity to refocus our discussion on the 2020
peacebuilding architecture review. In that regard, we hope that the sustaining peace
approach can be more firmly established in the United Nations system. The Republic
of Korea, as a member of the PBC and a member of the Group of Friends of Solidarity
for Global Health Security, will continue to strive to make an active contribution to
the enhancement of sustaining peace in response to this unprecedented pandemic.

108/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

Annex 50
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Romania to the
United Nations, Ion Jinga
I would like to commend the Indonesian presidency for having convened
this timely high-level open debate of the Security Council on “Pandemics and the
challenges of sustaining peace”.
Allow me also to express my deep appreciation for the informative briefings
given by Secretary-General António Guterres; Mr. Ban Ki-moon, former SecretaryGeneral; and Ms. Sarah Cliffe, Director of the Center on International Cooperation
at New York University.
Romania aligns itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the European
Union. I will make now a few remarks in my national capacity.
The COVID-19 pandemic has had a devastating effect worldwide, affecting in
particular vulnerable communities — women and children, people with disabilities,
the marginalized, displaced persons and refugees — and exacerbating already
existing inequalities. As has been reiterated, the pandemic is adding yet another
layer of complexity to already fragile situations. The pandemic is not merely a
health crisis. Its direct and indirect consequences, including unemployment, food
insecurity, lack of access to basic services and the inability to send remittances, can
act as risk multipliers and increase tensions and fuel instability. By exacerbating the
drivers of conflict, the pandemic directly undermines the social fabric of societies.
Its corrosive effects span the social, economic and political dimensions. The way
in which we address this unprecedented challenge will represent one of the biggest
tests for our global solidarity and our capacity to react collectively.
We are of the view that the pandemic poses a significant threat for hardwon peacebuilding and development gains. Resolution 2532 (2020) recognizes that
the COVID-19 pandemic is likely to endanger international peace and security.
Disruptions have already been noticed across the United Nations system, impacting
peacekeeping operations and special political missions and affecting the work of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). The pandemic has the potential of tipping
countries over the edge into violent conflict, especially countries emerging from
conflict or fragile States.
In that context, we stand fully behind the Secretary-General’s appeal for a
global ceasefire. Warring parties need to step back from hostilities, silence the guns
and concentrate on the common enemy, the pandemic. By opening precious windows
for diplomacy, as the Secretary-General himself has stated, the ceasefire could create
more opportunities for building peace.
The pandemic has brought to light that the root causes of instability, violence
and conflict can run the entire political, development and human rights spectrum.
Hence, the humanitarian development-peace nexus must be the framework within
which the United Nations system, Member States, specialized agencies and other
relevant actors should work to achieve inclusive sustainable development and sustain
peace. An adequate response requires a whole-of-system and whole-of-society
approach. We must step away from thinking in silos. In that connection, we salute
the Secretary-General’s efforts towards a United Nations-wide response, and we
stand behind the measures proposed in his policy papers to address the impact of the
pandemic by using a multidimensional and cross-pillar response.
Despite the dire picture, we believe that crises can reveal opportunities.
At the institutional level, we are of the view that the PBC, in its advisory role to
the Security Council, can provide the Council with particular insights on regional
20-10786109/120

S/2020/799

and country-specific situations. The PBC has a unique capacity to foster greater
coherence and coordination, thus contributing to building stronger partnerships
among the various national, regional and international actors. We reiterate our
strong support for the United Nations peacebuilding architecture and the 2020
peacebuilding architecture review process and their instrumental role in creating
synergies among security, political and development actors.
Additionally, we encourage the continuing involvement of regional and
subregional organizations, and emphasize the importance of using their existing
and potential capabilities to address the pandemic. Owing to their knowledge of
their respective regions, regional organizations are well-positioned to understand
their specific dynamics. They also offer a deep and accurate portrayal of regional
perspectives and dynamics. The whole international community can benefit from
the experiences of different regional organizations to develop best practices and
approaches to development and security concerns.
Romania has been a steadfast supporter of regional organizations. In 2005,
under the Romanian presidency of the Council, we promoted the very first United
Nations resolution on cooperation with regional organizations, resolution 1631
(2005). Nowadays, the practice of cooperating with regional organizations has been
institutionalized as one of the cornerstones of the peace and security architecture,
but Romania was the first country to enshrine that item on the Council’s agenda,
in 2005.
As we mark the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations this year,
and as we find ourselves confronted with different and more complex challenges,
this crisis highlights the opportunity to build back better. The pandemic has made
inequalities and fractures in society all the more obvious, making it easier for
Governments to target specific objectives in an effort to rebuild. We strongly believe
that we can do that by adopting people-centred and conflict-sensitive responses and
by giving countries the opportunity to renegotiate their social contracts through
inclusive and comprehensive dialogue.
Secretary-General António Guterres spoke about the need for networked
multilateralism in which the United Nations works hand-in-hand with regional
organizations, international financial institutions, development banks, specialized
agencies and civil society to bring multilateralism to the people. Obviously, the
international community is going through a crisis, but we have now the unique
opportunity to come together and shape the “future we want, the United Nations we
need” by pooling our energy, capacities and skills.

110/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

Annex 51
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Slovakia to
the United Nations, Róbert Chatrnúch
I thank you, Sir, for organizing this important debate on pandemics and the
challenges of sustaining peace during these unprecedented, challenging times for
us all. I also wish to thank Secretary-General António Guterres, former SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon and Ms. Sarah Cliffe, Director of the Center on International
Cooperation at New York University, for their insightful briefings.
My delegation associates itself with the statement submitted by the observer
of the European Union (annex 29). Allow me to make a few additional observations.
We are witnessing direct and secondary consequences of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic interacting with pre-existing humanitarian crises,
adding another layer of complexity to already fragile situations and weak governance
and health systems and disproportionately affecting the most vulnerable populations,
who experience lack of access to basic services and health care, which impacts their
livelihoods and social protection. The pandemic threatens to reverse sustaining
peace and development gains made by transition and post-conflict countries.
United Nations peacekeeping operations have a special role to play in these
difficult circumstances in support of local community efforts to manage the
pandemic. Slovakia supports the robust and comprehensive approach taken by the
United Nations to ensure that complicated political processes continue, stability is
maintained, civilians are protected and the pandemic is contained.
I would like to reaffirm Slovakia’s support for the Secretary-General’s reforms
aimed at rendering United Nations peace operations a more effective tool in the
promotion of peace and security and enhancing support for political processes in host
countries. We highly commend the Secretary-General’s leadership in this domain,
including through the Action for Peacekeeping initiative, which has garnered a
strong sense of ownership among Member States.
Slovakia has been an active troop- and police-contributing country since
its admission to the United Nations. We currently have peacekeepers deployed in
the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus and the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization missions, and have participated in military and civilian
missions of the European Union, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Slovakia fully supports the 2020 review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture, which offers a timely opportunity for adapting to the immediate
challenges posed by the pandemic with regard to sustaining peace. My country
underscores the need for stronger partnerships with international and national
health and financial institutions and reaffirms the advisory, convening and bridging
roles of the Peacebuilding Commission in supporting a coordinated and coherent
international response to the crisis.
We need to enhance interlinkages between peacekeeping missions for a
more effective use of peace, security and stability instruments, including through
integrated planning, implementation and assessment to ensure consistency and
coherence. The COVID-19 pandemic requires effective, agile and responsive United
Nations peace operations.
Last but not least, we should keep working to smooth the transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding and to ensure a joined-up approach across the United
Nations system, donors and other stakeholders.
20-10786111/120

S/2020/799

All reviews of peacekeeping mandates must consider exit strategies that seek to
help lay the foundation for long-term sustainable peace. Member States increasingly
view security sector reform (SSR), as embedded in resolution 2151 (2014), as an
important priority for peacekeeping, including with regard to the timely conclusion
of peacekeeping missions. For years, Slovakia has identified SSR as one of the key
elements for effective conflict prevention and successful post-conflict rebuilding
and stabilization. The direct experience from many United Nations peace missions
and operations clearly shows that nationally led and inclusive SSR is key to
developing security sector institutions that are non-discriminatory, representative
of the population and capable of effectively responding to specific security needs.
As many have said, peacekeeping is a unique tool, but the pursuit of longlasting political solutions is critical, and the mandates of peacekeeping missions
must continue to evolve with the context and needs on the ground.
The United Nations peacekeeping architecture needs to adapt to the new types
of challenges that the world is facing, such as climate change and environmental
degradation. Particular attention needs to be given to how the COVID-19 pandemic
is creating new problems and amplifying existing ones, such as socioeconomic
divides, gender inequality and increased insecurity for women and girls and other
vulnerable groups.
Slovakia strongly supports the Secretary-General’s call for a cessation of
hostilities and the implementation of a global ceasefire, as well as an urgent and
coordinated response to the COVID-19 pandemic through three lines of action —
tackling the health emergency, focusing on the social impact of the crisis and the
economic response to it, and working to build back better.
Slovakia encourages a collective response to the COVID-19 crisis, which, if
adequately addressed, may also bring opportunities for advancing peace processes
and enhancing multilateralism.

112/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

Annex 52

Statement by the Permanent Mission of Slovenia to the United Nations
We wish to thank the Indonesian presidency of the Security Council for
this high-level open debate, the Secretary-General for his statement and former
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Ms. Sarah Cliffe, Director of the Center on
International Cooperation at New York University, for their valuable contributions.
No matter how we put it, the world is facing the biggest challenge and
danger since the inception of the United Nations, and we were not prepared. The
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis has resulted in a severe health crisis and has
had devastating social and economic consequences.
The role of United Nations peacekeeping missions is vital in addressing armed
conflict and post-conflict situations. It is also clear that pandemics cannot be treated
solely as a health issue. With the COVID-19 outbreak, people in conflict zones are
now faced with yet another life-threatening danger, and we are faced with the double
challenge of implementing and sustaining peacebuilding efforts around the world.
Slovenia emphasizes the role of peacekeeping as a tool for the international
community to maintain and safeguard peace and security. Slovenia is committed
to maintaining a presence in peacekeeping and improving training. We support the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative and the Declaration of Shared Commitments on
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations to make peacekeeping operations an even
more credible mechanism for establishing peace in crisis areas in many parts of the
world. But is it absolutely necessary that we deploy well-trained and well-equipped
peacekeepers, with robust and wide mandates that include a human rights component.
In Slovenia we have already come to the conclusion that we need to increase
our resilience. To that end, we are investing in additional airlift capabilities for the
Slovenian Armed Forces. The United Nations and its specialized agencies, for their
part, could make an important contribution by providing greater transparency and
enhancing their early-warning capabilities.
Ensuring access to clean water as a key factor in ensuring global health and
food security is an immediate and long-term challenges that COVID-19 poses for
peacebuilding and sustaining peace in countries affected by, and emerging from,
conflict. The use of water, sanitation and hygiene, particularly hand washing, is
deemed one of the most effective and cost-efficient measures for preventing the
spread of COVID-19 and numerous contagious diseases.
This pandemic has also forced us to become more creative, think differently
and seek solutions elsewhere. Our attempts to better cope with the pandemic and
sustain peace should go hand-in-hand with strengthened cooperation between
States and other relevant stakeholders through water diplomacy as a mechanism for
building peace and health. The COVID-19 crisis has also revealed the essential role
of efficient cooperation between multilateral agencies and the United Nations with
regard to the very fragmented area of water.
Let me conclude by saying that multilateralism is not obsolete. On the
contrary, it is the necessary guarantor of democratic dialogue and promoter of
progressive solutions to many problems and challenges we face as a global family.
Multilateralism, as the sum of international cooperation, with the United Nations at
its core, is not a luxury, nor is it an option. It is a necessity.
The Security Council holds the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. That is why upholding and implementing
international agreements and norms and ensuring the rule of law, including through
ongoing peacebuilding efforts and mitigating new coronavirus-related risks for
fragile peace, is the basis of a functioning and democratic international community.

20-10786113/120

S/2020/799

Annex 53
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of Spain to the United Nations,
Pablo Gutiérrez Segú Berdullas
[Original: Spanish]
I align myself with the statement submitted by the observer of the European
Union (annex 29).
I would like to thank the Indonesian presidency of the Security Council
for organizing this open debate to continue assessing the threats the coronavirus
disease pandemic poses to multilateralism. In that regard, I thank Secretary-General
António Guterres, former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, and Ms. Sarah Cliffe,
Director of the Center on International Cooperation of New York University, for
their statements.
Spain is committed to inclusive multilateralism, especially now that the
pandemic is a threat to multilateralism. The current crisis must be resolved through
universal agreements and common efforts. In that regard, resolution 2532 (2020)
was a great achievement, and Spain will continue to firmly support the SecretaryGeneral’s call for a global ceasefire.
The Secretary-General’s call continues to be important because the pandemic
response must be based on the peace-humanitarian assistance-development-human
rights nexus. The current crisis consists of three major challenges.
First, movement restrictions can contribute to the curtailment of human rights
and hamper humanitarian access and development cooperation.
Secondly, social distancing forces us to reimagine new ways to effectively
mediate peace processes.
Thirdly, the global ceasefire must be accompanied by adequate humanitarian
tools and relevant development mechanisms in order to build resilient societies.
Our actions must continue to be guided by the United Nations. The Peacebuilding
Commission is a key player in the management of the crisis. Our actions must be
based on an integrated approach that recognizes and makes possible the effective
participation of women in the pandemic response and in peace processes. Similarly,
we must broaden our approach to include mechanisms for the prevention, promotion
and respect of human rights and protection of civilians, with special consideration
for people in vulnerable situations.
I conclude by recalling that, in the greatest crisis of the twenty-first century,
the international community must reinforce multilateralism, the centrality of the
United Nations and the role of the World Health Organization. Only then will we be
able to overcome these challenges.

114/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

Annex 54
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Switzerland to the
United Nations
[Original: French]
I would like to thank Indonesia for organizing today’s public debate and the
briefers for their briefings.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has evolved from a health
crisis into an unprecedented economic and social crisis with uncertain medium- and
long-term consequences. It has already presented a major challenge to international
peace and security, as well as to conflict prevention and the sustainability of
peace. The consequences threaten to reverse the gains made in peacebuilding and
development, further repress human rights, increase social and political tensions
and give rise to new conflicts. The Secretary-General’s call for an immediate global
ceasefire, his report on the socioeconomic impacts of the pandemic, his human rights
policy paper and the reports from field missions and country teams clearly highlight
these risks. The impact of the pandemic is being felt in all situations on the Security
Council’s agenda.
Sustainability and prevention are at the heart of any effective and sustainable
response to the pandemic. The Security Council must assume its responsibility in
the following three areas.
First of all, Switzerland welcomes the unanimous echo given in resolution
2532 (2020) to the Secretary-General’s appeal. The resolution contains important
measures on delivering humanitarian assistance and maintaining space for diplomacy.
It must be translated into specific follow-up measures for situations on the Council’s
agenda, such as in the Sahel area, Syria, Yemen and the Sudan, where the intensity
of violence is on the rise and the humanitarian situation is deteriorating. The Council
must demand that the parties to armed conflicts guarantee rapid, unimpeded and
sustainable humanitarian access so that the needs of populations are met. The
Council must put all its weight behind mediation efforts and efforts to ensure the
sustainability of peace.
Secondly, for a coordinated and integrated response to COVID-19,
Switzerland calls on the Council to strengthen collaboration with other actors, such
as the World Bank, regional organizations, national authorities and civil society.
Such collaboration should include a joint analysis that reveals the risks posed by
the pandemic, takes into account socioeconomic dimensions and addresses the root
causes of conflicts. The Peacebuilding Commission, which has been particularly
active since the beginning of the pandemic, plays a key advisory role in supporting
the Security Council in this regard.
The Security Council needs to work better with human rights bodies and
mechanisms that rightly highlight the accelerating impact of COVID-19 on human
rights violations, which are often early warning signs of future conflict. The
consultations for the review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture in
Geneva, organized by Switzerland, also highlighted the role of the humanitarian
and disarmament communities. Switzerland calls on the Council to further integrate
these different sources of expertise, including by inviting such representatives to
participate in its work.
Thirdly, efforts to take COVID-19 into account in the renewal of mission
mandates are progressing, but they are still insufficient. Switzerland calls on the
Council to strengthen mission mandates to enable them to play a leading role in
responding to the pandemic, in improving the resilience of the countries where
20-10786115/120

S/2020/799

they are engaged and in sustaining peace. Strengthening these mandates in support
of inclusive and accountable State institutions, the protection of civilians, human
rights monitoring and the inclusion of women and youth is essential for a sustainable
response to the pandemic and for peacebuilding.
Together we must strengthen solidarity and maintain our support for prevention
and peacebuilding efforts, including through adequately funding such relevant
entities as the Peacebuilding Fund. Despite the immense challenges, COVID-19
is also an opportunity for building back better and for increased commitment to
sustaining peace.

116/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

Annex 55
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Thailand to the
United Nations
At the outset, Thailand welcomes the Secretary-General’s recently released
report on peacebuilding and sustaining peace (S/2020/773), which was submitted
against the backdrop of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. As
highlighted in the report, the COVID-19 pandemic and its consequences can lead to
increased tensions and violence and may exacerbate existing drivers of conflict and
undermine social and economic resilience. Moreover, the economic, security and
social effects of COVID-19 are likely to cause greater instability in conflict-prone
countries. Therefore, the pandemic serves to underscore the need to create strong
partnerships among all stakeholders to find tangible short- and long-term solutions
in response to the pandemic.
Thailand wishes to highlight our vision and experience that could contribute
to the multilateral efforts aimed at addressing the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic
in the peacebuilding context.
First, Thailand encourages peacekeeping operations to continue carrying
out their mandates while also further assisting host countries in their coronavirus
response both in the short and long term. Against the backdrop of the COVID-19
pandemic, peacekeeping operations remain an integral tool in multilateral strategies
to help establish a sustainable environment for achieving sustaining peace and
sustainable development, including supporting the public health aspect. We believe
that early peacebuilding tasks undertaken by peacekeepers would beneficially
contribute to host countries’ long-term development, including through capacitybuilding activities, logistics, awareness-raising and supporting the establishment of
health-care infrastructure.
For its part, Thailand, through its Horizontal Military Engineering Company,
has helped in the construction of COVID-19 screening facilities at the compound of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) in response to the pandemic
at its early stage. It has also established a learning centre in the UNMISS camp to
share with the local community our best practices on agriculture, water and land
management, and health care, as well as our sufficiency-economy philosophy to help
improve the people’s livelihood. We truly believe that this is the face of forwardlooking and sustainable peacekeeping.
Secondly, Thailand believes that South-South and triangular cooperation
could be another innovative approach for creating peacebuilding partnerships.
Because it is essential to mobilize common efforts to enhance inclusive peace and
development, South-South cooperation could be a complementary path to revitalizing
and renewing supports to sustaining inclusive development and peace. We also
encourage enhanced exchanges of views and dialogue among countries, regional and
subregional organizations and the Security Council as well as other United Nations
bodies, in order to achieve synergy and ensure complementarity. As a development
partner in South-South cooperation, Thailand has been constructively engaged
with a focus on promoting community development with security and resilience,
increasing mutual understanding and laying fundamental preconditions for creating
contexts for peace and stability.
Equally important, Thailand firmly believes that peace does not exist in
a vacuum. It is intrinsically linked with sustainable development and respect for
human rights. We therefore believe that a comprehensive people-centred approach to
peacekeeping is imperative. Also, inclusive national ownership is a prerequisite for
successful peacebuilding and for sustaining peace.
20-10786117/120

S/2020/799

Thirdly, inclusive multi-stakeholder approaches could ensure long-term
solutions in conflict-affected areas. In conflict-affected States, where healthcare systems are already weakened, the pandemic will worsen the situation for
vulnerable groups, particularly the elderly, who are more prone to the virus. Women
and children, as well as persons with disabilities, will face greater difficulties in
gaining access to health care and other essential services. It is therefore imperative
for all stakeholders to create strong partnerships, share best practices and provide
socioeconomic opportunity to vulnerable groups through sustainable development
approaches. We must place importance in including vulnerable groups in all peace
processes at all stages in order to ensure consistent peacebuilding progress and
provide long-term solutions for all challenges, including public-health crises.
Last but not least, the bridging role among relevant United Nations organs
could foster cross-pillar approaches to the pandemic in the peace and security context.
The COVID-19 pandemic could pose challenges on socioeconomic issues beyond
those related to the immediate health and humanitarian impacts. Accordingly, the
response to the pandemic requires systemic approaches for effective preparedness
and solutions. A stronger and more coherent cross-pillar approach would lead to
more efficiency in supporting countries to become more sustainable and resilient,
which will contribute to a more peaceful society. Indeed, the ongoing review of the
peacebuilding architecture in 2020 will be another critical milestone for all relevant
actors to formally explore ways to further strengthen the work on peacebuilding.
Thailand believes that peacebuilding and sustaining peace should be integrated
through all pillars of the United Nations engagement at all stages of conflict and in
all its dimensions.
As we confront today’s challenges from the COVID-19 pandemic, achieving
the goal of sustaining peace has never been more important or relevant. Therefore, in
order to achieve the goal of sustaining peace more effectively, we must calibrate our
ambitions to match our strengths and needs, enhance and modernize our capacities,
and stay relevant.

118/120

20-10786

S/2020/799

Annex 56
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United Arab
Emirates to the United Nations, Lana Nusseibeh
The United Arab Emirates would like to thank Indonesia for ensuring the
Security Council’s continued focus on coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and its
effect on the most vulnerable people. It is already abundantly clear that the pandemic
is worsening conditions that both lead to and amplify conflict and violence, from
hunger to disruption of basic services to hate speech. These impacts serve to
underscore that States Members of the United Nations and the Organization itself
must take a holistic approach to peace and security. Accordingly, we would like to
share four thoughts on how the Security Council and its partners can work to sustain
and foster peace in the face of the pandemic and other shocks.
First, we welcome the precedent set by resolution 2532 (2020) and its demand
for ceasefires in the face of pandemics. The United Arab Emirates was one of the first
countries to endorse the Secretary-General’s original appeal for a global ceasefire
in response to COVID-19, as we believe humanitarian pauses are a powerful tool
for de-escalating conflicts, providing space for political processes and slowing the
spread of disease, all with substantial associated peacebuilding benefits.
Secondly, Member States and the United Nations system should continue
to empower Resident Coordinators in order to facilitate the international response
to COVID-19 and enhance the work of the Organization on preparedness and
peacebuilding. Resident Coordinators are best placed to ensure that there is
lockstep coordination among the United Nations development, humanitarian and
security pillars, with a view to achieving collective outcomes. As one dimension
of coordination, we would expect heads of missions authorized by the Security
Council to systematically liaise with Resident Coordinators in order to identify the
contributions they can make to pandemic recovery and to longer-term peace and
security, on the one hand, and the support missions need from other agencies, on
the other hand. The role of Resident Coordinators should also be front and centre
in ensuring that the work of the Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Fund coheres with the overall United Nations portfolio in a country.
Thirdly, we must accelerate efforts aimed at mainstreaming gender in peace
and security. The Council and other United Nations bodies have established that
gender equality is central to durable peace and economic recovery, and we have
unfortunately seen the pandemic — like other crises — have a disproportionate
impact on women and girls. Accordingly, the pandemic is a further prompt to ensure
that the Council is always briefed on the role of women in peacebuilding and peace
processes, that Council-mandated missions have sufficient gender resources and that
United Nations peace and security activities have clear gender metrics linked to
personnel performance evaluations. To support mainstreaming, my country has made
gender equality a cross-cutting requirement of its foreign aid by 2021, including in
conflict-affected countries, and we have completed two cycles of training for women
peacekeeping training in partnership with UN-Women at the Khawla Bint Al Azwar
Military School for Women, in Abu Dhabi.
Fourthly, we urge the United Nations to move towards anticipatory action.
If there are credible warnings around health, climate change, violence and other
factors that intensify or enable conflict, they should be matched by increased and
coordinated development, humanitarian and peacebuilding activity to prevent or
mitigate conflict. The United Arab Emirates is also working towards that end during
the pandemic: of the over 100 countries to which we have shipped medical aid since
March, a large percentage are countries on the Council’s agenda. Our purpose is
20-10786119/120

S/2020/799

to reduce the pandemic’s intensification of fragility. Similarly, risk-informed early
warnings could result in the Security Council’s rapid mobilization of mandates and
resources. The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the World
Food Programme, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies and other
humanitarian agencies have taken steps towards an anticipatory approach, including
in their Security Council briefings. Their experience could inform how the Council
and the United Nations system more broadly allocate resources and staff earlier with
a view to preventing conflict.

120/120

20-10786
