106

General Assembly-Tw<>nty-seventh Session

at its twenty-eighth session all commitments made
under the prnvi,ions of the present res(llution, together
with the cireumst:mcc-; rclatin~ thereto. and shall submit supplementary estimates t,~ the Assembly in respect
of such commitments;
:1. Decides that if, as a result of a decision of the
Security Council, commitments relating to the maintenance of peace and secmity should ari,c in an estimated
total exceeding $ I O million before the twenty-eighth
session of the G,'neral Assembly, a special session of
the Assembly shall be convened by the SecretaryGeneral to consider th,: matter.
2 I 16th plenary !lleeting
19 December l 972

3046 (XXVII). Workinµ; f~apital Fund for the
finant'ial )t•ar 197:~
The General Assemhl_,
Resolves that:
I. The Working Capital Fund ,hall he established
for the year erH.ling 31 Decrn1lwr 1973 in the amuunl
of $US 40 million;
2. Member States shall make advances to the
Working Capital Fund in <1ccordancc with the scale
adopted by the General Assembly for contributions of
Members to the budget for the financial year 197?,;
3. There shall be set off against this allocation of
advances:
(a) Credits to Member States resulting from trans-

fers made in l 959 and 1960 from surplus account to
the Working Capital Fund in a total amount of
$1,079,158;
( b) Cash advances paid by Member States to the
Working Capital Fund for the financial year 1972
under General Assembly resolution 2901 (XXVI) of
22 December 1971;
4. Should the credits and advances paid by any
Member State to the Working Capital Fund for 1972
exceed the amount of that Member State's advance
under the provisions of paragraph 2 above, the excess
shall be set off against the amount of the contribution
payable by the Member State in respect of the financial
year 1973;
5. The Secretary-General is authorized to advance
from the Working Capital Fund:
(a) Such sums as may be necessary to finance budgetary appropriations pending the receipt of contributions; sums so advanced shall be reimbursed as soon
as receipts from contributions are available for the
purpose;
(b) Such sums as may be necessary to finance commitments which may be duly authorized under the
provisions of the resolutions adopted by the General
Assembly, in particular resolution 3045 ( XXVII) of
19 December 1972 relating to unforeseen and extraordinary expenses; the Secretary-General shall make
provi,ion in the budget estimates for reimbursing the
Working Capital Fund;
( c) Such sums as, together with net sums outstanding for the same purpose, do not exceed $150,000, to
continue the revolving fund to finance miscellaneous
self-liquidating purchases and activities; advances in
excess of the total of $ I 50,000 may be made with the

prior concum:nce of the Advisory Committee on Adrnini~trativc and Budgetary Questions;
(d) With the prior concurrence of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,
such sums as may be required to finance payments of
advance insurance premiums where the period of
insurance extends beyond the end of the financial year
in which pay111c:nt is made; the Secretary-General shall
make provision in the budget estimates of each year,
during the lik of the related policies, to cover the
cha1gcs applicable to each such year;
(c) Such sums ,is may be necessary to enable the
rax Equaliz,11ion Fund to meet current commitments
pending the accumulation of credits; such advances
shall be repaid a, soon as credits arc available in the
Tax Equalizattun Fund;
6. Should the provision in paragraph I above
prove inadequate to meet the purposes normally related
tu the Working Capital Fund, the Secretary-General is
,lllthorized tu utilize, in 1973, cash from special funds
and accounts in his custody, under the conditions approved in General Assembly resolution 1341 (XII I)
of 13 Dccc111h.'r 1958, or the procL-cds of loans authorized by the A,sL'mbly
21161 Ii plmar,· 111ceti11g
19 Decemher 197:!

:io.i7 (XXVII). Revenue-producing aetivitit•s
The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
on revenue-producing activities, 40 especially paragraph 26 thereof on services to visitors, and the related
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions,51 1
Recalling the report of the Secretary-General on
revenue-producing activities submitted to the General
Assembly at its tenth scssion," 1 in which he indicated
that the revenue is not, nor should it be, the sole
justification for such activities and that regard must
he paid to other, and often overriding, purposes of
the activities which arc not always consonant with a
purely financial approach to management questions,
Convinced of the public information value of the
United Nations guided tours,
Mindful that the Oflice of Public Information is at
present engaged in a serious effort to help build a
positive public image of the United Nations,
Convinced that the guided tours play an important
public relations role in the success of this operation,
Aware that thousands of visitors taking the guided
tours every year acquire a better understanding of the
United Nations and, in turn, spread a spirit of goodwill which is essential for the reinforcement of confidence in the Organization,
Concerned about the reduced public interest in the
United Nations, as reported by the Secretary-General.
and the steady decline in the number of visitors to
the United Nations,
4D A!C.511479.
"" Ofjiciul Records of 1/ic General Asscmblv, Twentv-scve11th
Scssimi. S1q,plcme11t No. 8A (A/8708/ Adci.1-30), document
A/8708! Add.22.
01 !hid .. Tnllli Session, Annexes, agenda items 38 and 47.
document AiC.5 623.
