REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL PURSUANT TO SECURITY COUNCIL RESOLUTION 721 (1991)

4. Underlines the view that the purpose of the deployment of any United Nations peace-keeping operation in
Yugoslavia would be to cnable ail parties to settle their disputes
peacefully. including through the processes of the Conference
on Yugc,slavia;

Decision

At its 3023rd meeting, on 15 December 1991, the Council
decided to invite the representative ofYugoslavia to participate,
without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled "Report of
the Secretary-General pursuant to Secunty Council rcsolution
721 (1991) (S/23280)". 27

5. Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations:
(a) Requests ail States to report to the Secretaiy-General
within twenty days on the measures they have instituted for
meeting the obligations set out in paragraph 6 ofresolution 713
(1991) to implement a general and complete embargo on ail
deliveries of weapons and military equipment to Yugoslavia;

Resolution 724 (1991)
of 15 Decernber 1991

(b) Decides to establish, in accordance with rule 28 of its
provisional rules of procedure, a committee of the Security
Council consisting of ail the members of the Council to
undertake the following tasks and to report on its work to the
Council with its observations and recommendations:

The Security Council,
Reaffinning itsresolutions 713 (1991) of2S September 1991
and 721 (1991) of 27 November 1991.
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General pursuant to Security Council resolution 721 (1991) of 11 December
1991,1116
Recalling its primary responsibility under the Charter of the
United Nations for the maintenance of international peace and
security,
Recalling also the provisions of Chapter VIII of the
Charter,

(i)

To examine the reports submitted pursuant to
paragraph (a);

(ii)

To seek from ail States further information
regarding the action taken by them conceming
the effective implementation of the embargo
imposed by paragraph 6 ofresolution 713 (1991);

(iii)

To consider any information brought to its
attention by States conceming violations of the
embargo, and in that context to make recommendations to the Council on ways of increasing the
effectiveness of the embargo;

(iv)

To recommend appropriate measures in response
to violations of the general and complete
embargo on ail deliveries ofweapons and military
equipment to Yugoslavia and to provide information on a regular basis to the Secretary-General
for general distribution to Member States;

Detennined to ensure that the general and complete
embargo on ail deliveries of weapons and military equipment
to Yugoslavia imposed by resolution 713 (1991) is effectively
applied,
Commending the initiatives taken by the Secretaiy-General
in the humanitarian field,
1. Approves the report of the Secretaiy-General of 11
December 1991,1116 and expresses its appreciation for it;

2. Endorses in particular the views expressed in paragraph 21 of that report that the conditions for establishing a
peace-keeping operation in Yugoslavia still do not exist and in
paragraph 24 that full compliance with the agreement signed in
Geneva on 23 November 1991 197 would permit accelerated
consideration of the question of establishing a United Nations
peace-keeping operation in Yugoslavia;

(c) Calfs upon ail States to cooperate fully with the
Committee in the fulfilment of its tasks conceming the effective
implementation of the provisitms of paragraph 6 of resolution
713 (1991);

(d) RequeststheSecretary-General toprovide allnecessaiy
assistance to the Committee and to make the necessary
arrangements in the Secretariat for this purpose;

3. Concurs in particular with the Secretaiy-General's
observation that the international community is prepared to
assist the Yugoslav peoples, if the conditions described in bis
report are met, and in that context endorses bis offer to send
to Yugoslavia a small group of personnel, including military
personnel, as part of the continuing mission of bis Personal
Envoy, to carry forward preparations for possible deployment
of a peace-keeping operation;

6. Undertakes to consider ways by which compliance with
the commitments entered into by the parties may be achieved;
1. Strong~v urges ail States and parties to refrain from any
action which might contribute to increasing tension, to inhibiting the establishment of an effective cease-fire and to impeding
or delaying a peaceful and negotiated outcome to the conflict

45

urgent practical steps to tackle the critical needs of the peopk
of Yugoslavia, including displaced persons and the mo~t
vulnerable groups affected by the contlict, to assist in the
voluntary return of displaced persons to their hom.::s:

in Yugoslavia which would permit ail the peoples ofYugoslavia
to decide upon and to construct their future in peace;
8. Encourages the Secretary-General to pursue his
humanitarian efforts in Yugoslavia, in liaison with the International Committee of the Red Cross, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Children's
Fund and other appropriate humanitarian organizations, to take

9. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter unt,i
a peacefol solution is achieved.
Adopted ww11imously al the .102.lrd
meeti11g

Part II. Other matters considered by the Security Council

ADMISSION OF NEW MEMBERS TO THF. UNITED NATIONS 191'

A.

2. Recommends tu the General AsM:rubly !.hat the
Republic of Korea be admitted to membershir, in the Unikd
Nations

Appücalions of the Democratic Peopk's Republic of
Korea and the Republic of Kt,rea

Adnpted without vote al the J(~/I s!
meeti11g.

Decisions

Decîsion

At its 2998th meeting, on 6 August 1991, the Council,
following the adoption of its agenda. decided to refer the
applications of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea 199
and of the Republic of Koream for membership in the United
Nations to the Committee on the Admission of New Members
for examination and report, as provided in rule 59 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

At the same meeting, following the adoption of Security
Council resolution 702 (1991), the President of the Council
made the following statcment on behalf of the members: 2oz
''By adopti11g resolution 702 ( 1991), the Security
Council has taken another step towards the completion of
a political process in exercise of one of the most important
functions entrusted to it under the Charter of tht United
Nations, namely, to make recommendations to the General
Assembly regarding the admission of new mcmbcrs to the
Organization.

At its 3001st meeting, on 8 August 1991, the Council
discussed the report of the Committee on the Admission of
New Members201 conceming the applications of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea and of the Republic of Korea for
admission to membership in the United Nations.

Having examined separately the applications of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea 199 and of the Republic of
Korea,200 for admission to the United Nations,

"The applications ofthe Democratic People's Republic
ofKorea and the Republic ofKorea have been considered
and unanimously approved by the Council. The aspirations
of the peoples and Govemments of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea and the Republic of Korea
have hannoniously coincided. That is why the Council
decided to consider and take a simultaneous decision on
the admission of both parts of the Korean Peninsula to
membership in the world Organization.

1. Recommends to the General Assembly that the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea be admitted to
membership in the United Nations;

"This is a historie occasion for the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, the Republic of Korea, the
Asian continent and the world community of nations.

Resolution 702 (1991)
of 8 August 1991

The Security Cow1cil,

46
