S/2015/234

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 April 2015
English
Original: French

Letter dated 31 March 2015 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the exchange of letters of 20 and 24 December
2013 (S/2013/764 and S/2013/765) with the President of the Security Council
concerning the deployment of a static United Nations guard unit to strengthen the
security of the compounds of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM) and the United Nations Support Office for the African Union Mission in
Somalia (UNSOA) located in Mogadishu.
As indicated in these letters, in addition to the protection provided by the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali National Security
Forces, the Council took note of the proposed arrangements for the establishment of
a United Nations guard unit that would form part of the overall security concept by
providing “inner ring” static protection for UNSOM and UNSOA faciliti es and
installations in Mogadishu.
The Council authorized for this purpose the deployment of a guard battalion
composed of static guard companies, an extraction and reinforcement team and an
adequately composed logistics support company (410 in total), to be provided as
contingents by Member States, with the following functions:
(a) Provide static security, patrols and access control for UNSOM and
UNSOA facilities and installations in Mogadishu, including should UNSOM move
outside Mogadishu International Airport;
(b) Act as a deterrent against possible attacks by extremist elements on those
facilities and installations;
(c)
Airport;

Provide rapid extraction capability within Mogadishu International

(d) Support AMISOM and the Somali National Security For ces in extracting
and relocating United Nations personnel who are outside the airport area in the
event that they are under imminent threat of physical violence.
I take this opportunity to express my appreciation for the support and
assistance provided by the African Union and the Federal Government of Somalia to
the United Nations in this regard.
In my letter of 20 December 2013, I expressed my intention to review the
continuing need for the presence of the United Nations guard unit on an annual
basis by conducting a security assessment. In this context, and following the attack
15-05394 (E)

070415

*1505394*

070415

S/2015/234

on the Mogadishu International Airport of 25 December 2014, the United Nations
reviewed the current security arrangements for the UNSOM and UNSOA facilities
and installations in Mogadishu. This review highlighted an increased level of threat
as well as increases in the number and size of compounds needing protection, and
identified additional security requirements that cannot be addressed at the current
troop level of 410.
Based on this security assessment, I intend to increase the strength of the
guard unit in Mogadishu to a total of 530 personnel, an increase of 120 troops. The
additional troops will reinforce the existing battalion and will also be responsible
for a new compound, namely, the United Nations guard unit base. This increase will
be in line with the current concept of operations for the guard unit. The Federal
Government of Somalia was notified on 18 March.
In accordance with the arrangements in the exchange of letters of 20 and
24 December 2013, should other situations warrant the use of one or more
additional guard unit(s), especially in regions other than Mogadishu, I will revert to
the Council with advice on the supplementary measures that may be required. I also
intend to continue to review the continuing need for the presence of the United
Nations guard unit on an annual basis by conducting a yearly security assessment.
A protocol of amendment to the status-of-mission agreement for UNSOM,
which would extend the necessary legal protection to the guard unit and to the State
or States contributing contingents, is still under negotiation with the Government of
Somalia.
Pending its conclusion and entry into force, it is to be understood that the
provisions of the model status-of-forces agreement between the United Nations and
host countries (A/45/594, annex) that apply to, and in respect of, the military
personnel of national contingents assigned to the military component of a United
Nations operation and to the property, funds and assets of the States contributing
those contingents shall apply provisionally to, and in respect of, the military
personnel of national contingents assigned to the guard unit and to the property,
funds and assets of the States contributing those contingents.
I would be grateful if you could confirm that the above arrangements are
acceptable to the Council. If so, it is my intention to take the necessary steps to
increase the strength of the guard unit as soon as possible. In keeping with existing
practice, I will, in due course, notify the Council of the concurrence of the troop contributing countries whose units would be deployed to Mogadishu.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

2/2

15-05394
