TWENTY-SECOND

YEAR

MEETING: 7 JULY 1967
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page
1
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 364) . , . . . . . , . . . . . , , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . , . . . , . . , . . , . .

1

Letter dated 6 July 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/8036) . , . . . , , . . , . . , . . . , . . , . . . . , . . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV.1344

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a refei-ence to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council(symbo1 S/. . ,) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

THIRTEEN

HUNDRED

AND

SIXTY-FOURTH

Held in New York, on Friday,
President: Mr. Endalkachew Makonnen (Ethiopia).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark,
Ethiopia, France, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 364)

7 July

MEETING

1967, at 4 p.m.

4. I also indicated that it was no coincidence that foreign
commandos landed in Kisangani precisely when a unit of
Katangese ex-gendarmes mutinied at Bukavu and wasjoined
by armed foreign civilians, all of whom engaged in combat
with the loyal units of the Congolese National Army,
5. Today, as the situation develops in the troubled areas
and the investigation of the individuals involved in acts of
sabotage continues, it becomes clear that the ignorance
displayed by some Governments in their official statements
cannot go unchallenged.

1. Adoption of the agenda,
2. Letter dated 6 July 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/8036).

6. Very early in the morning of 5 July 1967, two planes
landed commandos at Kisangani airport. At the same
moment, foreigners in the National Army mutinied and
joined forces with the commandos, occupied the airport
and proceeded to use our military planes to bomb the
positions of the units of the Congolese army.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

7. In Bukavu, as I have said, fighting took place between
the units of the National Army and the ex-units of the
Katangese gendarmerie which had mutinied.

tetter
dated 6 July 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/8036)

8. All this took place some time after certain foreign
nationals, whose names and nationalities I shall tell you in a
moment, had been arrested for sabotaging vital economic
installations of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision of
the Council taken yesterday, I now propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to take a seat at the
Council table to participate without vote in. the discussion
of the item on our agenda,

9. Their movements and their outside contacts could not
escape the notice of the Spanish and Portugese Governments in particular since, on the one hand, these contacts
took place with Tshombe who, according to statements of
the Spanish Government; had been forbidden to take part
in any political activity, and on the other hand, some of the
participants in the plot entered the Congolese territory by
way of Lisbon and Angola.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. T, Idzumbtri!
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a place at the
Courzcil table.

2. The PRESIDENT: The Council will now continue its
consideration of the question before it. The first speaker on
my list is the representative of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, who has indicated that he has additional information to present to the Security Council. I therefore call
OII him.
/3. Mr. IDZUMBUIR

(Democratic Republic of the Congo)
(translated
from French):
During yesterday’s debate
/1363rd
meeting/ I referred to the recent events in
Kisangani in an attempt to demonstrate that those events
constituted part of a plot to overthrow the institutions of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

10. The police investigation into the acts of sabotage
reveals the following. First of all a Belgian subject named
Jean-Paul Lahaye participated in these acts of sabotage.
Another Belgian subject named Roger Perricas, who
unfortunately escaped, also participated. A third Belgian
subject who participated, named Michel Scailquin, also
escaped.
11. A fourth Belgian subject was Paul van Audenhaege,
born in Ghent, According to the investigation, he admitted
that he had accompanied Mr. Lahaye $ the latter’s car
from Lubumbashi (formerly Elisabethville) to Kundelungu
to take Mr. Savant, of whom I shall speak later, and another
Congolese accomplice to Lubumbashi. Presently, I shall
inform the Council of the role played by this Mr. Savant

21. The second stage of the “Kerilis Plan” was begun in
July when, in the early hours of the morning, the
commandos landed in Kisangani and the Katangese units
mutinied in Bukavu, supported in the two towns by a
private foreign militia.

and you will then understand the ramifications of these acts
of sabotage.
12. A fifth Belgian subject who also participated in the
acts of sabotage is Francis Dumont, born in Anderlecht. At
the investigation, he admitted having taken Mr. Savant to
Kapanga where a cousin of Tshombe lives, and with whom
he was to speak before returning to Angola. Mr. Dumont
participated at the request of a Mr. Thibaut.

22. I should like particularly to stress the part played by
Mr. Savant, Tshombe’s special adviser, who was able to
travel without hindrance to Angqla, via Lisbon, and then
from Angola to the Congo, at a time when no one in the
Spanish or Portugese intelligence services could have been
unaware of the reasons for these trips. My Government
naturally finds it difficult to accept the protestations of
innocence made tcdly by those Governments, one of which
claims to pave been entirely unaware that such activities
could have emanated from< anywhere in Angola or PortLga!,
while the other continues to tell any one who will listen
that Tshombe is not engaging in any political activity in
Madrid,

13. Who is this Mr. Savant? Mr. Savant is a French citizen
who has unfortunately escaptd. He is a special adviser to
Tshombe, and at the same time a liaison officer who
entered the Congo several times, through the town of
Texeira de Souza in Angola, especially under the assumed
name of Laforge. He was Tshombe’s special envoy to the
Congo, where he was to make contacts in order t 7 carry out
a plan which had been conceived in Madrid.
14. Another accomplice is Mrs. Savant, a native of
Belgium, who admitted at the investigation having received
a message from her husband, at the time of his arrival in
Texeira de Souza, asking her to contact Mr. Thibaut and to
ask him for transportation from Texeira de Souza to
Kundelungu.

23. Certainly, many other points have yet to be explained,
As I said at the beginning of this statement, we are sure that
as the situation develops, as we regain control over our
territory and over the trouble spots, and as the investigation
in the sabotage activities proceeds, we will be better able to
gauge their ramifications and the support which the
saboteurs have been able to obtain from certain countries.

15. Finally, another French citizen implicated in the
matter is Michel Thibaut, a resident of Lubumbashi, who
admits having taken Mr. Savant in his plane from the town
of Texeira de Souza in Angola to Kundelungu in the Congo,
at the request of Mrs. Savant,

24. But even now, it is interesting to note how the arrest
of Tshombe in Algiers and the initiative of my Government
in .requesting,. h# e$@ition
provoked reactions among
certain public figures or groups of public figures in some
countries.

16. All these persons were implicated in the execution of a
plan conceived in Spain, called the “Kerilis Plan”, which a
very high ranking Belgian officer, by the name of Van de
Walle, helped to prepare. This is the same Van de Walle who
was with Tshombe at the time of the Kantangese secession,
during his stay in Minshasa, and who is once again with him
today in Madrid.

25. It is particularly interesting to see the reaction of a
group of British members of Parliament who, after
Tshombe was arrested, hastened to propose a motion
which, while aimed at British subjects, also took into
account the fate of those for whom they worked.

17. This plan had three stages. The first consisted of
economic sabotage throughout
the entire Congolese
territory, especially in Katanga, the mining centre, and in
the central Congo, tihich has the seaport and an important
line of communications.

26. There was also a resounding declaration by the racist
authorities of Salisbury, who followed the lead of the
metropolitan country in supporting the destructive force
unleashed by the hired murderers in the eastern part of our
country.

18. The second stage of the pIan consisted of inciting
mutinies within the Congolese National Army and attempting, inter alia, through the foreigners in the service of the
National Army, to stir up discontent and practise subversion among the units of the National Army.

27. Even in Belgium, the site of the headquarters of this
international high finance organization for which Tshombe
works, a statement was made by a Belgian senator, Mr,
Hilaire Lahaye, who reminded his compatriots that Belgium
had a moral debt to Tshombe and that his country ought to
discharge that moral obligation. One might well wonder
whether this was the way those gentlemen chose to repay
their debt to Tshombe by staging this landing of .foreign
commandos on the territory of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

19. The third stage consisted of the physical elimination
of the Chief of State. The plan provided that in case of
resistance there should be no hesitation in opening fire on
the civilian population.
20. Thus, during last June, the first stage was put into
effect by dynamiting the Lubudi bridge, an economically
strategk bridge, and by blowing up the electric pylons
about which I spoke yesterday. The explosives used for this
‘purpose, part of which were recovered by the police, came
partly from factoj installations in Katanga and partly from
Angola.

28. One thing is certain: certain political and financial
circles in some of the Western countries, especially Belgium,
Spain and Portugal, were not unaware that political
activities were being planned on their soil with the
intention of seizing power in the Congo and reinstating
their darling Tshombe as the Head of State.
2

29, We ask the Council to condemn such activities. We
believethat they are COlltrarY to the Charter of the United
Nations and that ~OVerI~~~~c~ltsWhich allow or tolerate such
activities on their soil should be condemned, since they are
actiagin violation of the United Nations Charter.

38. This very afternoon, an unknown aircraft tried to land
on the Aru plain, on the frontier between the Congo and
Uganda. Realizing that this strip was protected by the
military, it flew off in the direction of Uganda. We have
also alerted the Ugandan authorities about it.

30. We believe that this is an important prerequisite for
peacebetween States. It is also an important prerequisite
for peaceful international relations between States and for
respectof the sovereignty and independence of States and
the freedom of their people to choose their own leaders and
tlleir own institutions.

39. In my address to the Security Council I said the
problem should be considered in the full context of the
struggle which will continue to be waged in Africa for as
long as colonialism and racism believe in your support.
40. Shoulder your responsiblilities by curing the diseaseat
the source and prevent it as soon as the symptoms appear.
Do not be content to plug the holes in the dykes of peace
and justice, do not be satisfied with administering tran.
quilizers when specific medication is required,

31, I venture to hope that this Council will never allow
international imperialist groups and those who deal in high
finance to believe or imagine that they have the right to
lnake or break the institutions of small States. We also
believe that the COUd
will never allow responsible
Govermnents, Members of this Organization,
to identify
themselveswith the insidious actions of such groups.

41. DO not do as you did in the Middle East where, over
the years, instead of tackling the basic problems in dispute,
finding permanent solutions to those problems and seeing
to it that they were respected, we had the impression that
the Council was content to deal from time to time with
border incidents and make a few contributions to aid the
refugees, until the day when real war broke out.

32. We believe that it is the duty of this Council to
prevent States Members of this Organization from one day
becoming victims of such intrigues.
33, There is no need to remind you here that it is essential
for the Security Council to examine this problem in its full
context. Indeed, there is no doubt in anyone’s mind that as
long as colonialist conditions persist in southern Africa,
neither our country nor independent Africa will ever enjoy
peace,

42. I venture to hope that you will not wait until the
Congo is invaded once more, not by a handful of
mercenaries but perhaps by an army secure in the knowledge that it can fall back to safe positions in Angola and
Rhodesia, before you remember’, too late, the serious threat
of coloniali&m and racism in Africa and the protection
which their agents, whether States or individuals, enjoy
from certain Powers, as in the case‘of Tshombe in Spain.

34. The collusion between these acts of international
banditry and the colonialism of certain western Powers
needs no proof. Such an invasion of our territory could
never have taken place unless those taking part were sure
that they would be given refuge by the colonialists of
Portugal and Rhodesia, not to mention the racists of South
Africa and the great Powers which support them.

43. The fighting in Kisangani has caused a number of
deaths, according to a late report. How many deaths are
necessary before measures are finally taken against those
who tolerate the activities of murderers and their masters
on their territory? I venture to hope that very soon we
shall be able to supply you with a complete list of the acts
of destruction and murder committed in Bukavu and
Kisangani.

35. I have just learned at the last minute that the
Kisangani mercenaries, under the pressure of the army
approaching the airport, lost no time in fleeing Kisangani in
the two planes which had brought them and one plane
belonging to the Congolese airline which had been prevented from leaving the airport and which: they cornmandeered, together with the crew, to take them to a
destination in the south of the country. According to a
radio communication between that plane and another
conlmerciaI plane, they were heading towards Rhodesia.

44. However, there is not a shadow of doubt that you
must condemn the duplicity’ of the colonialist and racist
Powers once and for aI.I and put an end to them.
45. Mr. IYALLA (Nigeria): Now that the Council has
heard the additional information supplied by the rep=
sentative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and in
the light of that representative’s urgent request that the
Council do something about this matter, I would propose
under de 33 (1) of the provisional rules of procedure of
the Security Council that the meeting be suspended for half
an hour so that we may consider what to do next.

36. We are defending ourselves with the means at our
disposal. We do not have sufficient resources to Cover our
immense territory with a network air protection,
as many
developedcountries can.
37. The three planes were later seen over Katanga,
probably heading towards Rhodesia or perhaps towards
Angola. We alerted the Zambian authorities. We are SilnPlY
asking the Governments of Portugal and the United
Kingdom, which are responsible for Angola and Rhodesia,
to arrestthese mercenaries and to return our aircraft to us
ifit should land on their territory.

46. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Nigeria has
formally moved a suspension of the meeting under rule
33 (I). Under that rule “Any motion for the suspension or
for the simple adjournment of the meeting shall be decided
3

without debate.” Accordingly, I now put to the vote the
motion for suspension of the meeting for half an hour.

cratic Republic of the Congo itself. As we see it, it would
be rather unwise to postpone further consideration of this
question until Monday and, if I have understood you
correctly, until Monday afternoon.

A vote was taken by show ofhands.

53. Do you not think, first, that it would be better to
make a more definite announcement regarding the time of
the Security Council’s next meeting? And, secondly, it
seems to us that members of the Security Council should be
ready to reconvene here and continue the meeting at any
minute, at any time.

The motion was adopted unanimously.
The meeting was suspended
5.30 p.m.

at 5 p.nz and resumed at

47. The PRESIDENT: As there are no other names on the
list of speakers for this meeting, I should like to outline a
programme of work which I think might suit the convenience of the Council.

54, We are, of course, thinking mainly of the position of
the representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, who will have to collaborate with us in this respect
and help us to ensure that the question which we have on
the Council’s agenda can be considered by the Council
without deldy.

48. The representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has given us additional information this afternoon
which, I am sure, will be most useful in the consultations
which have already begun, and I think that we should give
ourselves the benefit of continued consultations during the
next two days, now that we have the advantage of that
additional information. We could then resume our work on
Monday afternoon, 10 July.

55. The PRESIDENT: I wish to assure the representative
of the Soviet Union and all other members of the Council
that it can never be the intention of the President to delay
in any way the work of the Council, now or at any other
time.

49. It is understood, of course, that once the Council is
seized of an urgent problem, members must be at the
disposal of the Council should the situation require the
convening of an emergency meeting. Therefore, I shall
expect members to stand by for any such eventuality and I
shall appreciate the understanding an;l co-operation of my
colleagues in this regard.

56. In the suggestion I put to the Council I tried to meet
the two elements of expediency and convenience to
members, On the one hand, I said that the additional
information that has been given to us today is of such
importance that, together with the information we received
yesterday, it could very well be the basis for the kind of
consultation that is considered tradition&l in the Council
and that has always been found to be productive. And after
all, the entire effort of the Council should be aimed at
producing results and arriving at decisions, On the other
hand, I fully agree, at the same time, that once the Council
is seized of a problem of this kind, it has to be ready to
meet at any time; and unless I have committed an error of
omission, I believe I said in the statement I made earlier
that I would expect all members to keep themselves at the
disposal of the President to meet at any time, should the
development of the situation require it.

50. I do not intend to fix any definite hour for our
meeting on Monday afternoon. I shall continue to be in
constant contact and consultation with representatives, and
I therefore think that the hour can be decided upon in the
course of such consultations.
5 1. Mr. FEDORENKO
(Union
of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated front Russian): The Security Council
has been convened urgently to consider the complaint made
by the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in connetion with an aggression committed by the
forces of imperialism and colonialism, We have before the
Council a cable from the President of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (see S/8031/ and we have also
heard two statements by the representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr. Idzumbuir, one at
yesterday’s meeting [1363rd meeting] and one at this
meeting. The seriousness and urgency of the discussion of
this matter in the Security Council are clear from the very
nature of the case; and we certainly would not want
Members of this Organization to get the impression that as
soon as the Security Council begins its examination of
questions of aggression and interference in domestic affairs,
we then start a whole series of adjournments and deIays in
the discussion of these urgent matters.

57. In this way, therefore, I thought I was covering all the
ground and providing for all eventualities. But of course in
matters of this kind, there is no question of the PreSident
wishing to dictate the tempo in terms of meetings. I am
entirely in the hands of the Council and would be very
happy to benefit from the advice of my colleagues.
58. Mr. FEDORENKO
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): Mr. President, we are
grateful to you for emphasizing that members of the
Security Council must be ready if necessary to meet at any
time to continue the discussion of the item on our agenda.
59. I should like to ask at what time we shall be meeting
on Monday to continue our discussion, if there is no need
for an urgent meeting.

52. I should therefore like to state the position of my
delegation on this question and to emphasize that in our
view there should in future be more clarity and precision in
the Security Council’s work in connexion with the appeal
made by the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo concerning the aggression committed against a
Member State of the United Nations, namely, the Demo-

60. The PRESIDENT: It seems to me that the fixing of
the time is the easiest thing to do. I thought that perhaps
we could fix the time when we felt we had something
useful on the basis of which we could continue our
4

discussion. As far as the President is concerned, if Monday
afternoon is accepted for the next meeting, then we can
meet at any time on Monday afternoon, at 3 o’clock or
4 o’clock, for instance.
61, At the same time, taking into consideration the
genuine preoccupation of our colleague of the Soviet
Union, perhaps the best thing under the circumstances
would be not to fix a time, but to say that we shall
continue consultations on the understanding that the
President will call a meeting at any time that is found to be
most appropriate and most useful from the point of view of
the advancement of our work. In this way I believe we
could leave open the possibility of calling a meeting even
before Monday. We would emphasize, in other words, the
need that I have already stressed, that a meeting may take.
place at any time, should the situation require it.
62. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): Mr. President, we appreciate your approach and are particularly grateful for the
concern you have shown for the heavy demands on the
time of members of the Security Council, including the
representative of the Soviet Union. Generally speaking we
are all in the same position. We must, of course, show
consideration for one another, and think about our time

and our other affairs. This is in the spirit of good traditions
and mutual understanding. Nevertheless, it would seem to
me that the members of the Security Council should not
disperse without making some effort to sketch out a
time-table for our work and to establish some guidelines.
After all, the first thing we do is to plan the timing of our
discussions. I think it would be in the interests of all
members of the Security Council to fix a definite date and
time for our next meeting, if everything turns out as we
expect and if there is no need for an emergency meeting. If
you are suggesting Monday 10 July at 3 p.m., we have no
objections, assuming that all members of the Security
Council, and the representative of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, are of the same mind.
63. The PRESIDENT: I wish to thank the representative
of the Soviet Union for his statement. I propose that we
meet at 3 p.m. Monday, on the understanding, of course,
that all members of the Council will make themselves
available to the President for a meeting should develop
ments in the situation so require.
64. If there is no objection to that proposal I shall take it
that it is acceptable to all members. Since there is no
objection, the Council will meet again on Monday at 3 p.m.
The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

Uniied

Nofions

UNITED

publications.may

the world.
or Geneva.

Consult

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

Les

publications

your

des

d&positoires
du monde
Nations
Unies,
Section

KAK

nOi7YYUTb

1hJUlllll
ill‘CIIT~‘TllIlX
H~r:l:IllIlc
ll~lO~~;KC

COMO
Los

in U.N.

PUBLICATIONS

be
bookstore

obtained

from

or

to:

write

LES PUBLICATIONS
Notions

Unies

sent

en

entier.
Informer-vous
des venter,
New York

U3,l(AHUFI

CONSEGUIR

publicaciones

de

10s Nociones

Price:

$U.S.

vente

Unidos

0.50

distributors
Soles

throughout

Section,

New

les

librairier

libroirie

et

ler

ogencer

ou adressez-vous

06bEAUHEHHblX

b:

HAl.(Ufi

hlOilill0
Iij’llIiTb
n lillll~lilllJS
IIU’lKlll11LlX
C’II~lIlIllill
06 Il:l,~alllllllX
Il IltlIllCII
IillllilillO~
06%enIrllclllllax
Irnqlrrl,
CcKl~rrH

estirn

en vento

o IU librero

o dirijasc

(or equivalent

York

UNIES

dans

DE LAS NACIONES

del mundo.
Consulte
York o Ginebro.

and

Notions,

aupr&r
de votre
ou Genbvc.

OPTAHU3AMUU

PUBLICACIONES

bookstores

United

DES NATIONS

~pIYlllll:l~l(Illl
&~I~~~IIIcIIII~,IX
Ihl\Ilk
110 III’CS 11:lfiOllZlX
MUpa.
I~NlOAIlTl?
II.111 II1IIlIIITC
II0 a,lpcoy
: OprallIlaaIgill
11!3,~2tllIlir,
IIIJO-11Ol~Ii
IUIC jfCCllt?IlIl.

en todas
parles
Ventas,
Nuevo

Litho

NATIONS

II
110

UNIDAS
en librerfas

in other

y cosos

a: N&ones

currencies)

Unidos,

distribuidoros
Secci6n

de

08361-November

1970-2.100
