S/PV.7353

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7353rd meeting

Monday, 22 December 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cherif . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Chad)

Members:

Argentina. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Sarki
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power

Agenda
The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
Letter dated 5 December 2014 from the representatives of Australia, Chile,
France, Jordan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, the Republic of Korea, Rwanda,
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2014/872)

14-71508 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1471508*

S/PV.7353

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to those members of the Council who wish to make
statements.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
is opposed to exploiting the existence of large-scale
violations of human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea as a reason to include the situation
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in the
agenda of the Security Council. The Charter of the
United Nations stipulates explicitly that the primary
responsibility of the Security Council is to maintain
international peace and security. The United Nations
organs each have their own respective functions
and mandates. The Security Council is not a forum
designed for involvement in human rights issues, and
still less should human rights issues be politicized.
Currently, international peace and security are faced
with numerous daunting challenges. The Security
Council should strictly abide by its responsibilities and
concentrate on addressing issues that really concern
international peace and security.
The situation on the Korean peninsula remains
complex and sensitive. Upholding the goal of the
denuclearization of the peninsula, maintaining peace
and stability on the peninsula and insisting on dialogue
and consultations as a way to resolve issues is in the
common interests of all parties concerned and should
be the direction towards which all parties should work
together. The Security Council should work more
to facilitate dialogue and ease tensions and refrain
from doing anything that might cause an escalation
of tensions. The Security Council’s inclusion of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea situation on
its agenda in order to involve itself of the situation of
human rights in that country will work against those
goals and can only do harm rather than good.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I shall make only a few
brief remarks. I would like to start by reading the
letter that a group of 10 Council members addressed to
you, Mr President, in your capacity as President of the
Council on 5 December. The letter stated:
“We the undersigned members of the Security
Council — Australia, Chile, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Republic of Korea,
Rwanda, the United Kingdom and the United

2/21

23/12/2014

States — are deeply concerned about the situation
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
“We are particularly concerned by the scale
and gravity of human rights violations detailed
in the comprehensive report undertaken by the
Human Rights Council commission of inquiry
on human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea (A/HRC/25/63), as contained in
document S/2014/276. These violations threaten to
have a destabilizing impact on the region and the
maintenance of international peace and security.
“Therefore, we write to request that the
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea be formally placed on the Council’s agenda
without prejudice to the item on non-proliferation
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
We request a meeting of the Security Council on
the situation in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, pursuant to rule 2 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, and request that a
senior official from the Secretariat and a senior
official from the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights formally brief the
Council under that agenda item, which will enable
Council members to receive further information
from the Secretariat on this situation and its
implications for international peace and security.”
(S/2014/872)
The 10 members of the Council which signed the
letter are first seeking the establishment of a new
agenda item, “The situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea”, under which the Council can, as a
matter of urgency and then as necessary, consider the
serious and deteriorating human rights situation in that
country. Given the gravity and systematic nature of the
human rights violations taking place in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and the threat to the
maintenance of international peace and security, we do
not consider that this can be appropriately considered
by the Council on an ad hoc or informal basis.
Secondly, a formal Council meeting under the
new agenda item must take place today. Rule 2 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure provides that
the President shall call a meeting of the Security Council
on the request of any one member of the Council, and
it has been over two weeks since 10 Council members
requested such a meeting. We consider therefore that
we should now simply proceed to adopt the agenda,

14-71508

23/12/2014

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

which has as its substantive item “The situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea”.
The President (spoke in French): I wish to draw
the attention of the members to document S/2014/872,
which contains a letter dated 5 December 2014 from
the representatives of Australia, Chile, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, the Republic of Korea,
Rwanda, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
In view of the request that the matter be included
in the provisional agenda and in view of the comments
made by the representatives of China and Australia,
I propose to put the provisional agenda to the vote.
Accordingly, I shall put it to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Argentina, Australia, Chile, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Republic of Korea,
Rwanda, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and United States of America
Against:
China, Russian Federation
Abstention:
Chad, Nigeria
The President (spoke in French): The provisional
agenda has been adopted.
The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea
Letter dated 5 December 2014 from the
representatives of Australia, Chile, France,
Jordan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, the Republic
of Korea, Rwanda, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2014/872)
The President (spoke in French): Pursuant to
the request of the representatives of Australia, Chile,
France, Jordan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, the Republic
of Korea, Rwanda, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and the United States of America
contained in document S/2014/872, that a meeting of
the Council on the agenda item “The situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea” be convened,

S/PV.7353

I shall suspend this meeting and we shall resume, after
a brief recess, to continue consideration of the agenda
item.
The meeting was suspended at 3.15 p.m. and
resumed at 3.20 p.m.
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate
in this meeting: Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, and Mr. Ivan
Šimonović, Assistant Secretary-General for Human
Rights.
I now give the floor to Mr. Zerihoun.
Mr. Zerihoun: The Security Council is meeting at
a time when the situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea is attracting increased world
attention and concern. The report (A/69/639) of the
Secretary-General to the General Assembly entitled
“Situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea” was issued earlier this month.
The General Assembly adopted resolution 69/188,
entitled “Situation of human rights in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea”, on 18 December, and on
19 December the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
of the United States issued a report alleging that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea was responsible
for the recent cyberattack targeting Sony Pictures
Entertainment.
The Secretary-General is aware of the FBI report.
He is also aware that the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea has denied any involvement. The United
Nations is not privy to the information on which the
FBI’s conclusions are based. However, the rise in the
incidence and severity of cyberattacks is of increasing
concern.
The commission of inquiry established by the
Human Rights Council gave voice to the many victims
of grave human rights violations and provided a road
map for the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
adhere to in order to conform with universal humanrights standards. The commission concluded that “the
gravity, scale and nature of these violations reveal a
State that does not have any parallel in the contemporary
world” (S/2014/276, annex, para. 80). The commission
also reframed and changed the tone of the discussion on
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. It is not just
the nuclear issue that deserves international attention
and action. The discussion in the Security Council

14-715083/21

S/PV.7353

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

today allows for a more comprehensive assessment and
action when addressing security and stability concerns
on the Korean peninsula.
In keeping with its obligations under international
law, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has
a responsibility to protect its population from the
most serious international crimes. The international
community also has a collective responsibility to protect
the population of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and to consider the broader implications of the
reported grave human rights situation for the stability
of the region.
For the first time in 15 years, the Foreign Minister
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea attended
the General Assembly’s debate in September this year
and met with the Secretary-General, confirming the
commitment of his country to sustaining and continuing
dialogue. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
has also undertaken active diplomatic activities around
the world, including in Europe, East Africa and
Northeast Asia, and has engaged more substantively
with the United Nations human-rights system, including
the universal periodic review mechanism. Those signals
of engagement offer an important opportunity for the
United Nations and the wider international community
to redouble efforts towards building trust, dialogue and
cooperation on all tracks. It is also an opportunity for
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to work with
the international community to improve the humanrights situation and the living conditions of the people
of the country.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has
issued official statements making clear its objection to
the recent General Assembly resolution on the human
rights situation in the country and, on 9 December,
the spokesperson of the Foreign Ministry presented
his Government’s strong reaction to the meeting of
the Security Council today. While the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea had raised the possibility
of conducting a fourth nuclear test in its statements
immediately before and after the Third Committee
vote, its recent statements have refrained from such
references.
The Secretary-General notes that the international
community has remained firm and united in affirming
that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea cannot
have the status of a nuclear-weapon State under the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
There is strong international consensus on the need for
4/21

23/12/2014

the verifiable denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
In that context, the Six-Party Talks remain a viable
mechanism to achieve irreversible denuclearization and
maintain peace and security on the Korean peninsula.
The 2005 Joint Statement remains a solid framework
for addressing those issues through dialogue and
negotiation.
While the non-proliferation, political, human rights,
economic and security challenges are interrelated and
mutually reinforcing, the United Nations urges Member
States to increase humanitarian assistance for those in
need in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
The United Nations-led humanitarian response to
the country is of high quality and life-saving, with a
measurable impact on the lives of the most vulnerable.
The response, however, is hampered by a funding
deficit, which has been exacerbated by sanctions.
Next year will mark the seventieth anniversary
of the end of the Second World War, the founding
of the United Nations, as well as the division of the
Korean peninsula. The Korean question has remained
unresolved for such a long time, and the situation on
the peninsula remains fragile and volatile. Inter-Korean
relations have remained deadlocked, and family
members separated for far too long.
Restarting credible dialogue and meaningful
engagement would be an important step towards
overcoming the current standoff on the Korean
peninsula and should go hand-in-hand with efforts to
ensure accountability. The United Nations will continue
its engagement on both fronts and counts on the active
support of the international community, especially
the countries in the region. Sustained international
efforts will be important in supporting those efforts.
All concerned parties should work to make 2015 a
pivotal year to improve the human-rights situation in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and to move
toward a denuclearized and peaceful Korean peninsula.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Zerihoun for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Šimonović.
Mr. Šimonović: Let me mention that the High
Commissioner is sorry that he could not address the
Council today, himself.
Earlier this year, the representative of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea spoke very
vividly in the Council about the “savageness and

14-71508

23/12/2014

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

brutality” of crimes against humanity committed
against the Korean people during the Second World
War (S/PV.7105, p. 57). Ambassador Ri Tong Il listed
massacres, abductions, forcible recruitment, forced
labour and sexual slavery, which, he said “trampled on
the dignity of Korean women and of the Korean nation
as a whole” (ibid.).
That is the kind of compassion that we are seeking
for the victims in the Korean peninsula today — victims
of extermination, of murder, of enslavement and
torture; victims of rape, forced abortion and other
sexual violence; victims of persecution on the basis of
political, religious, racial and gender grounds; people
who have been forcibly transferred; those whose loved
ones have been abducted or disappeared without a
trace; people who have been deliberately starved for
long periods of time.
According to the Human Rights Council commission
of inquiry on human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, those crimes have been perpetrated
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in a
widespread, systematic manner, as deliberate policy
directed by the highest levels of Government. In many
instances, they constitute crimes against humanity. The
report of the Commission (S/2014/276, annex) is before
Council members today. Rarely has such an extensive
charge-sheet of international crimes been brought to the
Council’s attention. It documents a totalitarian system
characterized by the brutally enforced denial of the
rights to freedom of thought, conscience and religion,
as well as the rights to freedom of opinion, expression,
information and association.
Songbun classification, which calibrates perceived
loyalty to the State, generates extensive and damaging
discrimination throughout the country. Where it
intersects with gender-based discrimination, it
increases the vulnerability of women and sharply
limits their opportunities. The Government of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has also used
denial of the right to food to control and coerce its
people. The actions of officials have caused the deaths
of hundreds of thousands of people, according to the
commission — particularly during the famine of the
1990s — and have inflicted permanent physical and
psychological injuries on survivors.
In November 2013, the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and the World Food
Programme found that 84 per cent of households — 8
to 9 families out of 10 — were not consuming enough

S/PV.7353

food. According to the latest national nutrition survey,
in 2012 28 per cent of children under-five suffered
stunting from malnutrition and almost 1 woman in
4 had been so starved that she risked giving birth to
premature or underweight children.
Nationals of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea who manage to flee the country may fall victim
to trafficking networks, and women often face forced
marriage or forced prostitution. If forcibly returned, they
face persecution, torture, forced abortion, prolonged
arbitrary detention and even summary execution.
The commission expressed its deepest horror at
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s political
prison-camp system — kwanliso — whose inmates
suffer deliberate starvation, forced labour, execution,
torture, rape, forced abortion and infanticide. The
commission estimated that hundreds of thousands of
prisoners have perished in those camps over the past
50 years and that they currently hold 80,000 to 120,000
people.
Representatives of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea have acknowledged the existence
of what they term “reformatories”. I firmly believe
that with honesty, transparency and international
assistance, we can find a way to dismantle the camp
system and release and rehabilitate prisoners. Other
countries of the region have shown that it is possible to
release thousands of political prisoners and to roll back
systems of administrative detention.
The commission of inquiry has highlighted the
connections between the human rights situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and security
in the region overall. The sustained military focus
and nuclear priority of the Government have been
pursued at the expense of the economic and social
rights, as well as the lives and well-being, of its people.
Comprehensive human rights violations on the part of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea have had a
significant impact on regional peace and security, from
international abductions and enforced disappearances
to trafficking and the outflow of desperate refugees.
If we are to reduce tension in the region, there must
be movement towards real respect for human rights in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. That issue
deserves the Security Council’s fullest attention and
action.
Since the publication of commission of inquiry’s
report in March, with the prospect of action by

14-715085/21

S/PV.7353

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

the Council, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea authorities have shown promising new signs
of engagement with international human-rights
mechanisms. They engaged productively in their
second universal periodic review in the Human
Rights Council and, for the first time, accepted
numerous recommendations dealing with humanitarian
assistance, women’s and children’s rights, health and
education. Representatives of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea also held an unprecedented meeting
with the Special Rapporteur. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea also indicated, for the first time,
its willingness to accept technical assistance from
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights. Moreover, bilateral negotiations
between the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
and Japan have reopened the investigations into the
alleged abductions of Japanese nationals. I hope that
this process will be conducted in transparency and
good faith, leading to truth and redress for the families.
It will also be important to bring clarity to reported
abductions from the Republic of Korea and elsewhere.
All of those developments may present an
opportunity for real change. Other countries in the
region have shown in the recent past that it is possible
to dismantle deep-seated structures of repression and
receive assistance in reform, leading to new recognition
and standing in the international community. My
Office will naturally give all possible support to
such progress, together with the international human
rights mechanisms; and here I note that the Special
Rapporteur should be invited to visit the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea without preconditions. In
March 2015, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights will establish a fieldbased structure in Seoul, as mandated by Human Rights
Council resolution 25/25. That will follow up on the
commission of inquiry, boost support for the Special
Rapporteur and serve as a hub for documentation,
technical assistance and advocacy in order to promote
accountability and improve human rights in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Real change in the human rights situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea will not only
require reform; it also demands justice. For the first
time, a United Nations-mandated body has described
human rights violations in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea in terms of international criminal
law. That is significant in establishing individual and

6/21

23/12/2014

institutional accountability, but it also invokes the
international community’s responsibility to take action
to prevent and punish such crimes. An overwhelming
majority of Member States — those in the Human Rights
Council and those in General Assembly — as well
as victims, survivors and civil-society organizations
around the world, have called on the Security Council
to take action on this report, including by referral to the
International Criminal Court and by adopting targeted
sanctions.
As we have seen this year, concerted actions by
the international community can have a powerful
deterrent effect and may begin to change the policy of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. I believe
that the Security Council can advance two crucial
goals: accountability and engagement for reform.
Today’s discussion has placed the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea on notice. The Council should
carefully monitor developments in the coming months
to see whether engagement with that country leads to
real change, or whether it should take further action.
The people of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea have endured decades of suffering and cruelty.
They need the Council’s protection, and the cause of
justice, peace and security in the region requires its
leadership.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Šimonović for his briefing.
I now give the floor to members of the Security
Council.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Tayé-Brook Zerihoun and Assistant
Secretary-General Ivan Šimonović for their briefings.
Today’s meeting is an historic step forward in
the international community’s efforts to consider
the situation in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea and its broader implications. It also sends a
vital message to the people of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea that the international community is
aware of their suffering and stands in solidarity with
them. By meeting on the topic, the Council recognizes
that the dangerous threat to international peace and
security posed by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea regime is not limited to its weapons programmes
and proliferation activities, but that the threat also
flows from its atrocious treatment of its people and

14-71508

23/12/2014

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

its determination to use every means possible to resist
action that it perceives as a challenge to its authority.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is,
in effect, a totalitarian State that uses violence and
repression against its own citizens to maintain itself
and its threatening military apparatus in power. The
regime’s atrocities against its own people have created
an inherently unstable State. The regime’s system of
repression enables its proliferation policies and the
deprivations that it imposes on its people fund those
policies. Some have asserted that the Council has no
business considering this issue. Australia strongly
disagrees. History shows that human rights violations
of the type and scale that we are seeing in North Korea
have reverberations well beyond the country in which
they are committed. They amount to a rejection of the
international norms that underpin stable societies, and
they undermine peaceful relations between States.
As we have seen time and again, serious violations of
human rights serve as a warning sign of instability and
conflict, especially in the absence of accountability for
such violations.
With the publication of the seminal report of
the commission of inquiry on human rights in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (S/2014/276,
annex), the international community now has a
comprehensive, evidence-based assessment of the
systematic, widespread and gross human rights
violations being committed by the North Korean
regime. The report is deeply disturbing and compels a
response. The commission’s findings on the extent of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s indoctrination
programme highlight a deliberate strategy to control
the population in order to secure the regime’s hold on
power. The programme seeks to instil national hatred,
which includes incitement to discrimination, hostility,
violence and propaganda for war.
The Commission’s report lays bare the depraved
nature of the tools of control of the regime of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, including the
denial of access to basic human needs: food, water,
heating, shelter and work. The massive humanitarian
catastrophe that has resulted from the scale of the reign
of terror in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
has affected all of its neighbours and has threatened
regional stability.
There is a lethal restriction on the freedom of
expression. One witness told the commission that no

S/PV.7353

one would dare object to the harsh living conditions in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, because
“protest is equivalent to death” (A/HRC/25/CRP.1,
para. 225). Instead, the citizens of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea are forced to denounce
conduct that is perceived by the regime as a threat to
it. Family members must report on each other. The
regime’s vast surveillance apparatus ensures harsh
punishment — even summary execution — for those
who do not comply.
The country’s extreme militarization has come at
a devastating cost. The North Korean people have paid
for the world’s fourth largest standing army — and the
development of nuclear weapons and an increasingly
sophisticated ballistic missile system to deliver
them — with mass starvation and deprivation. The
commission estimates that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea devotes up to 25 per cent of its
gross national product to defence expenditures. Yet the
commission also finds that malnutrition and starvation
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea could have
been avoided through even a marginal redistribution of
State military spending.
The commission also found an entrenched pattern
of discrimination based on the uniquely harsh songbun
class system, which is systematically applied so as to
maintain control against perceived threats, both external
and internal. Likewise, the extreme restrictions on the
freedom of movement within North Korea and across
its borders are designed to maximize State control.
Punishments for violations are severe, often vicious
and inhumane. Women, who are subjected to horrific
discrimination, resort to international traffickers to
escape. The torture that they are subjected to if they
return cannot be regarded as a solely domestic concern.
One of the cruelest policies of the regime is the
system of arbitrary detention and political prison camps.
An estimated 80,000 to 120,000 people have been
imprisoned without trial in four political prison camps,
and the commission found that the majority, including
children, had no prospect of ever being released.
Summary executions and other cruel extrajudicial
punishments are meted out for violations of camp rules.
Torture is routine. As the commission notes,
“The limited information that seeps out from the
secret camps creates a spectre of fear among the
general population..., creating a powerful deterrent

14-715087/21

S/PV.7353

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

against any future challenges to the political
system” (ibid., para. 730).
The commission found that the information it
received established that crimes against humanity have
been committed in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, pursuant to policies established at the highest
level of the State. We strongly support the commission’s
conclusion that the international community must accept
its responsibility to protect the people of North Korea
from crimes against humanity because the Government
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has
manifestly failed to do so. The gravity, scale and nature
of these human rights violations distinguishes North
Korea as a State that, in the Commission’s words, has
no parallel in the contemporary world. The need for an
international response could not be more obvious.
This view is clearly shared by the majority of
the States Members of the United Nations, which last
Thursday adopted resolution 69/188 in the General
Assembly, which submitted the commission’s report to
the Council for consideration and action. This is broad
recognition by the United Nations membership that the
Council has a responsibility on this issue, including to
ensure accountability for the crimes being committed.
Those crimes are integral components of the political
system of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
We must assume that crimes against humanity will
continue if there is no international response.
A core element of the commission’s mandate was
to ensure accountability for human rights violations,
in particular where such violations amounted to crimes
against humanity. The commission asked the Council to
refer the situation in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to the International Criminal Court. The
General Assembly has called on the Council to consider
this recommendation. Australia believes that the crimes
against humanity documented in the commission’s
report warrant the attention of the International Criminal
Court. In the absence of any move by the North Korean
regime to ensure accountability, the Council should
seriously consider this recommendation.
The North Korean regime does have the power
to change its behaviour. Most of the commission’s
recommendations are directed towards the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea itself. The country’s recent
indications of a purported willingness to increase its
cooperation with the international community on human
rights were welcome, but those offers have since been

8/21

23/12/2014

withdrawn, and there has been no sign of any internal
reform. Instead, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea has responded to the General Assembly’s call for
it to engage on human rights issues by denouncing that
call and indicating it would engage in further hostile
acts. When the Democratic People’s Republic responds
to human rights criticisms with threats to use nuclear
weapons, it only strengthens the link between the
country’s human rights policies and their implications
for international peace and security.
Recent
cyberattacks
against
international
companies have been attributed to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, which is another example
of the extraterritorial reach of its crimes, along with
abductions of foreign nationals, and demonstrates the
extent to which it is prepared to defy international norms
and aggressively seek to destabilize other countries and
international commerce.
The international community’s message to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea regime is direct.
It must change course. It can take steps immediately
to put an end to all systematic, widespread and gross
human rights violations being perpetrated in the
country, which only further weaken the North Korean
people and the stability of the State itself. It can commit
to cooperating with the international community by
extending full cooperation to the Special Rapporteur
on the situation of human rights in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, including by granting him
full, free and unimpeded access to the country and by
providing unfettered access to humanitarian agencies.
There are options for the Democratic People’s
Republic regime — humane options — and we will
continue to press its leadership to embrace them.
Assistant Secretary-General Šimonović alluded to
some of them a moment ago. In the meantime, we
are realistic about the brutal prospects for the North
Korean people and what needs to be done to provide
them with a measure of protection. We continue to
look to those countries that have the most influence
on North Korea, including those in the North Asia
region and other partners, to continue to press the case
for fundamental change to the State apparatus of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. We know, of
course, this will not be easy.
To conclude, the Security Council must also live
up to its responsibilities in the absence of action by the
regime, particularly in relation to accountability for

14-71508

23/12/2014

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

crimes against humanity. Given the scale of the human
rights violations and their link to international peace
and security, it is essential that the Council remain
seized of the situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. The Council must regularly assess
the situation and give serious consideration to further
action it might take, in the interests of the North Korean
people themselves and in support of peace and security
in their region and globally.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Šimonović and Assistant
Secretary-General Zerihoun for their informative
and appropriately bleak briefings and for the ongoing
attention that their respective teams give to the situation
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in spite
of persistent obstacles put up by the North Korean
Government.
Today’s meeting reflects the growing consensus
among Council members and States Members of the
United Nations that the widespread and systematic
human rights violations being committed by the North
Korean Government are not only deplorable in their
own right, but also pose a threat to international peace
and security. A major impetus for the Security Council
taking up this issue was the comprehensive report issued
in February 2014 by the United Nations Human Rights
Council commission of inquiry in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea (S/2014/276, annex). The
commission of inquiry conducted more than 200
confidential interviews with victims, eyewitnesses and
former officials and held public hearings in which more
than 80 witnesses gave testimony. Witness accounts
were corroborated by other forms of evidence, such
as satellite imagery confirming the location of prison
camps.
North Korea denied the commission access to the
country, consistent with its policy of routinely denying
access to independent human rights and humanitarian
groups, including the Red Cross and United Nations
special rapporteurs. Despite repeated requests, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea refused to
cooperate with the inquiry.
The main finding of the commission’s thorough
and objective report is that
“[s]ystematic, widespread and gross human rights
violations have been and are being committed
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea”
(S/2014/276, annex, para. 24).

S/PV.7353

The commission found that the evidence it gathered
provided reasonable grounds to determine that
“crimes against humanity have been committed
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
pursuant to policies established at the highest level
of the State” (ibid., para. 75).
If you have not watched any of the hours victims’
testimony or read from the hundreds of pages of
transcripts from the commission’s public hearings,
Mr. President, I urge you to do so. They show North
Korea for what it is — a living nightmare.
A former prisoner of Political Prison Camp No. 15,
Kim Young-soon said she and other prisoners were so
famished that they picked kernels of corn from the dung
of cattle to eat. She said,
“[I]f there was a day that we were able to have a
mouse, this was a special diet for us. We had to
eat everything alive, every type of meat that
we could find; anything that flew, that crawled
on the ground. Any grass that grew in the field”
(A/HRC/25/CRP.1, para. 770).
Ahn Myong-chol, a former guard at prison camp 22
spoke of guards routinely raping prisoners. In one case
in which a victim became pregnant and gave birth, the
former guard reported, the prison officials cooked her
baby and fed it to their dogs. This sounds unbelievable
and unthinkable, yet this is what a former guard told the
commission of inquiry at a public hearing. His account
fits a pattern across witness testimonies of sadistic
punishments meted out to prisoners whose crime was
being raped by officials.
The commission estimates that between 80,000
and 120,000 are being held in prison camps like the
ones where so many of these crimes occurred. Many
who testified before the commission were tortured as
punishment for trying to flee North Korea. One man
who was sent back to the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea from China described being held in prison
cells that were only around 50 centimetres high — just
over a foot and a half. He said the guards told him that
because the prisoners were animals they would have to
crawl like animals.
A woman from the city of Musan told how her
brother was caught after fleeing to China. When he
was returned, North Korean security officials bound
his hands and chained him to the back of a truck before
dragging him roughly 45 kilometres, driving three

14-715089/21

S/PV.7353

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

loops around the city so everyone could see, his sister
testified. “When he fell down, they kept on driving”,
she said. Nor are the horrors limited to prison camps, or
those who try to flee. The commission found
“an almost complete denial of the right of freedom
of thought, conscience and religion, as well as
of the rights to freedom of opinion, expression,
information and association” (S/2014/276, annex,
para. 26)
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
On 18 December, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 69/188 expressing grave concern at the
commission’s findings and roundly condemning the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s widespread
and gross violations of human rights. One hundred
and sixteen Member States voted in favour, 20 against
and 53 abstained. The resolution also encourages the
Security Council to
“take appropriate action to ensure accountability,
including through consideration of referral of the
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to the International Criminal Court (ICC),
and consideration of the scope for effective targeted
sanctions against those who appear to be most
responsible” (resolution 69/188, para. 8).
The Security Council should demand that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea change its
atrocious practices, which demonstrate a fundamental
disregard for human rights and constitute a threat to
international peace and security. We should take that
on for three reasons.
First, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
response to the commission of inquiry’s report, and
even to the prospect of today’s meeting, shows that
it is sensitive to criticism of its human rights record.
We need only look at all the different strategies North
Korea has tried in the past several months to distract
attention from the report, to delegitimize its findings
and to avoid scrutiny of its human rights record. The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has ramped
up its propaganda machine, publishing its own sham
report on its human rights record and claiming “the
world’s most advantageous human rights system”. The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea tried to smear
the reputation of hundreds of people who were brave
enough to speak out about the heinous abuses they
suffered, calling them “human scum bereft of even

10/21

23/12/2014

an iota of conscience”. That was in a statement North
Korea sent to the Security Council today. And North
Korea has launched slurs against the commission’s
chairman, Justice Kirby. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has deployed threats saying any
effort to hold it more accountable for its atrocities
would be met with “catastrophic consequences”. All of
North Korea’s responses — the threats, the smears, the
cynical diversions — show that the Government feels
the need to defend its abysmal human rights record.
That is precisely why our attention is so important.
The second argument for exerting additional
pressure is that when regimes warn of deadly reprisals
against countries that condemn their atrocities, as the
North Koreans have done, that is precisely the moment
when we need to stand up, and not back down. Dictators
who see that threats are an effective tool for silencing
the international community tend to be emboldened
and not placated. That holds true not only for the North
Korean regime, but for human rights violators around
the world who are watching how the Security Council
responds to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
threats. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is
already shockingly cavalier about dishing out threats of
staging nuclear attacks, and has routinely flouted the
prohibitions on proliferation imposed by the Security
Council. In July, North Korea’s military threatened to
launch nuclear weapons at the White House and the
Pentagon, and in March 2013 it threatened to launch
a pre-emptive strike on the United States of America,
saying, “ Everything will be reduced to ashes and
flames”.
In the most recent example of its recklessness, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea carried out a
significant cyberattack on the United States in response
to a comedy portraying a farcical assassination plot. The
attack destroyed systems and stole massive quantities
of personal and commercial data from Sony Pictures
Entertainment, not only damaging a private sector
entity, but also affecting countless Americans who
work for the company. The attackers also threatened
Sony’s employees, actors in the film, movie theatres
and even people who dared to go to the theatre showing
the movie, warning them to “remember 11 September”.
Not content with denying freedom of expression to
its own people, the North Korean regime now seems
intent on suppressing the exercise of that fundamental
freedom in our nation. North Korea has also threatened
the United States with serious consequences if our

14-71508

23/12/2014

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

country did not conduct a joint investigation with the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea into an attack
that it carried out. That is absurd, yet it is exactly the
kind of behaviour we have come to expect from a regime
that has threatened to take “merciless countermeasures”
against the United States over a Hollywood comedy,
and has no qualms about holding tens of thousands
of people in harrowing gulags. We cannot give in to
threats or intimidation of any kind.
Thirdly, the international community does not
need to choose between focusing on North Korea’s
proliferation of nuclear weapons and focusing on its
widespread and ongoing abuses against its own people.
That is a false choice. We must do both, as we have
seen throughout history that the way countries treat
their own citizens — particularly those countries that
systematically commit atrocities against their own
people — tends to align closely with the way they
treat other countries and the norms of our shared
international system.
On 23 November, a week after the Third Committee
adopted its draft resolution on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, North Korea’s military
said, “All those involved in its adoption deserve a
severe punishment” and warned again of catastrophic
consequences. Now here, presumably, “all” would
imply the more than 100 Member States that voted
for the draft resolution. The military also said that if
Japan “continued behaving as now it will disappear
from the world map”. When a country threatens nuclear
annihilation because it receives criticism of how it
treats its own people, can there be any doubt regarding
the connection between North Korea’s human rights
and international peace and security?
North Korea did not want us to meet today and
vociferously opposed the country’s human rights
situation being added to the Security Council’s agenda.
If the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea wants to
be taken off the Security Council’s agenda, it can start by
following the commission of inquiry’s recommendations
to acknowledge the systematic violations it continues
to commit, immediately dismantle political prison
camps and release all political prisoners, allow free
and unfettered access by independent human rights
observers, and hold accountable those most responsible
for its systematic violations. Knowing the utter
improbability of North Korea’s making those and the
long list of other necessary changes, it is encumbent
on the Security Council to consider the commission

S/PV.7353

of inquiry’s recommendation that the situation in
North Korea be referred to the International Criminal
Court and to consider other appropriate action on
accountability, as 116 United Nations Member States
have urged the Council to do.
In the meantime, the United States will support
the efforts of the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights to establish a field-based office to
continue documenting the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s human rights violations, as mandated by the
Human Rights Council, as well as support the work of
the Special Rapporteur. Both should brief the Council
on new developments in future sessions on that issue. It
is also crucial that all of Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s neighbours abide by the principle of
non-refoulement, given the horrific abuses that North
Koreans are subjected to upon return, and provide
unfettered access to the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees in their countries.
The United States of America will continue to welcome
North Korean refugees to our country and help provide
assistance to North Korean asylum-seekers in other
countries.
It is reasonable to debate the most effective strategy
to end the nightmare of North Korea’s human rights
crisis. What is unconscionable in the face of those
widespread abuses and dangerous, given the threat
that the situation in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea poses to international peace and security, is
to stay silent. Silence will not make the North Korean
Government end its abuses. Silence will not make the
international community safer. Today we have broken
the Council’s silence. We have begun to shine the light,
and what it has revealed is terrifying. We must continue
to shine that light for as long as those abuses persist.
Today’s meeting is another important step, but far from
the last, towards accountability for the crimes being
perpetrated against the people of North Korea. The
Council must come back to speak regularly about the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s human rights
situation and what we can do to change it for as long as
the crimes that brought us here today persist. That is
the absolute minimum we can and must do.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun and
Mr. Šimonović for their briefings. What they have
described for us today backs up the information
contained in the report of the commission of inquiry
(S/2014/276, annex), chaired by Mr. Kirby.

14-7150811/21

S/PV.7353

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The work the commission of inquiry has done is not
only remarkable for its quality, it is also salutary. For the
first time, it has given us an overview of the violations
committed by the North Korean authorities over 50
years, pursuant to policies established at the highest
level of the State, as the commission’s report puts it. It
has thrown light on a terrible machine, the Pyongyang
regime’s machine for enslaving its people. There is no
time today to detail the full litany of the crimes: murder,
arbitrary arrest and detention, widespread torture, rape,
abduction, forced disappearance, slavery, obstruction
of humanitarian access, the exploitation of famine. The
list is long, unfortunately. Hundreds of thousands of
political prisoners have died in camps over the past 50
years, while between 80,000 and 120,000 are still being
detained.
The violations affect men and women. They do
not spare children. The regime’s murderous madness
seems limitless. The Security Council has finally met
to hear the cry of distress of the victims of a bloody
regime. What is more, those crimes are committed
in the darkness of censorship. North Korea is closed
to international media and to the organizations that
defend human rights and the High Commissioner for
Human Rights. The commission of inquiry could not
gain access.
We cannot remain silent in the face of this waking
nightmare. Those responsible for the terror, the North
Korean authorities first and foremost, must be brought
to justice to answer for their actions. The crimes they
have committed will not go unpunished. This is an
ethical imperative for the international community. As
Mr. Šimonović emphasized, there can be little doubt
that the seriousness, scale and systematic nature of
these crimes render them crimes against humanity.
The commission of inquiry’s recommendation that the
situation be referred to the International Criminal Court
should therefore receive the maximum attention possible
from the Council. The Court is a guarantee of fair and
effective justice. What is at stake is the fight against
impunity today and tomorrow, justice for the victims
and future reconciliation. The High Commissioner for
Human Rights also has a role to play. His field office,
which is currently being set up in Seoul, should enable
us to monitor the report’s recommendations and the
situation as it develops. It should also continue to collect
information on the violations committed, and we would
like the Council to receive regular updates.

12/21

23/12/2014

The regime’s violations are a threat to peace and
international security. They are part — indeed, an
essential component — of a totalitarian political system
that threatens and destabilizes the entire region. In
the words of the commission of inquiry, “the gravity,
scale and nature of these violations reveal a State that
does not have any parallel in the contemporary world”
(S/2014/276, annex, para. 80). It is a State that has no
parallel in the degree of its terror, a pariah State under
the international nuclear and missile non-proliferation
regime, a State that, in violation of Council resolutions,
exports sensitive goods and technologies that then
serve to finance its leaders’ indecent life style and
the repression of a population that is regularly hit by
famine.
The Security Council could no longer ignore crimes
such as these that shock humankind’s conscience. It was
its responsibility to take up the issue. By holding this
meeting today, the Council has sent a clear message
to the torturers in Pyongyang. The wall of silence that
has too long imprisoned a people and a country cut off
from the world has been removed. The reality of North
Korea is now visible to all. The Security Council is
on the case. Nothing, not even the nuclear blackmail
the North Korean regime used to try to dissuade
us from convening this meeting, will make us look
away. The Pyongyang regime is confronted with its
responsibilities before history and the judgement of the
international community. The violations must now end,
the political prisoners be freed and the country opened
to the media, non-governmental organizations and the
United Nations.
Let us hope that instead of hurling itself into
another of the cycles of provocations and repression to
which it is, alas, accustomed, the North Korean regime
will hear our urgent call and at last choose the path of
openness, reconciliation and peace.
Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): My delegation would like
to thank Assistant Secretaries-General Zerihoun and
Šimonović for their briefings.
Nigeria regards human rights as essential to
ensuring that all human beings live in dignity. We also
believe that all States have an obligation to promote and
protect the rights of their citizens. With human rights
being one of three main pillars of the United Nations,
the Organization has put appropriate mechanisms in
place to protect and promote them around the globe.
Those mechanisms include special procedures, the
universal periodic review (UPR) and treaty bodies.
14-71508

23/12/2014

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Nigeria notes that the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea participated in the first and second cycles
of the UPR. We also note that in October, the roving
ambassador of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea met with the Special Rapporteur on the situation
of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea. Nigeria encourages the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to maintain and, indeed, strengthen
its engagement with the Human Rights Council and the
treaty bodies, with a view to promoting and protecting
the rights of its citizens.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for
taking the necessary steps to ensure that the situation
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea could
be formally placed on the Council’s agenda and this
briefing meeting held at the request of 10 members
of the Council, including my country, Luxembourg. I
thank Mr. Тауé-Brook Zerihoun, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, and Mr. Ivan Šimonović,
Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights, for their
briefings on the situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and its implications for international
peace and security.
In the past decade, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea has worked methodically to flout international
law, undermine the nuclear non-proliferation regime
and challenge the Security Council’s decisions. Since
2006, in defiance of its international obligations, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has carried
out various nuclear and missile tests. It has refused to
engage in constructive dialogue with the international
community and continues to issue regular threats of
nuclear strikes. Such an attitude aggravates the risks
of conflict and is a threat to peace and international
security, which no one can deny.
But there is more, and it is just as serious. For
several decades, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea has been violating its people’s most basic rights
on an unequalled scale. That is what the devastating
report (S/2014/276, annex), published on 7 February
by the commission established by the United Nations
Human Rights Council to investigate human rights in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, documents
methodically, rigorously and transparently.
I will not list the macabre inventory of the atrocities
committed in North Korea. They make one sick. I would,
however, like to make three points that emerge from
the commission of inquiry’s detailed report. The first

S/PV.7353

is that the Commission finds a series of violations that
meet the criteria established by international law and
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
for the existence of crimes against humanity. Secondly,
the perpetrators of those crimes enjoy total impunity,
since their actions are conducted pursuant to policies
established at the highest level of the State. Thirdly,
the violations affect the most vulnerable parts of the
population indiscriminately — first of all women, who
are subject to systematic discrimination and intolerable
abuse, often of a sexual nature, and then children, who
are the first victims of famine and who have not been
spared the hell of political prison camps.
In that regard, I would like to cite the testimony of
Mr. Shin Dong-hyuk, an escapee from Political Prison
Camp No. 14. His testimony concerns a small 7-yearold girl who had the audacity to pick up grains of cereal
to quash her hunger. I will quote from the testimony
found in in the detailed conclusions of the commission
of inquiry:
“[A]bout twice a week, [the guards] would choose
one kid and do the inspection to see if this person
is stealing something or hiding something, but she
was so unlucky that she was chosen as the kid to
be inspected. And, in her pocket there were some
grains and then the guard asked where she got it.
Then, she told the guard that she picked them up on
the street. There was a wooden stick that the guards
used. And, the guard says that’s not the way I taught
you, so you went against my teaching. So, she was
beaten so badly that she fainted, and we had to take
her to her mom. When she didn’t come to school the
next day, we learned that she had died.” (A/HRC/25/
CRP.1, para.772)
We cannot separate the bellicose posture of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea on the
international front from the appalling human-rights
situation that reigns within the country at the instigation
of the leaders of the North Korean regime. Respect for
human rights is a hallmark of a stable society, willing
to live in peace with its neighbours. Inhumane living
conditions imposed on large sectors of the population of
North Korea represent, over time, a risk to the stability
of the country, and based on that, the entire region.
The Security Council must therefore consider
the recommendations contained in the commission
of inquiry’s report. One recommendation, which is
explicitly mentioned in General Assembly resolution
69/188 on the human rights situation in the Democratic

14-7150813/21

S/PV.7353

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

People’s Republic of Korea, adopted by a large majority
of the General Assembly on 18 December, calls for the
International Criminal Court to be seized of the matter.
Luxembourg fully supports that recommendation,
as it is absolutely essential that those responsible for
such atrocities, unequalled in our contemporary times,
committed by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, should, to use the language of the commission
of inquiry, be held to account for their acts.
We also believe that the Security Council should
consider the option of imposing targeted sanctions
against those who are most responsible for the crimes
against humanity committed in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. We also invite the North
Korean authorities to authorize the visit of the Special
Rapporteur on the human rights situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea without delay,
within respect for the modalities of the United Nations
applicable to fact-finding missions. That would be the
sign that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
authorities are sincere in their willingness to cooperate
with the special procedures of the Human Rights
Council. Further, given the scale of the discrimination
suffered by women and the scale of the violation and
abuse of which they are victims, we believe that UNWomen should be officially seized of the matter as well
and act within the scope of their competencies.
Today’s meeting, a first of its kind, should not
be without a follow-up. Now that this item is on the
Security Council‘s agenda, we encourage the Council
to be briefed regularly in the future on the situation
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The
briefings that we have heard today have strengthened
our conviction that it is the duty of the Council to closely
follow the changing situation, which has an intrinsic
link to peace and security, development and respect for
human rights, to paraphrase former Secretary-General
Kofi Annan.
To conclude, I should like to commend the work
of the commission of inquiry, composed of Justice
Michael Kirby, Madam Sonja Biserko and Marzuki
Darusman. They have enabled us to look at the reality
of North Korea from the perspective of the mistreated,
the powerless, the voiceless and those excluded by the
North Korean regime. Their work and that of the Human
Rights Council, the General Assembly and today of the
Security Council have allowed for a voice to be given
to those without voice in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. The message that we can send today

14/21

23/12/2014

is simple. The international community cannot be deaf
to the suffering of the North Korean people. We will not
forget them. We will not abandon them to their sad fate.
They are worthy of our attention and our continuing
support until their ordeal comes to an end.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I thank you,
Sir, for organizing this important meeting. Our thanks
and appreciation also go to the Assistant SecretaryGeneral of the Department of Political Affairs and the
Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights for their
briefings on the situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
Most of those who have spoken have had to depend
on limited sources of information, because it has been
impossible to carry out investigations and inquiries on
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to discover
the situation at first hand inside the country. However,
we find that the picture is very bleak regarding the
humanitarian situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, and that it constitutes a menace to
international peace and security. That has been made
abundantly clear by the threat to carry out new nuclear
experiments and to develop, test and launch new ballistic
missiles. All those actions constitute grave violations
of Security Council resolutions and the Charter of the
United Nations through the routine commission of grave
and systematic violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights, including violations of the right
to food, movement and expression, in addition to forced
disappearances, torture and inhuman treatment in the
political detention camps.
The Security Council should not ignore the situation
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. It should
make every effort to put an end to the serious violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law in
that country. It should also put an end to the use of nuclear
weapons and the threat of the use of such weapons. We
also call on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to take tangible and speedy actions in order to meet the
concerns of the international community by allowing
the Special Rapporteur on human rights to visit the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and to permit
humanitarian agencies to work inside the country.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I would
like to thank Assistant Secretaries-General Zerihoun
and Šimonović for their appropriately bleak briefings.
In February, the international community received
a wake-up call to the truly shocking violations of

14-71508

23/12/2014

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. In a 400-page report (S/2014/276, annex), the
United Nations commission of inquiry provided an
unprecedentedly detailed insight into the appalling
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. Owing to the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s consistent refusal to cooperate or allow
access to the country, the commission instead gathered
extensive first-hand testimony from witnesses and
victims now living outside the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. What they heard painted a picture
of authorities who are so frightened of losing control
that indoctrination begins in kindergarten; so scared of
what will happen if ordinary people get a glimpse of
the outside world, that just owning a tunable radio is a
criminal offence; and so insecure that religion is seen
as a sign of divided loyalties and an act of treachery.
The commission’s report describes a regime so
paranoid that punishments are extended to whole
families; so cruel that those fleeing for a better life are
imprisoned, tortured and sexually violated; so callous
that it stood by and let hundreds of thousands die from
starvation rather than ask for international assistance.
The commission concluded that the systematic,
widespread and gross human rights violations being
committed in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea were components of a totalitarian State without
parallel in the contemporary world. They called on
the international community to protect the people of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, given the
regime’s manifest failure to do so.
The international community cannot ignore such
detailed and grave findings. Since the report was issued,
we, alongside international partners, have worked to
ensure that the Commission’s report is a beginning,
and not an end. The setting up of a presence of the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in
Seoul is a practical demonstration of the international
community’s determination not to forget the people of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. This field
office will continue the Commission’s work of evidence
collection as an important step towards accountability.
It is a reminder to those at any level of the regime
apparatus who are responsible for these awful human
rights violations that the world is watching and that
they should consider themselves put on notice. If the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea fails to hold
violators to account, the international community must
be ready to do so.

S/PV.7353

Both the Human Rights Council and the General
Assembly have condemned in the strongest terms the
findings documented in the commission of inquiry report
and have demonstrated the widespread concern across
the globe at the enduring misery of the North Korean
people. Both bodies by overwhelming majorities have
encouraged the Security Council to consider the human
rights situation in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea. The United Kingdom supports the call for
the Security Council to consider appropriate action to
ensure accountability, including through consideration
of a referral of the situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to the International Criminal Court.
Despite these calls from the United Nations
membership, there were those who opposed discussion
in the Security Council today. But the failure of States
to abide by the universal principles of respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms, as set out in
the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, is a legitimate concern
of the Security Council. Human rights, democracy
and strong institutions, founded on the rule of law, are
essential. Without these key foundations in place, peace
and security are at risk, both in individual States and in
the broader international community.
That is why the United Kingdom is pleased that the
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
has been added to the agenda of the Council today
and that we have been able to have this long-overdue
discussion. It is a signal to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea authorities of the international
community’s focus on the issues highlighted in the
Commission of Inquiry’s report. Our message to the
authorities in Pyongyang is this — listen and engage
with these concerns.
The majority of the recommendations in the
commission’s report are directed towards the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea Government.
It is the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
Government that holds the power to transform the lives
of its people for the better. Rather than continuing
to deny the existence of human rights violations and
refusing to engage with international concerns, we urge
them to accept and address them seriously.
We are disappointed that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea responded to the recent Third
Committee resolution by withdrawing its previous
offers of dialogue and its invitation to the Special
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the

14-7150815/21

S/PV.7353

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to visit the
country for the first time. The United Kingdom urges it
to reconsider. If done fully and without preconditions,
these would be positive first moves towards taking
the bold step of admitting that there are problems and
making a genuine effort to improve the human rights
situation on the ground.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has
an opportunity. The United Kingdom, like so many
in the international community, stands ready to
adjust our position in response to any concrete steps
that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea takes
to improve human rights in the country. But if the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea continues to
flout the obligations they owe to their people, then the
international community should be ready to take further
steps to address the situation. We urge the Council to
remain seized of this matter.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China has
stated its position against the Council’s involvement in
the human rights situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. China has consistently opposed the
politicization of human rights issues and the pressuring
of countries under the pretext of human rights issues.
The Security Council is not the forum to discuss human
rights issues. We oppose the adoption of any outcome
document by the Council on the human right situation
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
China is a close neighbour of the Korean peninsula.
We will never allow any unrest or war to take place in
the peninsula. At present, the situation in the Korean
peninsula remains complex and sensitive. We hope
that the members of the Council and the relevant
parties will place priority on the overall interests of
denuclearization and the maintenance of peace and
stability on the Korean peninsula, exercise restraint,
make greater efforts conducive to the easing of tensions,
avoid mutual provocation and refrain from any rhetoric
or actions that may lead to an escalation of tensions.
China will continue to work to realize a
denuclearized peninsula, maintain its peace and
stability, and address issues through dialogue and
consultation. This position is clear and firm. China
hopes that the relevant parties will make concerted
efforts to take genuine actions to create the conditions
for the resumption of the Six-Party Talks with a view
to jointly maintaining the overall situation of peace and
stability on the Peninsula

16/21

23/12/2014

Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Zerihoun, and the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Human Rights, Mr. Šimonović, for their
briefings. We also thank the Chadian presidency
for facilitating the inclusion of the situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea on the agenda
of the Council.
As one of the countries that supported the holding
of this meeting, Chile believes that today’s discussion
is timely and necessary. At the beginning of the year,
the commission of inquiry established by the Human
Rights Council issued its report (S/2014/276, annex),
which confirmed the existence of the systematic,
widespread and gross human rights violations in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, which in
many cases constitute crimes against humanity. It is
important to underscore the points of agreement of the
reports of the commission of inquiry and the Special
Rapporteur, as well as the resolutions of the Human
Rights Council and the General Assembly, which point
to the same conclusion — the human rights situation in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is dire.
How did Pyongyang react to the debate on this
topic? It dismissed it, alleging that it is a political
conspiracy and international smear campaign. The
Government even stated in writing, in a letter to the
Secretary-General dated 24 November, that it may
conduct a further nuclear test. This constitutes a clear
threat to international peace and security. It is of grave
concern that the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea continues to develop its nuclear programme and
delivery systems, at a great price in humanitarian terms
for its people, under the sanctions regime established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006). This strengthens
our conviction that we need to adopt a broader approach
that allows us to prevent a new conflict on the Korean
peninsula, which would have regional and global
consequences. It becomes clear that the approach we
have taken so far is not adequate and that we should
collectively exert more pressure.
It is essential that appropriate measures be adopted
to put an end to the serious human-rights violations
noted in the reports of the Secretary-General, the
Special Rapporteur and the commission of inquiry.
Those measures must put an end to the climate of
impunity in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
and allow for accountability. We urge the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to facilitate access on the

14-71508

23/12/2014

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

part of the Special Rapporteur to their country in
accordance with the terms of reference of the United
Nations for such special procedures; that is, freedom of
movement and interviews, with security arrangements
made for the Special Rapporteur and for those whom
he interviews.
Given the gravity of the situation in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, we believe that this first
meeting under a new item on the agenda constitutes
a step that is headed in the right direction. This is
an initiative that we supported at the meeting of the
members of the Security Council under the Arria
Formula in April. Certainly, we hope we can repeat it
regularly.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): At the outset, Sir,
let me thank you for acting on the letter (S/2014/872)
signed by 10 Council members from all five groups of
the United Nations, which includes Rwanda, requesting
that the situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea be formally placed on the agenda of the Security
Council. I also wish to thank Assistant SecretaryGenerals Tayé-Brook Zerihoun and Ivan Šimonović for
their respective briefings.
Rwanda, as a country that suffered the worst
violations of human rights in 1994, which were planned
and perpetrated by the then ruling regime, values
meetings like this, which are meant to attentively
examine situations of gross violations of human rights.
In the early 1990s, the Secretariat and the Council did not
pay much attention to all signals that were announcing
the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda.
Therefore, 20 years later, Rwanda, as a member of the
Council, must stand with the victims on the assurance
that the international community, which we are part of,
is determined to act upon its responsibility to protect
and is committed to hold perpetrators to account.
The three pillars of the responsibility to protect, as
stipulated in paragraphs 138 and 139 of the outcome
document of 2005 World Summit (General Assembly
resolution 60/1), provides that the State carries the
primary responsibility for protecting populations
from genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity
and ethnic cleansing. The international community
has a responsibility to encourage and assist States in
fulfilling that responsibility, as well as a responsibility
to use appropriate diplomatic, humanitarian and other
means to protect populations from such crimes. If a
State is manifestly failing to protect its population,
the international community must be prepared to take

S/PV.7353

collective action to protect the population, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations. We believe that
the Security Council should engage the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea on the basis of those pillars.
Rwanda takes note with great concern of the report
of the commission of inquiry (S/2014/276, annex),
which was established by the Human Rights Council
on 21 March 2013, with the mandate to investigate and
report on the human-rights violations in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. We were alarmed by the
findings of the commission, which documented several
crimes, including extermination, murder, enslavement,
torture, imprisonment, rape, forced abortions and other
sexual violence; persecution on political, religious,
racial and general grounds; the forcible transfer of
populations; the forced disappearance of persons;
the inhumane act of knowingly causing prolonged
starvation; not to mention the abduction of Japanese
citizens, including children, over the past decades.
The commission concluded that such crimes amount
to crimes against humanity and “reveal a State that
does not have any parallel in the contemporary world”
(S/2014/276, para. 80).
In the meantime, we deplore the fact that the
commission was denied access to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and that the competent
authorities in that country have not commented on
the report of the commission of inquiry. However, we
are encouraged to hear that recently the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea has indicated willingness to
allow the Special Rapporteur access to its territory and
to accept the technical assistance of the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights. We hope that
that opportunity will be pursued.
Given the situation, Rwanda, which on 18 December
voted in favour of General Assembly resolution
69/188, concerning the human rights situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, believes that it
was important that the Council be seized of the matter
and receive further information from the Secretariat
on the situation as well as on the implications of the
situation on international peace and security. During our
meetings, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
should be invited to express its views in order to engage
in a genuine dialogue with the Council and the wider
international community, which could lead to a better
understanding and towards significant improvement of
the human-rights situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.

14-7150817/21

S/PV.7353

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Rwanda supports the commission of inquiry’s
recommendations aimed at fostering inter-Korean
dialogue. We believe that the maintenance of peace and
stability on the Korean peninsula and the resolution of
disputes through dialogue and consultation are in the
common interests of all parties. We urge all actors on the
Korean peninsula, particularly the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, to engage in good faith in efforts
to create favourable conditions for resuming the stalled
political talks and for achieving the de-nuclearization
of the Korean peninsula.
To conclude, we hope that the Security Council will
remain seized of the situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, and we would like to encourage
the United Nations Secretariat and concerned United
Nations agencies to positively engage the competent
authorities in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea in order to address the issues of great concern
contained in the report of the commission of inquiry.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I thank you, Sir,
for convening this open meeting at the request of 10
Member States, including Lithuania. I also thank the
Assistant Secretary-Generals Tayé-Brook Zerihoun
and Ivan Šimonović for their briefings. Lithuania
welcomes this public briefing on the situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, as do the other
Security Council members that called for this meeting.
We believe that the scale and gravity of human rights
violations in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, as detailed in the report of the United Nations
commission of inquiry (S/2014/276, annex), threaten to
have a destabilizing impact on the region and on the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The more than 370-page report, based on extensive
research and testimony, is a profoundly disturbing read,
as we have heard from some of the quotes earlier in this
meeting. Hundreds of thousands perished, many many
more have been physically and psychologically maimed
by the regime that, in the words of the commission,
seeks to dominate every aspect of its citizens’ lives
and terrorizes them from within. The very idea of a
social contract between the State and its citizens is
reduced to naught, with those responsible to protect
the rights of North Koreans ruthlessly enforcing
almost complete denial of their freedom of thought,
religion, expression, information and association.
Extermination, enslavement, torture, forced abortions,
prolonged starvation — the list seems endless, as no
abuse is judged too harsh or inhuman by the regime.

18/21

23/12/2014

For decades and even when mass starvation was
claiming thousands of lives, the State gave precedence
to military spending, engaging in a clandestine
nuclear-weapons programme, buying and producing
expensive military hardware. Nuclear weapons tests in
2006, 2009 and 2013, as well as provocative ballistic
missile and rocket launches, have been condemned
by the Security Council and have been recognized as
a continuing clear threat to international peace and
security. As the commission of inquiry notes, the drive
to be a nuclear State has had profound consequences on
resource allocation, affecting particularly the parts of
the population that were already food insecure.
The report clearly indicates that crimes against
humanity are being committed, conceived and supported
by the highest levels of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea Government. Political prisoners and
their families perish in prison labour camps, deprivation
of food is used to control the population, children are
stunted by malnutrition, humanitarian access is blocked
to most affected regions, and torture is an inseparable
part of the interrogation process. Those who manage to
escape are often forcibly returned and invariably face
persecution, torture, forced abortions and arbitrary
detentions.
We take note of the indications by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea that it is ready to consider
human rights dialogues with international interlocutors,
technical cooperation with the Office of the High
Commissioner of Human Rights, and a country visit
by the Special Rapporteur. We were disappointed to
hear, however, that the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea is now backtracking on those signals. We
urge the country to engage with the international
community, to allow unimpeded access to international
human rights and humanitarian organizations, and to
start implementation of the recommendations of the
commission of inquiry.
So long as the human rights situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea continues to
deteriorate, however, it is important to make sure that the
international community is mindful of its responsibility
to protect the population of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, which has been so manifestly and
deliberately failed by its own Government. In this regard,
Lithuania welcomes the recent adoption by the General
Assembly of resolution 69/188 on the situation of human
rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
submitting the report of the commission of inquiry to

14-71508

23/12/2014

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

the Security Council. We also encourage the Council
to follow the General Assembly’s recommendation
and take appropriate action to ensure accountability,
including through consideration of referral of the
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to the International Criminal Court, and consideration
of the scope for effective targeted sanctions against
those who appear to be most responsible for acts that
the commission has said may constitute crimes against
humanity.
To conclude, let me reiterate the conclusion of
the commission of inquiry that the crimes against
humanity in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea will continue until the policies, institutions and
patterns of impunity that lie at their heart remain in
place. The Security Council should therefore remain
engaged in demanding that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea authorities initiate profound changes
through the implementation of the recommendations
of the commission of inquiry without delay. The
Council should track progress of such implementation
by holding regular briefings of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Special
Rapporteur to the Security Council.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun, and the Assistant
Secretary-General for Human Rights, Mr. Ivan
Šimonović, for their briefings.
I do not wish to reiterate the contents of the report
before the Council (S/2014.276, annex), but I shall
explain Argentina’s position on this issue.
Argentina is following with deep concern the
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
It has voted in favour of each of the resolutions adopted
by the competent forums, both the Human Rights
Council and the Third Committee of the General
Assembly vote, including the most recent, resolution
25/25 of the Human Rights Council and resolution
69/188 of the General Assembly. Both condemn in the
strongest terms the serious, widespread and systematic
violations of human rights committed in that country.
However, we wish to stress that Argentina considers the
inclusion of this issue on the agenda of the Security
Council to be of an exceptional nature.
Argentina believes that the Security Council
must carry out its specific mandate under the
Charter of the United Nations, which is a response

S/PV.7353

to the strategic vision of a clear delineation of tasks
among the different organs of the United Nations.
Thus, it is stipulated that the Security Council has a
responsibility to address matters pertaining to peace
and international security. It does not contribute to the
proper and effective functioning of the United Nations
system when the Security Council extends its range of
action. Today’s exceptional decision, based on previous
recommendations of the Human Rights Council and the
General Assembly, should not constitute a precedent to
encourage the extension of this practice.
Nonetheless, as it did in the Human Rights Council,
the Argentina expresses its concern at the conclusion
reached by the commission of inquiry that systematic,
widespread and grave violations of human rights, which
we deplore, have been and are being committed in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. We are also
concerned by the commission’s conclusion that crimes
against humanity have been committed.
At the same time, Argentina has maintained in the
Council and in various forums that we are concerned
about the threat that the nuclear and ballistic missile
programme of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea poses to the stability of the peninsula and the
region, and their implications for international peace and
security. Such situations remind us of the importance
of diplomatic means and political negotiations, and
we therefore urge all parties, including the Security
Council, to redouble their efforts to restart the dialogue
with a view to reaching a definitive solution to the issue
and to declaring the peninsula free of nuclear weapons
as a matter of priority. We also reaffirm that the
Government of that country must protect and guarantee
the human rights of its people.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We opposed the initiative to hold this
meeting. We believe that it could well have negative
consequences in terms of maintaining the effectiveness
of the work of the Security Council and other United
Nations bodies.
The Council is often criticized for the fact that it
is increasingly involved in matters that do not pertain
to its mandate. Today, we have provided yet another
reason for such criticism. Human rights issues should
be addressed not here but in the Human Rights Council,
a body that was created, with the active participation
of many members of the Security Council, specifically
to debate such issues and endowed with the necessary
powers and expertise to that end.

14-7150819/21

S/PV.7353

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Finally, and needless to say, today’s discussion is
unlikely to promote international dialogue with the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea on this subject,
in which its authorities have expressed their readiness
to engage.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I should like
to express my appreciation to the Chadian presidency
for convening today’s meeting on the situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. We also thank
Mr. Zerihoun and Mr. Šimonović for their briefings on
the human rights situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
It is unfortunate that, despite the international
community’s efforts to address the human rights issues
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea over
several years, the situation has continued to worsen,
ultimately warranting the Security Council’s attention.
Earlier this year, the commission of inquiry issued
its landmark report (S/2014/276, annex), which raised
international awareness of the gravity of the human
rights situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. Following the report’s release, we at the United
Nations have dealt with the issue in the Human Rights
Council and in the General Assembly.
While the General Assembly has adopted multiple
resolutions since 2005 on the human rights situation
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, this
year’s resolution 69/188 was unique in that it contained
recommendations on the Council’s role in these
efforts. Therefore, the Council’s decision to place the
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
on its agenda is a necessary starting point for further
discussion and engagement. Such engagement is crucial,
as we now understand the human rights violations in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to be so
systematic and widespread that they not only cause
mass suffering among North Koreans, but also pose a
threat to regional and international peace and security.
The Council has taken necessary measures in other
cases in the past in which human rights violations
were committed on a scale large enough to constitute
a threat to peace and security. Likewise, the Council
needs to pay due attention to the grave situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. In that regard,
we would like to stress the commission of inquiry’s
conclusion that many of the violations found in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea have amounted
to crimes against humanity. It also recommended
that the Council play a crucial role in ensuring
20/21

23/12/2014

accountability, including by considering referral of the
situation in Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
the International Criminal Court.
In addition, my Government takes serious note of
the announcement by the United States Government
on 19 December that North Korea carried out a
cyberattack on Sony Pictures Entertainment and posed
threats to movie theatres, which were also mentioned
in Mr. Zerihoun’s briefing earlier. In that regard we
would like to express deep concern over such acts,
which seriously undermine the openness and security
of cyberspace and escalate international tension.
We believe that addressing the North Korean
human-rights issue is vital, not only in promoting human
rights as a universal value, but also in maintaining
peace and stability on the Korean peninsula and in the
region. In that context, the Republic of Korea has been
working together with the international community to
improve the human rights situation in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and to provide assistance
to the North Korean people. We will redouble those
efforts in the coming years. We urge the authorities
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to take
steps to improve their human rights situation. As the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea previously
expressed its willingness to do so, we hope that
Pyongyang will begin engaging with the international
community through human-rights dialogues, including
with the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human
rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
and through technical cooperation with the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights.
In closing, the Republic of Korea hopes that the
Council will continue to play a vital role in ensuring
that the North Korean people will eventually be able to
enjoy their inalienable human rights and fundamental
freedoms.
Speaking at this meeting is probably my last duty
in the Council. When we first arrived in the Council
two years ago, one of the first issues we tackled was the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s missile and
nuclear issues. In the Council, my country has dealt
with many issues to which we have not been party,
with a view to contributing to the work of the Council.
Yet, somehow, our term in the Council started, and is
ending, with the North Korean issue.

14-71508

23/12/2014

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

It must be just a coincidence, but I say that with
a heavy heart, because, for South Koreans, the people
of North Korea are not just anyone. Millions of South
Koreans still have family members living in the North,
even though we never hear from them and even though,
by now, the pain of separation has become a cold fact
of life. We know that they are there, just a few hundred
kilometres away from where we live. We cannot read
the descriptions in the commission of inquiry report
without it breaking our hearts. We cannot watch video
clips from North Korea without flinching at every
scene. We cannot listen to the stories of North Korean
defectors without sharing their tears, without feeling as
if we are there with them experiencing the tragedies.
As we leave the Council with the debate on the
human rights situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, we do so with an ardent wish. The
ardent wish is for the situation to improve for the people
of North Korean, our innocent sisters and brothers,
who are on the street, in the countryside, in the prison
camps, who are suffering for no reason. We only hope
that one day in the future, when we look back on what
we have done today, we will be able to say that we did
the right thing for the people of North Korea, for the
life of every man and women, boy and girl, who has the
same human rights as the rest of us.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as the representative
of Chad.
I too thank Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs and Mr. Ivan
Šimonović, Assistant Secretary-General for Human
Rights, for their briefings.
The report of the commission of inquiry on human
rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
(S/2014/276, annex), as many among us have said, reveals
a situation of massive human rights violations in the
country. The report describes systematic, widespread
and flagrant human rights violations that have been and
continue to be perpetrated by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. It concludes that, in many cases, the
violations constitute crimes against humanity.
According to the Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, the violations are, by nature, an
inherent part of the country’s political system. As a
result, the commission of inquiry recommends urgent

S/PV.7353

action on the part of the international community to
address the human rights situation in the country,
including referrals to the International Criminal Court.
We too express our deep concern over the gravity
of the situation, if the information reported is proven
factual. Nevertheless, it must be emphasized that the
authorities of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
have rejected the said report and have refused entry to
the commission to carry out its investigation. In view
of the restrictions, it is obvious that the commission’s
members did not have the latitude to examine in detail
the data contained in the report, despite having carried
out numerous interviews with North Korean citizens
outside of North Korea. Precisely 480 persons were
interviewed for the report.
For our part, we call for prudence in avoiding the
politicization of human rights matters, particularly
when we know that in the context of some situations
where massive and flagrant violations of human
rights have been and continue to be committed, the
international community has lacked the courage even
to report as much. How does one explain that double
standard? There are many examples showing the errors
committed by the Council in the past in taking hasty
decisions based on certain reports. Moreover, the
report indicates that the human rights situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has existed
throughout the country’s entire history. If that is the
case, then we would ask why the situation has not
garnered the attention of the international community
during that time.
To conclude, we call on those countries with
influence over the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to assist in clarifying the allegations of massive
human rights violations in the country and encourage
it to allow the independent investigators free access
to both enter and leave the country. Along those lines,
we also call upon the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to make a commitment to direct and frank
dialogue with the international community and the
countries of the region.
I now resume my functions as the President of the
Security Council.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.

14-7150821/21
