29

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on offers of study and training facilities under General
Assembly resolutions 845 (IX);
2. Reaffirms its resolution 1471 (XIV) of 12 December 1959;
3. Invites once again the Administering Members
concerned to take. all necessary measures to ensure that
scholarships and training facilities offered by Member
States are utilized by the inhabitants of the Non-SelfGoverning Territories, and to render every assistance
to those persons who have applied for, or have been
granted, scholarships or fellowships, particularly with
regard to facilitating their travel formali~ies ;
4. Requests all Administering Members ~~ich_ have
not already done so to give the fullest pubhc1ty 111 the
Territories under their administration to a!J offers of
study and training facilities made by Member States;
5. Urges Member States to increase the number of
scholarships offered ;
6. Requests the Member States offering scholarships
to take into account the necessity of furnishing complete
information about the scholarships offered, and, whenever possible, the need to provide travel funds to
prospective students;
7. Requests the Secretary-General and the specialized
agencies to give such assistance as is possible and as
may be sought by the Member States concerned and
by the applicants ;
8. Further requests the Secretary-General to prepare
for the sixteenth session of the General Assembly a
report on the actual use of scholarships and training
facilities offered by Member States to students from
the Non-Self-Governing Territories._
948th plenary meeting,
15 December 1960.
1541 (XV). Principles which should guide Members in determining whether or not an
obligation exists to transmit the information
called for under Article 73 e of the Charter

The General Assembly,
Considering the objectives set forth in Chapter XI
of the Charter of the United Nations,
Bearing in mind the list of factors annexed to General
Assembly resolution 742 (VIII) of 27 November 1953,
Having examined the report of the Special Committee
of Six on the Transmission of Information under Article
73 e of the Charter, 12 appointed under General
Assembly resolution 1467 (XIV) of 12 December 1959
to study the principles which should guide Members in
determining whether or not an obligation exists to
transmit the information called for in Article 73 e of
the Charter and to report on the results of its study to
the Assembly at its fifteenth session,
1. Expresses its appreciation of the work of the
Special Committee of Six on the Transmission of Information under Article 73 e of the Charter;
2. Approves the principles set out in section V, part
B, of the report of the Committee, as amended and as
they appear in the annex to the present resolution;
3. Decides that these principles should be applied
in the light of the facts and the circumstances of each
12 Ibid., agenda item 38, document A/4526.

case to determine whether or not an obligation exists to
transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter.
948th plenary meeting,
15 December 1960.
ANNEX
l'RINC!PLES

WHICH

SHOliLIJ GUIDE MEMBERS

IN

DETERMINING

WHETHER OR NOT AN OBLIGATION EXISTS TO TRANSMIT THE
INFORMATION CALLED FOR IN ARTICLE

73 e OF TIIE CHARTER

OF THE UNITED NA'!IONS

Principle I
The authors of the Charter of the United Nations had in
mind that Chapter X [ should be applicable to territories which
were then known to be of the colonial type. An obligation
exists to transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter
in respect of such territories whose peoples have not yet
attained a full measure of self-government.

Principle I I
Chapter XI of the Charter embodies the concept of Non-SelfGoverning Territories in a dynamic state of evolution and
progress towards a "full measure of self-government". As soon
as a territory and its peoples attain a full measure of selfgovernment, the obligation ceases. Until this comes about, the
obligation to transmit information under Article 73 e continues.

Principle II I
The obligation to transmit information under Article 73 e of
the Charter constitutes an international obligation and should
be carried out with due regard to the fulfilment of international
law.

Principle IV
Prima facie there is an obligation to transmit information
in respect of a territory which is geographically separate and
is distinct ethnically and/or culturally from the country administering it.
Principle V
Once it has been established that such a prima facie case
of geographical and ethnical or cultural distinctness of a
territory exists, other elements may then be brought into
consider;ition. These additional elements may be, inter alia,
of an administrative, political, juridical, economic or historical
nature. If they affect the relationship between the metropolitan
State and the territory concerned in a manner which arbitrarily
places the latter in a position or status of subordination, they
support the presumption that there is an obligation to transmit
information under Article 73 e of the Charter.

Principle VI
A Non-Self-Governing Territory can be said to have reached
a full measure of self-government by:
(a) Emergence as a sovereign independent State;
( b) Free association with an independent St?.te; or
(c) Integration with an independent State.

Principle VII
(a) Free assoc1at10n should be the result of a free and
voluntary choice by the peoples of the territory concerned
expressed through informed and democratic processes. It should
be one which respects the individuality and the cultural characteristics of tke territory and its peoples, and retains for the
peoples of the territory which is associated with an independent
State the freedom to modify the status of that territory through
the expression of their will by democratic means and through
constitutional processes.
(b) The associated territory should have the right to determine its internal constitution without outside interference, in
accordance with due constitutional processes and the freely

30

General Assembly -

expressed wishes of the people. This does not preclude consultations as appropriate or necessary under the terms of the
free association agreed upon.
Principle VII I
integration with an independent State should be on the basis
of complete equality between the peoples of the erstwhile NonSelf-Governing Territory and those of the independent country
with which it is integrated. The peoples of both territories
should have equal status and rights of citizenship and equal
guarantees of fundamental rights and freedoms without any
distinction or discrimination; both should have equal rights
and opportunities for representation and effective participation
at all levels in the executive, legislative and judicial organs of
government.
Pri,iciple IX
Integration should have come about in the following circumstances:
(a) The integrating territory should have attained an
advanced stage of self-government with free political institutions,
so that its peoples would have the capacity to make a responsible
choice through informed and democratic processes;
(b) The integration should be the result of the freely expressed wishes of the terrttory's peoples acting with full knowledge of the change in their status, their wishes haying been
expressed through informed and democratic processes, impartially conducted and based on universal adult suffrage. The
United Nations could, when it deems it necessary, supervise
these processes.
Principle X
The transmission of information in respect of Non-SelfGoverning Territodes under Article 73 e of the Charter is
subject to such limitation as security and constitutional
considerations may require. This means that the extent of the
ihformation may be limited in certain circumstances, but the
limitation in Article 73 e cannot relieve a Member State of
the obligations of Chapter XI. The "limitation" can relate only
to the quantum of information of economic, social and educational nature to be transmitted.
Principle X I
The only constitutional considerations to which Article 73 e
of the Charter refers are those arising from constitutional
relations of the territory with the Administering Member. They
refer to a situation in which the constitution of the territory
gives it self-government in economic, social and educational
matters through freely elected institutions. Nevertheless, the
responsibility for transmitting information under Article 73 e
continues, unless these constitutional relations preclude the
Government or parliament of the Administering Member from
receiving statistical and other information of a technical nature
relating to economic, social and educational conditions in the
territory.
Principle XII
Security considerations have not been invoked in the past.
Only in very exceptional circumstances can information on
economic, social and educational conditions have any security
aspect. In other circumstances, therefore, there should be no
necessity to limit the transmission of information on security
grounds.

1542 (XV). Transmission of information under
Article 7 3 e of the Charter

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, by resolution 742 (VIII) of 27 November 1953, the General Assembly approved a list of
factors to be used as a guide in determining whether
a Territory is or is no longer within the scope of
Chapter XI of the Charter of the United Nations,

Fifteenth Session

Recalling al,so that differences of views arose among
Member States concerning the status of certain territories under the administrations of Portngal and Spain
and described by these two States as "overseas provinces" of the metropolitan State concerned, and that
with a view to resolving those differences the General
Assembly, by resolution 1467 (XIV) of 12 December
1959, appointed the Special Committee of Six on the
Transmission of Information under Article 73 e of the
Charter to study the principles which shonld guidt'
Members in determining whether or not an obligation
exists to transmit the information called for in
Article 73 e,
Recognizing that the desire for independence is the
rightful aspiration of peoples under colonial subjugation
and that the denial of their right to self-determination
constitutes a threat to the well-being of humanity and
to international peace,
Recalling with satisfaction the statement of the representative of Spain at the 10-l8th meeting of the Fourth
Committee that his Government agrees to transmit information to the Secretary-General in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter XI of the Charter,
Mindful of its responsibilities under Article 14 oi
the Charter,
Being aware that the Government of Portugal has
not transmitted information on the territories under its
administration which are enumerated in operative paragraph 1 below add has nut expressed any intention of
doing so, and became such information as is otherwise
available in r('gard to the conditions in these territories
gives cattse for concern,
l. Considers that, in the light of the provisions of
Chapter XI of the Charter, General Assembly resolution
742 (VIII) and the principles approved hy the Assembly
in resolution 1541 (XV) of 15 Drcemher 1960, the
territories under the administration of Portugal listed
hereunder are Non-Self-Governing Territories within
the meaning of Chapter XI of the Charter:
(a) The Cape Verde Archipelago;
( b) Guinea, called Portuguese Guinea;
( c) Sao Tome and Principe, and their dependencies;
(d) Sao Joao Batista de Ajuda;
(e) Angola, including the enclave of Cabinda;
(f) Mozambique;
(g) Goa and dependencies, called the State of India;
( h) Macau and dependencies ;
(i) Timar and dependencies;

2. Declares that an obligation exists on the part of
the Government of Portugal to transmit information
under Chapter Xl of the Charter concerning these territories and that it should be discharged without further
delay;
3. Requests the Government of Portugal to transmit
to the Secretary-General information in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter XI of the Charter on the conditions prevailing in the territories under its administration enumerated in paragraph 1 above ;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary steps in pursuance of the declaration of the Government of Spain that it is ready to act in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter XI of the Charter;
5. Invites the Governments of Portugal and Spain
to participate in the work of the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories in accordance
