S/PV.8344

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8344th meeting

Thursday, 6 September 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Haley. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Ndong Mba
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Tenya
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 28 August 2018 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2018/804)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-27729 (E)
*1827729*

S/PV.8344

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 28 August 2018 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2018/804)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Izumi
Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/804, which contains a letter dated
28 August 2018 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Ms. Nakamitsu.
Ms. Nakamitsu: I thank the members of the
Security Council for the opportunity to brief them on
the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013), on the
elimination of the chemical weapons programme of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
As per long-standing practice, I met yesterday
with the Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic in advance of these consultations. In addition,
I remain in regular contact with the Director-General
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) and spoke to him this past Tuesday,
4 September.
As the Council was informed in July (see
S/2018/745), the OPCW Technical Secretariat has
verified the destruction of all 27 chemical weaponsproduction facilities declared by the Syrian Arab
Republic. That is an important step towards the full
implementation of resolution 2118 (2013).
Efforts to clarify the outstanding issues regarding
the initial declaration of the Syrian Arab Republic are
ongoing. As members are aware, on 10 July the OPCW
2/17

06/09/2018

received a letter from the Syrian Arab Republic in
response to questions regarding chemical weaponsrelated activities conducted at the Syrian Scientific
Studies and Research Centre. Those questions were
attached to a 10 April letter from the OPCW DirectorGeneral. The OPCW’s Declaration Assessment Team
is continuing to analyse the answers provided by the
Syrian Arab Republic and will report in due course to
the OPCW Executive Council.
The Secretary-General continues to urge cooperation
by the Government of Syria with the OPCW in resolving
the outstanding issues related to Syria’s declaration.
As I have noted on many occasions, the confidence of
the international community in the full elimination of
Syria’s chemical weapons programme depends upon
the OPCW being able to close those outstanding issues.
The complete implementation of resolution 2118 (2013)
is critical not only to finding a long-overdue end to the
ongoing conflict in Syria, but also to stability in the
region in the longer term. In this regard, I welcome
the news conveyed to me by the Director-General of
the renewal of the Tripartite Agreement between the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, the OPCW
and the United Nations Office for Project Services.
This will allow the OPCW to continue its activities in
Syria using the same logistics procedures and support
as in the past.
As the Council has been previously informed, on
6 July the OPCW Technical Secretariat issued a note
entitled “Interim report of the OPCW Fact-finding
Mission in Syria regarding the incident of alleged use
of toxic chemicals as a weapon in Douma, Syrian Arab
Republic, on 7 April 2018”, which was subsequently
circulated to the Security Council through the
Secretary-General. On 7 August, the OPCW received
a note verbale from the Syrian Arab Republic that
provided comments on the interim report. The Factfinding Mission (FFM) continues to collect and analyse
information with regard to the alleged use of toxic
chemicals as a weapon in Douma and will provide a
final report on its findings in due course. I reiterate my
full support for the integrity and professionalism of the
work of the OPCW and its Fact-finding Mission, and
look forward to the final report on this incident.
The FFM has also requested and was provided
with, documents pertaining to four reported incidents
currently under investigation by the National Authority
of the Syrian Arab Republic: two incidents in Kharbit
Masasnah on 7 July 2017 and 4 August 2017; one
18-27729

06/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

incident in Al-Salamiyah on 9 August 2017; and another
incident in Souran on 8 November 2017. The FFM is
continuing to translate and analyse the information
contained in those documents.
At its fourth special session last June, the Conference
of States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention,
inter alia, decided that the OPCW Secretariat
“shall put in place arrangements to identify the
perpetrators of the use of chemical weapons in
the Syrian Arab Republic … in those instances in
which the OPCW Fact-finding Mission in Syria
determines or has determined that use or likely use
occurred, as well as cases for which the OPCWUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism had
not issued a report”.
On 27 July, the OPCW Director-General provided a
report to States parties and to the Secretary-General on
the initial implementation of the decision. The SecretaryGeneral has taken note of the decision adopted at the
OPCW Conference of States Parties in June and looks
forward to the Director-General’s next progress report,
which will be issued to the OPCW’s Executive Council
at its eighty-ninth session, next month.
The lack of a mechanism to attribute responsibility
to those who have used chemical weapons has been
deeply troubling and a missing step on the path towards
accountability. The closure of the United NationsOPCW Joint Investigative Mechanism, which was
mandated to identify the perpetrators of such acts,
emboldened those who sought to carry out further
attacks. Anyone who uses chemical weapons must be
identified and held to account.
The Security Council holds the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
which is threatened by the use of weapons of mass
destruction. The adoption of the June decision in the
OPCW, therefore, does not lessen the need for unity
in the Security Council. The Secretary-General has
repeatedly expressed his willingness to assist the
Council, and I reiterate his calls on Council members
to work together to find a common approach to tackling
this issue, which has become one of the most critical
challenges to the maintenance of international peace
and security. Like the Secretary-General, the Office for
Disarmament Affairs stands ready to assist.
I would like to recall the remarks made by the
Secretary-General in this Chamber on 14 April, when

S/PV. 8344

he stated: “Any use of chemical weapons is abhorrent,
and the suffering it causes is horrendous” (S/PV.8233,
p. 2). In that regard, I underline that the use of any toxic
chemical, such as chlorine, as a weapon by any party
and under any circumstances is totally unacceptable.
Last week, the Secretary-General expressed his
deep concern about the growing risks of a humanitarian
catastrophe in the event of a full-scale military operation
in Idlib province. Before concluding, I wish to reiterate
that it is of vital importance that humanitarian principles
be upheld, that all relevant international disarmament
and non-proliferation norms — most importantly the
Chemical Weapons Convention — be fully respected,
and that all sides work together to avoid further
escalation in Syria, including in and around Idlib.
The President: I thank Ms. Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
wishing to make a statement.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank High
Representative Izumi Nakamitsu for her informative
briefing and you, Madam President, for having organized
this discussion in an open format. Transparency and
openness are extremely important and necessary for
objective discussions with sober assessments of exact
recent or ongoing developments. We certainly need such
a thorough approach, especially in the investigation of
incidents related to the use of chemical weapons in
Syria. The reports of the Fact-finding Mission in the
Syrian Arab Republic do not yet provide us with the
necessary clarity and objectivity, generating further
disagreement among Council members.
The position of Kazakhstan on this issue remains
firm and consistent. We do not tolerate the use of any
kind of weapon of mass destruction, including chemical
weapons. We support the prompt identification and
prosecution of all those responsible for chemical crimes.
However, the involvement of a party must be proved by
full, comprehensive and irrefutable evidence.
The issues of attribution and prosecution have
long represented a stumbling block in the work of the
Council. This impasse has prevented us from achieving
effective solutions. We, the members of the Council,
must rise above our geopolitical interests. Instead
of polarizing the deliberations with our views and
prejudices, we must all think seriously about further
joint and integrated action.

18-277293/17

S/PV.8344

The situation in the Middle East

We must remember that the political settlement
of the Syrian crisis and the fight against the threat of
chemical weapons in Syria are closely interrelated.
We must not allow chemical incidents, deliberately
organized for destructive purposes, to undermine our
achievements in the political dimension and detract
from the prospects for long-awaited peace in Syria.
Existing threats should be considered in that context.
In the report of the Director General of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) before us today (see S/2018/804), we see both
positive aspects and cause for concern. We agree with
the Secretary-General that the long-awaited destruction
of all 27 chemical weapon-production facilities in Syria
is an important step towards the full implementation
of resolution 2118 (2013). The report also indicates
certain progress in obtaining answers from the Syrian
Government on issues regarding its chemical weapons
declaration. We look forward to the further cooperation
of the Government of Syria with the OPCW in order
to eliminate all remaining ambiguities. We eagerly
await the results of the analysis by the Declaration
Assessment Team of the responses submitted by the
Syrian authorities.
At the same time, we are very concerned about
other circumstances. Questions remain unclear in the
following areas.
There is a lack of clarity about all ongoing
investigations of chemical incidents, including the
Douma incident, which would allow us to see how
and by whom chemical weapons have been used and
seriously affected the common people of Syria.
The lack of impunity and absence of preventive
measures do not allow us to effectively address the
continued threat of chemical-weapons use in the country
or the fear that chemical attacks are not only being used
as a tactical tool of warfare and liquidation of the enemy,
which is also unacceptable in our times, but also as an
instrument of terror that sows chaos among people to
achieve certain benefits for one particular party.
The provocative nature of such actions is a real
threat to our collective efforts to achieve peace and
stability in the Syrian Arab Republic. We should
not allow the politicization and polarization of this
serious matter, on which the fate of many depends. We
must also fight intentional provocations and planned
deliberate attacks.
4/17

06/09/2018

Kazakhstan calls for constructive and patient
consultations and the tireless search for mutually
acceptable solutions for the benefit of the people
of Syria.
Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
appreciate the convening of this meeting and thank
the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, for the valuable information she
has provided.
Peru condemns any use of chemical weapons. We
believe that such a practice constitutes, in and of itself,
a threat to international peace and security, a heinous
crime and a flagrant violation of the non-proliferation
regime and international humanitarian law. With that
in mind, we note with deep concern the recurrent
allegations regarding the use of chemical weapons in
Syria, and we are keeping a close eye on the results of
the investigations being carried out by the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). We
believe it to be critical that such investigations be able
to identify the perpetrators of those serious crimes,
with a view to guaranteeing accountability and access
to justice, as well as the effectiveness of an international
rules-based order.
On that note, we wish to reaffirm our full confidence
in the professional work being carried out by the OPCW
in Syria and our recognition of the dedication of its
personnel in particularly difficult conditions. We note
some progress, such as the completion of the process
of destruction of the 27 chemical weapons-production
facilities recognized by the Syrian Government.
We regret, however, that those advances are
continually overshadowed by systematic errors and
omissions in Syria’s declaration, five years after its
accession to the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of
Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction. We hope
that the documentation recently provided by the Syrian
Government, which is currently under evaluation by
the OPCW, will finally make it possible to clear up the
existing discrepancies.
In conclusion, we reaffirm that Peru will continue to
be guided by a comprehensive evaluation of the situation
and by our ongoing commitment to international law
and the protection of civilians on this matter.
18-27729

06/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Under-Secretary-General of Disarmament Affairs
for her clear and enlightening briefing.
It is no secret that this meeting is taking place
against an extremely worrying backdrop, in the light of
which I will make three series of observations regarding
the threat of a large-scale offensive in Idlib, potentially
involving the use of chemical weapons; the state of play
of the Syrian chemical file; and lastly, the urgenct need
a political solution and the priority that must be given
to the protection of civilians.
Let us get straight to the facts. Syria is once again
on the brink of an abyss. I would ask everyone here to
carefully consider what a major attack on Idlib would
mean. There are nearly 3 million inhabitants in the city,
more than half of whom are internally displaced. Such
an attack, in the context that I have just outlined, would
have disastrous humanitarian, migratory and security
consequences that would open a new chapter in the long
Syrian tragedy. Such an attack would indeed produce
an absolute humanitarian tragedy, with deadly attacks
on civilians, indiscriminate air raids and the use of
prohibited weapons, notably chemical weapons, by the
regime, while civilians would have nowhere to go. Such
an attack would also generate a major migration crisis
towards northern Syria, Turkey and potentially Europe
and beyond. Finally, such a major attack would pose a
serious threat to regional security, particularly through
the spread of jihadist fighters, who are also in the area.
In the light of the threat of such a disaster, we are
fully mobilized and wholly determined. The priority of
our collective efforts must be to respect the ceasefire
in the area, and today, on behalf of France, I call on
Russia and Iran to use their influence on the Syrian
regime to achieve that. The supporters of Damascus
have the means to prevent such a crisis, because the
regime cannot act alone.
We also remain extremely vigilant in the light of
the risk of chemical weapons use. As we have said
on several occasions, notably alongside the United
Kingdom and the United States, any new and verified
use of such weapons by the Bashar Al-Assad regime
would not go unpunished. Our political leaders have
expressed themselves unambiguously on that point.
As I said, there is currently a particularly serious
and high risk of such activity. It is no secret that the
Syrian regime has not stopped using chemical weapons
since 2013, in violation of its international commitments

S/PV. 8344

and of the most essential principles, values and rules of
law. The regime has pursued its strategy of crushing any
opposition by resorting to the most terrifying weapons,
while conducting a cynical campaign of misinformation
that is propagated by its allies.
Hundreds of civilians paid the price for that in
Douma, in April, as well as in Khan Shaykhun, one
year earlier, in April 2017. I remind those who would
once again try to deny or qualify the reality of the
facts or to try and cause confusion that the regime of
Bashar Al-Assad has already been formally identified,
on several occasions, as having the capacity to use
sarin, chlorine and gas on civilians — capacity that it
has used.
Let there be no mistake — the Syrian chemical
weapons programme has not been dismantled. The
continued use of chemical weapons in Syria is an
irrefutable indication that stocks of both sarin and
chlorine exist. We have taken note of the reports of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) noting the destruction of all declared facilities
and the transmission of information by the Syrian
regime. However, I remind the Council that the regime
has never sincerely cooperated with the OPCW and that,
to date, it remains impossible to confirm if the regime
declared all of its inventories and capacities in 2013.
In that edifying context, we therefore call on
Syria’s allies to take full responsibility for preventing
further escalation and banning the use of chemical
weapons. The meeting of the Astana Group countries
tomorrow must establish clear commitments on their
part to maintaining the ceasefire of which they are
guarantors; avoiding a military escalation, which would
be disastrous in humanitarian terms; and protecting
civilians in an area that, I recall, is supposed to be a
de-escalation zone.
Such action is imperative for Syria and for the
international community. The re-emergence of weapons
of terror poses a serious threat to the security of each
of our countries and to the entire non-proliferation
regime. We therefore have a collective moral, legal and
political responsibility to prevent and deter the use of
such weapons. The perpetrators of chemical atrocities
in Syria and elsewhere must know that they cannot act
with impunity and that they will be held accountable.
That is the goal of the international partnership against
impunity for the use of chemical weapons and the
mechanism for identifying those responsible being

18-277295/17

S/PV.8344

The situation in the Middle East

established in The Hague t. It is also one of the reasons
for our support for the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, which
must be able to complete its work. There can be no
lasting peace without justice.
In conclusion, I stress once again the particular
gravity of the current situation, the responsibility
incumbent upon us all to act, and the importance of
fully mobilizing the Council and, more broadly, the
international community to that end. The military
preparations under way in Idlib and the presence within
that enclave of a concentration of terrorist fighters and
several million civilians, including many displaced
persons, are creating conditions that could lead to a
humanitarian and security disaster that we must and can
prevent together if we pool our efforts. Such a scenario
would seriously undermine all the efforts under way to
find a political solution, under the auspices of United
Nations mediation and with the support of the Council,
and would represent a major setback.
The priority must be to respect the ceasefire, the
protection of civilians and full, safe and unhindered
humanitarian access. France therefore calls on the
Astana guarantors to maintain the de-escalation and
avoid the escalation of violence, with the primary
concern being to protect civilian populations. We are
at a crossroads. We can either once again plunge into
chaos or rally around United Nations mediation led
by Staffan de Mistura, which provides us with a way
out by promoting the establishment of a constitutional
committee in the coming weeks — the cornerstone of a
lasting political solution that, if we are able to pool our
efforts, is within reach. Let us therefore not allow the
conflict to regress into violent escalation.
We will have an opportunity to rally together at the
upcoming session of the General Assembly. On behalf
of France, I call on everyone today to rise as one to the
occasion. It is in our and the Syrians’ best interests.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, for her briefing. We express our
gratitude to the Technical Secretariat, the Declaration
Assessment Team and the Fact-finding Mission in
the Syrian Arab Republic of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) for their
6/17

06/09/2018

professional work and commitment to serving our
common goal of a world free of chemical weapons. Let
me reiterate that Poland takes note of the fact that the
OPCW Technical Secretariat has verified the destruction
of all declared chemical weapons-production facilities.
At the same time, we hope that communication between
the OPCW and Syria will continue so that all existing
gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies with regard to
the Syrian initial declaration can be clarified. We also
thank the Fact-finding Mission for its interim report
on activities related to the incident in Douma. We are
looking forward to the Mission’s final report.
We are already discussing the fifty-ninth OPCW
report today, which means that for almost five years
the Security Council and international community have
been unable to mitigate the threat posed by chemical
weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic. It does not
mean, however, that this body is incapable of doing so.
The establishment of the OPCW-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism demonstrated that, when the
Council is united around the common goal of countering
weapons of mass destruction, it can work effectively.
Poland continues to condemn the use of chemical
weapons anywhere, including in Syria, and is firmly
convinced that those responsible for chemical attacks
must be held accountable. It is crucial to preserving the
integrity of the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC).
Therefore, we are looking forward to the development
by the OPCW of arrangements necessary to identify the
perpetrators of the use of chemical weapons in Syria,
in accordance with the decision of the fourth special
session of the Conference of States Parties to the CWC.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We thank Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing.
The tenor of the discussion in the Security Council
on the topic of the chemical demilitarization of Syria
does not align with the actual state of affairs and
derives from the persistent anti-Damascus attitudes of
Western members of the Council. The Syrian military
chemical potential was destroyed some time ago under
the monitoring of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). The organization in
The Hague also confirmed the destruction of the last
declared production facilities, in accordance with the
Convention on the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of
Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction (CWC).
We agree with the Secretary-General that that was an
18-27729

06/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

important step towards the implementation of resolution
2118 (2013).
Gaps and inconsistencies in the Syrian declaration
are attributable to the fact that it was submitted under the
pressure of time constraints, against the backdrop of an
acute armed conflict. Subsequently, clarifications were
made in full compliance with CWC rules. Some issues
can no longer be clarified, given the number of years
that have elapsed and must be put to rest. With regard to
other issues, the Government of Syria has provided the
OPCW in good faith with available information, and
such interaction is the only way to resolve remaining
misunderstandings. There is no foundation to allegations
that Damascus allegedly retained elements from stocks
of toxic substances. That is pure propaganda. Suffice it
to recall that OPCW experts have inspected the research
centre in Barzah very thoroughly on two occasions
and found no trace of toxic substances. In April, that
facility was destroyed by missile strikes by the United
States, the United Kingdom and France under the
pretext that it was allegedly producing and stockpiling
chemical weapons, but no chemical traces were emitted
during the attack. That clearly indicates a large-scale
international deception on the part of the participants in
the aggression, of a kind with the shameful adventure
concerning Iraqi weapons of mass destruction. By the
way, for some reason OPCW officials are embarrassed
to mention the fact that the centre’s destruction was
caused by the bombing.
A characteristic feature of the conflict in Syria
has been the provocation of militants from illegal
armed entities through their use of toxic chemicals.
For five years, the same primitive machinations have
been used by international elements to discredit the
authorities in Damascus and justify subsequent acts
of aggression against Syria. Assistance in staging
events to provoke an appropriate response is provided
by the supposed rescuers, the White Helmets, who are
living off Western money. They even use children in
staging such events. Following the incident in Douma,
this scheme was revealed when we managed to track
down participants filming events, and they recounted
everything at The Hague.
At present, a new wave of severe threats is being
unleashed against Syria. The alleged intention of the
Syrian Government to use chemical weapons in Idlib
has been presented as fact. Agatha Christie’s novel
A Murder is Announced, in which the crime to be
committed — including its time and place — is reported

S/PV. 8344

in the newspaper, comes to mind. The expectations of
those who are curious and visit the address published
by the newspaer are not disappointed. Contemporary
prophets do not bother explaining why Damascus
needs to poison its civilian population with gas in an
environment in which Syria has already been bombed
twice, and new acts of aggression are being hatched.
Do others really believe that Damascus has called on
them to do that? Do they really think that the whole
world blindly believes those stories? Damascus has
no chemical weapons and no plans to use them. We
consider such warnings to be invitations to terrorists
to stage a new chemical attack and accuse the Syrian
authorities of it. The Syrian authorities do not need to
do that, but it is key for terrorists, since it is a sure way
to provoke an act of aggression against Damascus.
We know for certain, and we have provided the
relevant information to the OPCW, that toxic chemicals
and equipment for provocation were brought via
complicated routes into the territory not controlled by
the Syrian authorities; that militants were specially
trained by Western special services; that the White
Helmets and their allies are already present in Idlib;
and that dozens of children in the province have been
kidnapped. At the same time, the military presence
of key Western countries is demonstratively growing
near Syria, and their officials are making aggressive
statements. We spoke about that at a meeting of the
Security Council on 28 August (see S/PV.8332).
In that regard, we have a concrete proposal for
our American colleagues, namely, that they should
provide the list of targets that the Pentagon has
reportedly identified for possible strikes of the troika.
If the United States believes that they are related to the
stockpiling and use of chemical weapons, then it must
demonstrate its respect for the Charter of the United
Nations and international law and inform the OPCW so
that it can conduct chemical inspections pursuant to the
Chemical Weapons Convention. Since the United States
unreservedly believes in the authority and impartiality
of the OPCW Fact-finding Mission, its expertise should
allay any suspicions.
I would like to say a few words about the OPCW.
We expect that the new Director-General of the OPCW,
Mr. Arias González, will be able to restore the work of
the organization to its normal pathway. After numerous
remote investigations, its authority has suffered a
serious blow. The OPCW was further undermined by
the decision that a division of the Technical Secretariat

18-277297/17

S/PV.8344

The situation in the Middle East

would identify those responsible for the use of chemical
weapons, which was pushed through by a minority of
member States. That was not legitimate because it is
not in line with the goals of the Chemical Weapons
Convention, and Russia does not recognize it. The sole
purpose of that initiative is the purely political aim of
undermining Syria and Russia internationally. That was
made clear in the parliamentary statement delivered on
5 September by British Prime Minister Theresa May on
the Salisbury-Amesbury incident.
Let us remember that pursuing such provoscation
will lead only to a new exacerbation of tension in the
Near East, which has already been heightened due to
the policy carried out be Western countries, resulting
in disunity. It is not just a matter of instability, but also
of serious military conflicts that claim many innocent
victims. It is hardly likely that the West’s regional allies
will benefit from that.
There was a point in time when questionable
geopolitical games led to the proliferation of terrorism.
Today, as a result of similar ventures, we are witnessing
a surge in chemical terrorism. It is worth noting that the
role of those countries in achieving a political settlement
in Syria, about which they speak so fervently, is not
very high-profile. We highly recommend that they
cease hostilities and join in the efforts for peace.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank High
Representative Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing. We
welcome the confirmation by the Director General
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) that the Secretariat has verified the
destruction of all 27 chemical weapons-production
facilities declared by the Syrian Government. As the
Secretary-General states in his letter,
“the long-awaited completion of the issue constitutes
an important step towards the full implementation
of resolution 2118 (2013)” (S/2018/804, p. 1).
We understand that the OPCW has continued its
endeavours to clarify all outstanding issues regarding
the initial declaration of the Syrian Government. We
also note that the OPCW is still analysing the response
of the Syrian Government regarding the outstanding
issues. While we await the report, we reiterate that all
remaining matters should be resolved through continued
and more productive communications between the
Syrian Government and the OPCW.
8/17

06/09/2018

After its interim report on the alleged use of
chemical weapons in Douma, we note that the OPCW
Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic
(FFM) has continued to collect and analyse information
related to the incident. We stress that all parties should
cooperate with the FFM in its investigative work. In
that regard, we look forward to the final report of the
FFM. In addition, we note that the FFM is currently
translating and analysing the documents it requested
and received from the Syrian Government with regard
to four incidents.
Our positions on the use of chemical weapons are
well known. We strongly condemn any use of chemical
weapons by any actor — State or non-State — under
any circumstances. There cannot be any justification
for using chemicals as weapons. Their use is a threat
to international peace and security and endangers
the global non-proliferation system. Those who use
chemical weapons must be identified, based on robust
evidence, and held accountable. We still believe that
the unity of the Security Council is vital in that regard.
Acting together, according to the Charter of the United
Nations and the relevant Security Council relevant
resolutions, we believe, is the best and most sustainable
way to discourage and stop the use of chemical weapons
in Syria and elsewhere.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I thank Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu,
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, and her
team for their substantive briefing.
Equatorial Guinea welcomes the definitive
destruction of the 27 chemical weapons-production
facilities declared by the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic. The verification of that information
was requested in previous meetings, and we should
indeed be pleased that the Technical Secretariat of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) made all the arrangements necessary for
the verification of that information. It is a significant
step forward that should encourage the parties to take
concrete steps towards the implementation of the
relevant provisions of resolution 2118 (2013), and the
members of the Security Council to return to unanimity
in addressing this important and sensitive issue.
With regard to the security of OPCW personnel, we
believe that access to places of investigation requires
that the security of the Mission be guaranteed on a
permanent basis, in accordance with the provisions of
18-27729

06/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

the Conference of the States Parties to the Chemical
Weapons Convention, held on 26 and 27 June. In
that regard, we encourage the OPCW secretariat to
implement the new measures aimed at mitigating the
high security risks proposed by the United Nations
Department of Safety and Security.
The efforts and, above all, the contributions of
countries and international organizations to the Trust
Fund for Syrian Missions, which currently amounts
to €17.1 million, deserve our praise. Those resources
should undoubtedly be used to further support the
activities of the OPCW in Syria.
Faced with the current context of the terrorist threat
in north-western Syria and the offensives of the Syrian
Government that are making progress in recovering
territories, the parties must continue to consider
the importance of upholding international treaties,
especially the Chemical Weapons Convention. It is
also worth recalling is that the authorities of the Syrian
Arab Republic should prioritize their cooperation with
the OPCW Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian Arab
Republic so that no single case of chemical weapons
use goes uninvestigated and that those responsible do
not go unidentified.
The principled position of Equatorial Guinea on
chemical weapons has not changed. It has always been
clear and consistent. We are firmly opposed to the use
of chemical weapons by any country, organization,
group of States or person in any circumstance. The use
of chemical weapons is unjustifiable and intolerable
anywhere, at any time.
The Security Council and the OPCW are the
primary channels for addressing the problem of Syrian
chemical weapons. We recognize the important role
they have played, and we hope that the stakeholders
will adopt a constructive approach in order to find a
solution through direct and unhindered dialogue that
can prevent and put a definitive end to any future use
of chemical weapons in the Arab Republic of Syria
by any party. In that context, it is essential to create a
mechanism to identify those responsible for the use of
chemical weapons, to make formal accusations against
them and to prosecute them. That will require the unity
of the Security Council.
In conclusion, I reiterate that in the view of the
Government of Equatorial Guinea, it is now understood
that a political process is the only viable solution to the
problem of the Syrian Arab Republic. The international

S/PV. 8344

community must continue cooperating with the parties
concerned in order to reach a political solution that
respects the sovereignty, the independence, the unity
and the territorial integrity of the people of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome the briefing
of the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu.
My delegation reiterates the importance of the
verification carried out by the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) Technical
Secretariat with regard to the destruction of the last two
facilities linked to the production of chemical weapons
declared by the Syrian Arab Republic. We agree that
the full and verifiable destruction of all such facilities
is a key step in the implementation of resolution
2118 (2013). Following the response submitted by the
Syrian Government to the OPCW Director-General’s
letter of 10 April, we are awaiting the analysis and
conclusion of the OPCW’s Declaration Assessment
Team on that additional information. We also stress
the importance of the United Nations Office for Project
Services continuing to support the OPCW Fact-find
Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic, in line with the
Tripartite Agreement.
We welcome the planning of future visits by the
OPCW secretariat to the sites identified in the third
and fourth reports of the OPCW-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism (see S/2016/738 and
S/2016/888). We encourage the Secretariat to continue
such visits in order to gather evidence that will make
it possible to determine the possible use of chemical
weapons. To that end, it is essential that any investigation
into the use or possible use of chemical weapons, not
only on Syrian territory but in any circumstance, should
include on-site visits as a critical element, with the aim of
conducting conclusive and verifiable investigations. In
that connection, we reiterate our support for the OPCW
Fact-finding Mission, in accordance with its mandate,
to continue its work of investigation and verification of
all alleged attacks with chemical weapons in the most
objective, methodical and technical manner.
With regard to the incident involving the alleged
use of toxic chemical substances as a weapon in the city
of Douma, we reiterate the need for the investigation
to follow a standard, independent and transparent
protocol, with on-site visits as a key element, and we

18-277299/17

S/PV.8344

The situation in the Middle East

await the collection and analysis of the information
collected by the Fact-finding Mission to confirm the use
of chemicals weapons and identify those responsible
through the relevant mechanisms and in the framework
of the Charter of the United Nations.
We wholeheartedly believe that, regardless of the
powers granted to the secretariat and the DirectorGeneral of the OPCW at the fourth special session
of the Conference of States Parties to the Chemical
Weapons Convention in June, the Council still has the
obligation to reach consensus on the creation of an
independent, impartial and representative investigative
mechanism to carry out a thorough, reliable and
conclusive investigation that will make it possible to
identify the perpetrators and hold them accountable
before the courts. We welcome the good offices of the
Secretary-General. We believe that all options must be
considered in order to reach consensus on this issue.
Finally, we insist that the only way to resolve this
conflict is through an inclusive political process of
dialogue, led by and on behalf of the Syrian people
within the framework of the Geneva process and
resolution 2254 (2015), under the auspices of the
United Nations. That means that we must continue to
provide the necessary support for the efforts of the
Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for Syria and for the
establishment of a constitutional committee.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, Ms. Nakamitsu, for her valuable
briefing earlier today.
We welcome the destruction of the last two
chemical facilities in Syria. The overall number of
chemical facilities that have been destroyed now stands
at 27. This is a very important step towards the full
implementation of resolution 2118 (2013). We also
welcome the reference Ms. Nakamitsu made in her
briefing to the signing of the Tripartite Agreement,
which allows the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) to resume the work and
shoulder its responsibilities in Syria.
Despite the progress achieved, there remain
discrepancies in the details of the chemical programme
declared by the Syrian Government. We hope that the
answers provided by the Syrian Government in response
to the questions posed by the OPCW Director General
will contribute to resolving those discrepancies. We call
10/17

06/09/2018

upon the relevant Syrian authorities to fully cooperate
with the OPCW.
The Security Council is unable to fulfil its
responsibilities pertaining to the Syrian chemical
programme because it lacks a mechanism, replacing the
OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism,
to identify those responsible for the use of chemical
weapons in Syria. That is attributable to a division
among Council members. As a result, many Member
States, including Kuwait, have resorted to a different
international platform, the OPCW, to fill that vacuum.
A special session of the Conference of States Parties
to the Chemical Weapons Conventionwas held in The
Hague, at which it was decided that the OPCW would
take on the mandate of identifying the perpetrators of the
crime of the use of chemical weapons. We look forward
to the OPCW making the necessary arrangements in
order to shoulder this responsibility. In that regard,
we express our support for the Fact-finding Mission in
the Syrian Arab Republic (FFM), and we commend its
work and professionalism. We stress that it is important
to cooperate with the FFM and to protect its staff so that
they can work in a safe environment. We look forward
to the final findings of the FFM soon, including the
investigations of the Douma incident in April.
I reiterate the principled and steadfast position of
the State of Kuwait in that regard. We condemn any
use of chemical weapons anywhere, at any time and by
any party. That is a flagrant violation of international
law. We underscore the importance of holding those
responsible for the use of chemical weapons to
account, be they individuals, entities, non-State actors
or Governments.
Our meeting today comes at a critical time, as we
are seeing increasing reports and indications of an
imminent military escalation in the Idlib governorate,
home to nearly 3 million people, half of whom are
internally displaced persons. We are particularly
concerned about the possible recurrent use of chemical
weapons in Syria, and about the repetition in Idlib of the
crimes committed in Khan Shaykhun and elsewhere.
We join the Secretary-General in stressing that any
use of chemical weapons is absolutely unacceptable.
Over the past eight years, the Syrian people have
suffered the most brutal humanitarian violations,
including the use of chemical weapons against them.
That is why we must be united and rise above our
differences and divisions in order to prevent such
18-27729

06/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

crimes against humanity and to peacefully resolve the
situations in Idlib and in Syria as a whole. Our aim is to
stop the bloodshed of our Syrian brethren.
In conclusion, we hope that the summit to be
held tomorrow by the Astana guarantors will prevent
a humanitarian disaster in Idlib, protect civilians and
facilitate the delivery of humanitarian aid to the needy,
in compliance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions and international humanitarian law.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, UnderSecretary-General and High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, for her excellent briefing on
the issue of the use of chemical weapons in the Syrian
Arab Republic.
My delegation’s statement will focus on the following
two points: the progress made in implementing the
destruction of Syrian chemical weapons, in accordance
with resolution 2118 (2013), and the activities of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) regarding the allegations of the use of chemical
weapons in Syria.
With regard to the Syrian chemical weapons
programme, my delegation welcomes the progress
made in destroying all of the 27 chemical weaponsproduction facilities. We believe that such progress is an
important step towards the complete destruction of the
country’s chemical arsenal, and we therefore welcome
the cooperation efforts of the Syrian Government.
Further proof of this positive trend are the replies
made by the Syrian Government to the non-exhaustive
list of questions contained in the correspondence of
the Director-General of the OPCW, dated 10 April.
Those questions concern the initial declaration and the
provision to the Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian Arab
Republic of documents relating to the four incidents in
which chemical weapons were allegedly used in 2017
in Khirbet Masasnah, Al-Salamiyah and Suran. Côte
d’Ivoire hopes that the results of the analysis of those
documents will allow us to shed light on those incidents
and to identify, where appropriate, the perpetrators of
the use of such chemical weapons so that they are held
to account before the relevant international courts.
My country welcomes the new powers given to the
OPCW, in accordance with the conclusions of the special
session of the Conference of the States Parties to the
Chemical Weapons Convention on 26 and 27 June, for
the purpose of identifying the perpetrators of chemical

S/PV. 8344

weapons in Syria. In that regard, my delegation
supports, the decision of the OPCW Executive
Council to take appropriate measures to identify the
perpetrators of chemical weapons in Syria and to draft
a report on all relevant information on the origin of
those weapons. We also welcome the publication of the
OPCW interim report on the allegations of chemical
weapons use in Douma on 7 April, and we look forward
to the conclusions of the final report.
In conclusion, my delegation calls on the parties to
the conflict in Syria to focus on negotiations as part of an
inclusive political dialogue, in accordance with the Geneva
process, as mandated for in resolution 2254 (2015).
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs for her briefing
and for all the work that she is doing on this issue with
her team. Through her, allow me to thank the staff of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) in The Hague.
Like other speakers, we remain deeply concerned
about the escalating military action by the Syrian
authorities and Russia in north-western Syria. This
puts millions of civilians at risk, and the Security
Council will discuss that tomorrow. But in that context,
we are here today because we are seriously concerned
by the potential for further illegal use of chemical
weapons in any Syrian regime offensive in Idlib. As
other speakers have done, we reiterate that the use of
chemical weapons is a breach of the Chemical Weapons
Convention (CWC) and that it constitutes a threat to
international peace and security.
I was very interested in what the High Representative
had to say about the review by the OPCW of the Syrian
chemical weapons disclosure. I think that she is right
to say that some important steps have been made in
implementation of relevant Security Council resolutions,
and that there are some very important outstanding
issues. As of March, the OPCW Fact-finding Mission
in the Syrian Arab Republic had confirmed 13 cases
of likely chemical weapons use in Syria since it was
established in 2014. In terms of allegations, the Factfinding Mission has recorded at least 390. After more
than four years of work by the Declaration Assessment
Team, the OPCW is still unable to verify that the Syrian
declaration is accurate. We have heard many times that
there are “gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies”
in Syria’s account of its declaration under the CWC.
Those are substantive points.

18-2772911/17

S/PV.8344

The situation in the Middle East

I do not think that the Council really understands
why it is so difficult to resolve this issue. If a State
Member of the United Nations were acting in good faith
under the Chemical Weapons Convention, these issues
would be capable of being resolved, but we still find
ourselves confronting them in this Chamber, meeting
after meeting. I would also like to state that the last
report (see S/2018/745) noted that the list of issues had
even increased rather than decreased, and I would like
to know why. I hope that the Syrian representative will
be able to give us an explanation for that today.
Turning to the risk of the use of chemical weapons
over Idlib, and taking into account what the Russian
representative said, Agatha Christie was a fiction writer.
What is fact is that the Syrian authorities have been
found to have used chemical weapons against their own
people. What we hear from the Russian Ambassador is
an inversion of the facts, an inversion of the concern for
the protection of civilians that the Council has mandated,
an inversion of what the rules-based international order
of multilateralism is all about, and fundamentally, an
inversion of what Governments are supposed to do as
their first duty to protect their people and to keep their
people safe. I just find it unconscionable, that after all
these years, in the hundredth anniversary year of the
end of the First World War, that any Government can
even think of using chemical weapons against its own
people or, indeed, against anyone else, whether they are
a small city in Britain or a country like Syria.
I reject everything that the Russian Ambassador
said about aggression on the part of three permament
members of the Security Council. What France, the
United Kingdom and the United States are aiming to do
is to uphold the rules-based international order. People
who worry about action by our three Governments
should take every possible step to ensure that chemical
weapons are not used, and then there will be no problem
at all. We have demonstrated that we will respond
swiftly and appropriately to any further use of chemical
weapons by the Syrian regime, which has already had
such devastating humanitarian consequences for the
Syrian population. Once again, I join others in urging
Russia to use its influence to ensure that chemical
weapons are not used against civilians in Syria. Either
Russia calls for restraint or Russia will be deemed
complicit in their use when these weapons are used.
I want to conclude, if I may, by saying that I could
not agree more with the representative of Equatorial
Guinea about the primacy of the political process, and
12/17

06/09/2018

I hope that those efforts can be redoubled over the
coming weeks.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): As
this is the first time this month that I am speaking
at a meeting of the Security Council, allow me to
congratulate your country, Madam President, on
assuming the presidency of the Council for September.
I also thank High Representative Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
As was confirmed in the report of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) (see
S/2018/804), which was transmitted to the Security
Council by Secretary-General Guterres, all 27 declared
chemical weapons-production facilities in Syria have
been destroyed. We also note that, as we speak, the
OPCW is still studying the responses from the Syrian
Government in relation to some of the outstanding
questions concerning its initial chemical weapons
declaration. We hope that the OPCW will continue to
strengthen its communication and coordination with
the Syrian Government in an effort to duly resolve the
relevant issues.
The Chinese delegation notes some recent reports
that hint at possible chemical weapons attacks within
Syrian. I want to reiterate that China resolutely
opposes the use of chemical weapons by any country,
organization or individual in any circumstances or
for any purpose, and advocates severe punishment of
the perpetrators. At the same time, we believe that
all alleged chemical weapons incidents must undergo
comprehensive, objective and impartial investigations
so as to ensure that they are based on conclusive
evidence and that conclusions are in line with the facts
and can stand the test of time. Until then, we should not
predetermine the outcomes.
China consistently advocates respect for the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and opposes the wilful use or threat of use of
force in international affairs. Syria’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity must be fully respected.
The only way out of the Syrian impasse is through a
political settlement. We hope that all parties concerned
will, in a constructive spirit and through dialogue and
consultation, seek solutions that preserve the unity of
the Security Council and help to advance the political
process in Syria.
18-27729

06/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Let me begin by
thanking Ms. Nakamitsu for her informative briefing.
I will focus on three points: first, the developments
in Idlib; secondly, the use of chemical weapons; and
thirdly, the need for attribution and accountability.
First, with regard to the developments in Idlib, as
others before me have said, we are extremely concerned
about the escalation of violence in Idlib due to recent
air strikes. The risk of a further escalation of violence
is deeply concerned. Such an escalation would lead
to an unspeakable humanitarian catastrophe, with
major regional consequences. The Council has the
responsibility to prevent that worst-case scenario.
Let me repeat our key messages. All warring parties
must abide by existing Security Council resolutions. A
military offensive in Idlib would put at risk the lives of
more than 3 million civilians living in the region and
result in a new humanitarian catastrophe. The guarantors
of the Idlib de-escalation zone and the Syrian regime
need to work towards a peaceful, non-violent, negotiated
solution for Idlib. Any measure to counter terrorism
must comply with obligations under international law,
in particular human rights law, international refugee
law and international humanitarian law. Combating
terrorism is no excuse to target without distinction or
proportionality. Parties need to uphold international
humanitarian law throughout Syria, and in particular
in Idlib, and provide humanitarian access to those in
need. Any use of chemical weapons is unacceptable,
including in Idlib. It is prohibited by international law
and would have devastating human and humanitarian
consequences. We support the call of the SecretaryGeneral for restraint in the use of force, with the
protection of citizens as the first priority.
Secondly, with regard to chemical weapons, we
thank the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) for its fifty-ninth report (see
S/2018/804). We support the objective and professional
work of the OPCW Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian
Arab Republic and call on all warring parties in Syria
to continue their efforts to ensure that the Fact-finding
Mission can continue its work independently. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands looks forward to the final
report on the attack in Douma on 7 April.
We condemn the recent trend of spreading deliberate
disinformation on chemical weapons attacks, including
in the Council, to create confusion. There is no credible
information supporting the allegations of one Council

S/PV. 8344

member against the White Helmets and against Western
countries. In our view, the Security Council should
focus on common ground. We all condemn the use
of chemical weapons anywhere, by anyone and under
any circumstances; we all agree that impunity must be
countered to defend the international non-proliferation
architecture; and we all agree on the standard that the
use of chemical weapons is never permitted. Together,
we should reinforce the international norm that
chemical weapons should never be used again.
My third point is about attribution and
accountability. Let me refer to the points made by our
Kuwaiti colleague on the OPCW-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism and reiterate the importance
of the outcome of the special session of the Conference
of States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention
on 27 June. There an overwhelming majority of States
members of the OPCW reconfirmed and strengthened
the standard against the use of chemical weapons.
We once again plead for follow-up to the
conclusions of the OPCW Fact-finding Mission and its
future attribution mechanism by referring the situation
in Syria to the International Criminal Court. We remain
convinced that the OPCW can make an important
contribution to fighting impunity in Syria by sharing
information with the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic.
In conclusion, the people of Syria have suffered
far too long. They have suffered from mass atrocities,
violence and the use of chemical weapons. Working
with all possible instruments inside and outside the
Council, the Kingdom of the Netherlands will continue
its efforts to achieve accountability for those crimes.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I want first to thank the
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs for
her briefing.
During the conflict in Syria, we have witnessed
numerous systematic and flagrant violations of
international law, including violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law, by all parties
to the conflict andparticularly by Syrian forces.
Chemical weapons have been used repeatedly. We
condemn such use in the strongest terms. It is a serious
violation of international law and constitutes a threat
to international peace and security. Such use in armed

18-2772913/17

S/PV.8344

The situation in the Middle East

conflict amounts to a war crime. The proliferation and
use of chemical weapons by State and non-State actors
alike must end and those responsible for such crimes
must be held accountable. Impunity is not and will not
be an option.
We therefore supported the decision of the
Conference of the States Parties to the Chemical
Weapons Convention at its special session to put in
place arrangements to identify the perpetrators of the
use of chemical weapons in Syria. While a mechanism
established by the Council would have been preferable,
the issue was too important to be allowed to be blocked
indefinitely. That does not, however, as has been
stated in the Council previously, relieve the Council of
its responsibility.
I want to make a few remarks with regard to the latest
progress report (see S/2018/804) on the elimination of
chemical weapons in Syria from the Director General
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) .
First, we note that the Declaration Assessment
Team is analysing the response of the Syrian authorities
to the questions regarding the outstanding issues. Let
me emphasize that all open issues must be closed
without further delay. All remaining chemical weapons
must be declared and destroyed, in line with resolution
2118 (2013). We urge the Syrian authorities to cooperate
fully and actively with the OPCW so that the accuracy
and completeness of its declaration can ultimately
be verified.
Secondly, we would like to reiterate our full
support for the OPCW and our complete confidence
in the independent, impartial and professional work of
its Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic.
We look forward to the upcoming reports regarding a
number of pending investigations, including the final
report on the alleged attack in Douma.
Finally, we note the intention of the Director
General to issue a second progress report, ahead of the
October session of the OPCW Executive Council, on
the implementation of the decision of the special session
regarding attribution for chemical weapons attacks in
Syria. We look forward to the Security Council being
kept informed on that important matter.
We are alarmed by the signs of a possible military
offensive in north-western Syria. Idlib is a de-escalation
area, established by the Astana guarantors. However,
14/17

06/09/2018

one after the other of the de-escalation areas has turned
into escalation areas. A full-scale military offensive
would lead to a humanitarian catastrophe. Idlib is
different from other areas. There is nowhere to flee.
There are 3 million civilians living there, including
1 million children and internally displaced persons.
All parties, including Syrian allies, need to be
reminded of their obligations under international
humanitarian law to protect civilians and civilian
objects, and to comply with the principles of distinction,
proportionality and avoidance of unnecessary
suffering. We therefore urge all parties to abide by
the de-escalation agreement in Idlib and the Astana
guarantors to uphold their commitments regarding
de-escalation and humanitarian access. We must ensure
that Idlib will not become the next Aleppo or eastern
Ghouta. It is vital that Russia, Turkey and Iran find a
way during their meeting tomorrow to avoid further
escalation. This Council also has a preventive role to
avoid a disaster, and together with Kuwait and all other
members of the Council, we stand ready to explore all
meaningful options in that regard.
I express our alarm about allegations that chemical
weapons may be used again and remind all parties
of the clear and absolute prohibition on the use of
chemical weapons under any circumstances. It is more
critical than ever than we avoid escalation and revert
to the track of diplomacy for a political solution, in
line with resolution 2254 (2015). We reiterate our total
support for the United Nations-led political process
and the indefatigable efforts of Special Envoy Staffan
de Mistura. A sustainable political solution is the only
way to end the suffering of the Syrian people after more
than seven years of conflict.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
I thank High Representative Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
History’s verdict on the conflict in Syria is not
yet written. There have been plenty of missteps,
miscalculations and willful negligence throughout the
course of the war. There has been evil, there has been
honour and many things in between. I would say that
it should be cause for deep shame on the part of those
members of the Council that have fought relentlessly
to shield the Al-Assad regime from accountability.
Instead, those members have made a clear display of
18-27729

06/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

their cynicism, their penchant for brutality and their
lack of capacity for shame.
Still the competition for how the Syrian war will be
remembered — as an example of humanity at its worst
or at its best — goes on. Today’s meeting is devoted to
chemical weapons, but we should make no mistake — an
Al-Assad regime offensive on Idlib would be a reckless
escalation even if chemical weapons were not used. It
is up to Russia to keep this from happening, and we
will discuss the humanitarian consequences of the Idlib
offensive in greater detail tomorrow. In the meantime,
the Russian Federation has recently been building up
its naval forces off the coast of Syria, signaling that
Moscow is pre-positioning itself once again to abet the
murder and mayhem of the Al-Assad regime. As on
numerous occasions in the past, there are signs that the
Assad regime is planning to use chemical weapons to
finish off the siege of Idlib.
As in the past, the Syrian regime and its Russian
and Iranian allies are spreading lies about who is behind
chemical weapons attacks in Syria. Their claims are
baseless. They are the definition of fake news. In fact,
if the past is any guide, the Syrian and Russian attempts
to blame others for the use of chemical agents are an
indication that the Syrian regime still believes that it
can use these horrific weapons with impunity, and an
indication that the Syrian regime may be preparing
to use these horrific weapons in future attacks. No
one — I repeat — no one is fooled.
Here are the terrible facts of the war in Syria.
Five years ago, the Al-Assad regime launched missiles
containing a cocktail of deadly gas at the people of
Ghouta, killing 1,429 people. On 4 April 2017, the
Al-Assad regime dropped sarin gas from the sky on
the people of Khan Shaykhun. The attack killed over
70 innocent Syrians, including dozens of children. An
independent investigative group, the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM), found the
Al-Assad regime responsible for the attack. The fact
that the Russians later succeeded in killing the JIM
does not change its conclusions. Their findings were
credible and definitive. Al-Assad killed his own people
with chemical weapons at Khan Shaykhun.
Then, in April 2018, over 40 people died
and hundreds received treatment for exposure to
chemical weapons in Douma. In all, the United States
estimates, conservatively, that the Al-Assad regime

S/PV. 8344

has used chemical weapons on its own people at least
50 times since the war began. That amounts easily,
conservatively, to 1,500 innocent children, women
and men killed by the Syrian regime with chemical
weapons — 1,500 murders covered up by the Russian
regime and 1,500 reasons to disbelieve the claims that
others are responsible for the atrocities.
As these ridiculous claims are repeated again and
again, I ask everyone listening to remember that the
Syrians’ and Russians’ lies do not exonerate them.
The Syrians’ and Russians’ lies only reveal Al-Assad’s
guilt. The United States will not stop pushing back
forcefully against these lies. We will not abandon the
Syrian people.
Along with France, the United States has announced
new sanctions against individuals and entities that
support Al-Assad’s chemical and conventional
weapons programme. In June, the special sssion of
the Conference of the States Parties to the Chemical
Weapons Convention decided that the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons should identify
the perpetrators of chemical attacks in Syria. Even
though the United States believes that the primary
responsibility for addressing the use of chemical
weapons belongs to the Security Council, we welcome
this decision. Anything that brings us closer to bringing
the Al-Assad regime to account for its crimes enhances
the security not just of the Syrian people but of us all.
In referencing accountability, we have a message
for the Al-Assad regime and anyone contemplating
using chemical weapons in Syria. In the past, 18 months
I have spoken in this Chamber twice promising that the
United States would respond to the use of chemical
weapons in Syria. Both times, my Administration
followed through. The United States and its allies
forced the Al-Assad regime to pay the price for its
crimes. We therefore want to take this opportunity to
remind Al-Assad and his Russian and Iranian partners
that they do not want to bet against the United States
responding again.
The story of the war in Syria is still being written.
There is still time for those who believe in human
dignity to shape history. There is still time for the
nations of the world to come to their aid. And there is
still time for those who would commit additional acts of
human savagery to reconsider their actions. The choice
is theirs and it will dictate our response in the time and
the manner of our choosing.

18-2772915/17

S/PV.8344

The situation in the Middle East

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Some representatives have talked today about
the existence of chemical weapons in Syria. Their
talk is misleading and irresponsible because there are
no longer any chemical weapons in Syria. There have
been none since Ms. Sigrid Kaag announced before
the Security Council in 2014 that there were no more
chemical weapons in Syria
In her briefing today, Ms. Nakamitsu welcomed
the destruction of all the 27 chemical weapon facilities
in Syria, as well as the signing of the Tripartite
Agreement, which allows the United Nations Office
for Project Services (UNOPS) to continue its work
in Syria. It would seem that this information has fallen
on the deaf ears of certain colleagues who still insist
in this Chamber on waiting for the arrival of someone
named Godot who never arrives for decades, like in the
absurdist play by Samuel Beckett, Waiting for Godot.
The threatening language used in the Security
Council will have no impact, especially if it is coming
from the presidency. We are diplomats and our task
is to prevent wars and threats while searching for
diplomatic solutions to international crises. That is our
understanding as diplomats and as ambassadors. The
Security Council is not a battleground. The Council has
made several mistakes in Iraq and Libya, and it is about
time to learn from our mistakes.
When my and other delegations first saw the
programme of work for the month of September, we
were convinced that certain permanent members did
not want the Security Council to live up to its mandate
of maintaining international peace and security; rather,
those members are prepared to stop at nothing to exploit
the Security Council and the working instruments of
the United Nations to pursue their own political gains,
to the detriment of maintaining international peace
and security.
There are Governments of permanent members
of the Security Council that have abdicated their
responsibilities and become parties that are politically,
morally and legally unqualified to defend international
peace and security. To be clearer, I would say that any
party that protects and covers up the Israeli nuclear,
16/17

06/09/2018

biological and chemical arsenal; uses pretexts to
maintain its own chemical arsenals; destroyed Iraq by
hiding behind the weapons-of-mass-destruction lie;
withdrew from the international agreement with Iran;
stopped funding United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees and withdrew from
UNESCO; and continues to put pressure on United
Nations funding while also threatening to withdraw
from the World Trade Organization, has no right
to launch forged and false accusations against my
country, Syria, of using chemical weapons, especially
if it has an historical record replete with established
and non-fabricated facts about its own use of nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons against civilians in
many parts of the world.
Speaking of lies and fabrications, I would like
to share with the Council the details of a comic and
shameful television report that was prepared by a CNN
reporter called Arwa Damon, who, in Turkey, met the
self-styled victims of the alleged chemical attack in
Douma in April. That alleged attack was used as a pretext
by the American, British and French Governments, as
Council members recall, for their tripartite aggression
against Syria on Saturday, 14 April. Immediately
following that aggression, there was a meeting of the
Security Council (see S/PV.8233).
Going back to the television report in Turkey,
hundreds of kilometres far from the site of the alleged
incident that supposedly occurred in Douma, the CNN
reporter met with the so-called victims just one week
after the alleged attack. The reporter said that she
smelled the strange and stinky odour of a chemical
substance emanating from a school bag belonging to a
child in Turkey to justify the military aggression against
Syria. What a level of political and media decline!
Council members are aware of the fact that Syria
and its allies are engaged in a ferocious battle against
terrorist organizations, such as Da’esh, Al-Qaida
and the Al-Nusra Front, as well as affiliated terrorist
organizations. Members are explicitly and implicitly
convinced that we do not need to use internationally
prohibited weapons to eliminate terrorism. Members
know for sure that we have waged war against
international terrorism on behalf of their peoples and
Governments. We will not yield to shameful political
blackmail or to the threats of direct military aggression
posed by the Governments of the United States, Britain
and France. Those Governments have engaged in
every kind of prohibited act in Syria, supported takfiri
18-27729

06/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

terrorism and given orders to the terrorist Al-Nusra
Front and its affiliated groups and organizations, in
particular the White Helmets, to use chemical weapons
against civilians in Syria in order to accuse the Syrian
Government and find a pretext to launch a further
military aggression.
We in Syria are fighting Al-Qaida on our
territories, not in Washington, D.C., New York, London
or Paris. We are fighting Al-Qaida itself, which was
responsible for the aggression of 11 September 2001 in
New York City. We are fighting Al-Qaida, which has
attacked Paris, London and many European capitals.
However, some members of the Council are rewarding
us by supporting Al-Qaida against us, while we have
been fighting Al-Qaida on their behalf and their
peoples’ behalf.
Those in this Chamber who are supposed to
uphold international law and the legitimacy of the
Charter should ask themselves why Syria would use an
internationally prohibited weapon that we do not possess
it and that does not yield a real military benefit. Why
would we do that? It is simply being used as a pretext
for the three aggressors to wage one aggression after
another against us. Why is it that the chemical weapon
allegedly used only impacts women and children and
not terrorists? How are the Governments of the three
aggressors able to predict the place, date and kind of
chemical weapon that is going to be used in Syria? Why
are these Governments are in sync with the terrorists of
the Al-Nusra Front and the White Helmets regarding
the predictability of the time and place of an attack?
Why are the Security Council and the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weappons (OPCW) unable
to deal with the information provided by Syria?
In that regard, in recent years Syria has sent
156 official letters to the Security Council and the
OPCW regarding the toxic chemical weapons that are
possessed, stockpiled and prepared by terrorist armed
groups in Syria to be used against civilians in order to
accuse the Syrian army of using them. Nobody reads or
wants to read those letters. Nobody wants to cooperate

S/PV. 8344

with the Syrian Government to combat terrorism and
stop the terrorist groups from using chemical weapons.
Why? Because some people are opposed to resolving
the problem in Syria and want to invest in terrorism.
We have many questions to ask, and the answers
are already known. Those three Governments have
failed over the past eight years to achieve their goal
in Syria by supporting terrorism. That is why those
three Governments are carrying out their actions
today openly and flagrantly. They are conducting
direct military aggression against Syria and illegally
deploying military forces in parts of my country.
Those Governments are hindering the political
process in Geneva, Astana and Sochi. They will try to
prevent the eradication of terrorism in Idlib and other
places, continue to impose a suffocating economic
embargo on the Syrian people, block the funding of
Syria’s reconstruction and recovery, and prevent the
repatriation of Syrian refugees and displaced persons
so that they can live a dignified, safe and peaceful life.
I would like to underscore the fact that, following
the destruction of the two last facilities, to which
Ms. Nakamitsu referred earlier, and the dispatch of the
OPCW Fact-find Mission to verify their destruction
and clear the debris from the two sites, the Syrian Arab
Republic has fulfilled all its obligations by destroying
all sites related to the production of chemical weapons.
The Government of my country confirms that two
days ago it sent an official letter to the members of the
Security Council containing precise and highly credible
information about preparations under way by terrorist
groups in Idlib and in the suburbs of Latakia and Aleppo
in connection with toxic chemical substances to be
widely used against civilians, with a view to hampering
the military operation against terrorism in those areas.
Lastly, it is all too clear and sad that certain
permanent members of the Security Council, including
the current presidency, have conflated the actual topic
of today’s meeting with that of tomorrow’s meeting.
The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.

18-2772917/17
