asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6877

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6877th meeting
Friday, 30 November 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Karev
Mr. Crowley
Mr. M’Beou
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on women and peace and security (S/2012/732)
Letter dated 2 October 2012 from the Permanent Representative of Guatemala
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2012/774)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-62149 (E)

*1262149*

S/PV.6877

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2012/732, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on women and
peace and security (S/2012/732)
Letter dated 2 October 2012 from the
Permanent Representative of Guatemala to
the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2012/774)

I welcome the presence of the Deputy SecretaryGeneral and give him the floor.

The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives
of Afghanistan, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Bangladesh, Botswana, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Croatia,
Egypt, Estonia, Fiji, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Mexico, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nigeria, Papua New Guinea, the Republic of Korea,
Slovenia, Spain, the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Turkey and Tunisia to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Ms. Michelle Bachelet, Executive
Director of UN-Women, and Mr. Hervé Ladsous,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Ms. Bineta Diop, President and
Founder of Femmes Africa Solidarité, to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Mari Skåre, Special
Representative for Women, Peace and Security of
the Secretary General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

2

begin

I also wish to draw members’ attention to
document S/2012/774, which contains a letter dated
2 October 2012 from the Permanent Representative
of Guatemala to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.

its

The Deputy Secretary-General: I would like to
begin with a warm expression of appreciation to both
India and Guatemala, which, during their Security
Council presidencies, focused our attention on the
important contributions by women and women’s civil
society organizations to preventing and resolving
armed conflict and to carrying out peacebuilding.
During a recent visit to Mali, I saw first-hand some
of the acute challenges that women face in times of
crisis and conflict. My time there left a deep impression
on me. I promised the women leaders with whom I met
in Bamako that I would convey their message to the
Council. They told me disturbing accounts of the abuses
that women faced in the northern part of the country,
which is now under extremist rule and occupation.
Sexual violence against women is widespread, and
I met women who had been raped. Despite being the
primary victims of a combined security, political and
humanitarian crisis, they remained excluded from the
various bodies that were seeking possible solutions.
They urged me to make known to the outside world
the need not only to ease their suffering, but also to
strengthen women’s participation in resolving the crisis
and preparing for a better future.
As Council members well know, extremist
groups have started implementing exceedingly harsh
interpretations of sharia law in northern Mali. That
has led to the separation of boys and girls at schools,
forced marriages for young girls and targeted killing
or maiming of women accused of having children out
of wedlock. Women’s rights are being dramatically
curtailed, including their right to work, leaving them
unable to sustain themselves or their families.
But women in Mali and across West Africa are
strongly resilient. They have already demonstrated their
ability, if they are given a chance, to bring about peace,

12-62149

S/PV.6877

reconciliation and development. We must empower and
assist them further.
As the case of Mali clearly underlines, armed
conflict affects women and men differently, which
means that women have to be part of the solution. One
of the key messages of the Secretary-General’s report
on women and peace and security (S/2012/732) is that
early and sustained engagement with women is crucial
to ensuring the sustainability of peace efforts, as well
as vital to deepening democracy and promoting respect
for human rights. Actively engaging women must be a
priority, not an afterthought.
The role of women’s organizations across the world
in preventing violence, resolving conflict and building
the foundations for peace is well known. Our challenge
is to become more systematic in supporting and scaling
up such initiatives and making the necessary links to
formal peace processes. Today’s debate is an opportunity
to support that critical work and to address the obstacles
to women’s participation in conflict mediation, peace
talks, national dialogues and donors’ conferences. It
is also critical that we accelerate progress in reaching
the goals of the Secretary-General’s seven-point action
plan on gender-responsive peacebuilding.
The Secretary-General and I welcome the
presidential statement on women, peace and security
issued on 31 October (S/PRST/2012/23), in which the
Council pledged to advance women’s participation in
all aspects of conflict resolution, including transitional
justice.
The United Nations system is strongly committed
to strengthening the rule of law, particularly with
regard to women’s access to justice during and
after conflict, which is precisely when it is most
needed but is least accessible. We are reviewing the
United Nations programming in order to galvanize a
stronger and more effective impact in that area. The
declaration adopted at the High-level Meeting on the
Rule of Law at the National and International Levels
(General Assembly resolution 67/1) has given new
impetus to that effort.
Through the evolution of the women and peace
and security agenda over the past 12 years and through
country-specific decisions and mission mandates,
the Security Council has demonstrated that decisions
made around this table can tangibly improve the
lives of women and girls in conflict and post-conflict
situations. We must, however, ensure that those issues

12-62149

are not addressed just once a year, on the anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000). I therefore welcome the renewal
of the Council’s invitation to the Executive Director of
UN-Women to provide periodic briefings outside the
annual open debate cycle.
Finally, engaging women and promoting gender
equality as part of our work for peace and security is
a daily responsibility and an unfinished mission for all
of us. It is time for us to finally recognize the role and
power of women to help us build a peaceful world.
The President: I thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for his statement.
I now give the floor to Ms. Bachelet.
Ms. Bachelet: It is an honour to address the
Security Council and to introduce the report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security
(S/2012/732).
I join the Deputy Secretary-General in thanking
the presidency of India and the previous President
of the Council, the Ambassador of Guatemala, for
encouraging us to address the role of women’s civil
society organizations in the prevention and resolution
of armed conflict and in peacebuilding. We are grateful
that this open debate was rescheduled after last month’s
hurricane. We thank the Council for having met
exceptionally on 31 October to adopt the presidential
statement that welcomed the enhanced participation,
representation and involvement of women in the
prevention and resolution of armed conflict and in
peacebuilding (S/PRST/2012/23). I am also very happy
to participate today with my colleague Hervé Ladsous
and with Ms. Bineta Diop.
The
very
origin
of
Security
Council
resolution 1325 (2000) is the courage, leadership and
accomplishments of women’s civil society organizations
that promote peace under what are often unimaginably
difficult circumstances. Today we will hear many
examples of the contributions of women leaders and
civil society organizations. I would like to draw the
Council’s attention to what women’s groups in Mali are
doing right now to contribute to non-violent solutions
to the crisis.
In spite of their absence from official conflictresolution processes, women leaders in the north of
the country are using informal channels to call on
the leaders of armed groups to participate in peace
dialogues. Just two weeks ago, nearly 1,000 women

3

S/PV.6877

leaders and members of civil society groups gathered in
Bamako and delivered a common call for peace, during
which they expressed solidarity across ethnic and
other divisions and recommended specific measures to
protect women’s rights and to prevent violence against
women and children. They asserted that now was the
time to dedicate funding to reparations, care and the
empowerment of survivors.
Wherever there is conflict — whether in Mali,
Syria, the Middle East or the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo — women must be
part of the solution.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2012/732) assesses
the state of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
in the areas of conflict prevention, women’s protection,
their participation and gender-responsive relief and
recovery efforts. The report notes the rising number
of countries and regional organizations that have
strategies on women and peace and security, including
the recently announced Pacific regional action plan.
In the area of conflict prevention, the report finds
that more actors, including the Security Council, are
engaged in early-warning efforts to detect threats to
women and girls. However, the effective prevention of
violence against women and girls remain a challenge.
One need look no further than Syria or Mali to find
situations where conflict has severely affected women
and children. Sexual and gender-based crimes persist,
along with other abuses that affect women differently
from men — such as forced displacement, the loss of a
means of survival and limited access to basic services.
In the area of participation, particularly in formal
peace processes, the report notes that while some
good examples exist, specific efforts are needed to
increase the number of women represented on official
delegations. Of the 14 peace negotiations co-led by the
United Nations in 2011, only four had delegations that
included a woman. Of nine peace agreements signed
in 2011, only two — Yemen and Somalia — included
provisions on women and peace and security.
In the area of elections, the report shows the value
of temporary special measures to increase the number
of women candidates. Yet, out of nine post-conflict
elections last year, only one — in Uganda — employed
an electoral gender quota, which produced a
parliament made up of 35 per cent women. In the other
eight elections, women won between 4 and 13 per cent
of the seats.

4

In the area of protection, the report indicates that
mechanisms pertaining to such things as community
patrols, access to legal aid, rapid response and surge
teams multiplied in the past year. There have also been
initiatives to establish integrated services, address
fuel and lighting needs and train security personnel.
Women’s protection is now part of standard operating
procedures for security-sector personnel in some
contexts.
Despite the progress, the report identifies
persistent protection gaps and obstacles to women’s
and girl’s access to justice. We therefore welcome the
attention given in the presidential statement to mission
drawdown and the imperative of preventing any erosion
of the protection environment during transitions.
In the area of relief and recovery, the report
indicates that post-conflict financial allocations to
women’s empowerment and gender equality are low
but increasing. The percentage of project spending that
targets gender-specific needs rose from an estimated
5.7 per cent in 2010 to 7.1 per cent this year. That is
an improvement, but it is clearly still a long way from
the 15 per cent minimum spending target set in the
Secretary-General’s action plan on gender-responsive
peacebuilding.
The report emphasizes the need for greater attention
to women’s post-conflict employment and other forms
of livelihood support.
The report has a special section on genderresponsive prevention and the resolution of conflict.
It notes that gender expertise and the participation
of women in official peace processes is decisive in
ensuring greater sensitivity to women’s rights and
gender equality in a subsequent accord. For that to
happen, gender issues must be addressed at the earliest
possible stages — right from the start of dialogue and
peace negotiations.
The report welcomes opportunities created in the
past year for women to participate in international
strategy and donor conferences, including in the
Central African Republic, Afghanistan and South
Sudan. However, it acknowledges that insufficient
attention is given to improving women’s access to
national and international peace dialogues. Greater
effort must be made to invite women to participate in
conflict-resolution forums.
To ensure greater progress, the report recommends
action in three broad areas.
12-62149

S/PV.6877

First, consistent implementation of international
norms and standards on the human rights of women
and girls is needed across all efforts to prevent and
resolve conflict and build peace. The report calls
for systematic attention to women and peace and
security commitments across the Security Council’s
actions. It notes in particular the need to sustain the
implementation of these commitments in situations of
mission drawdown and transition.
Secondly, when it comes to women’s participation
and representation, determination is needed to provide
more opportunities, eliminate obstacles and build
capacity for influence. The report cites the need for more
women mediators, advisers, negotiators and observers
in peace processes, and more women in the senior
management of international and regional organizations,
and calls for measures to address obstacles to their
participation. In elections, temporary special measures
help to encourage women’s participation both as voters
and as candidates. Special attention to the protection of
women human rights defenders is called for. In United
Nations missions, sector-specific gender experts can
advance mainstreaming. Capacity-building of women’s
organizations during and after armed conflict will help
amplify women’s influence.
Finally, there is a need for continued improvement
of tracking and accountability systems for the
implementation of women and peace and security
commitments, including at the regional and national
levels. It is recommended that challenges to the national
and regional implementation of women and peace
and security commitments be assessed, including in
upcoming reviews of national action plans. The need
for increased coordination and consistent tracking of
results at the United Nations is also noted.
To summarize, we need determined leadership and
dedicated systems to realize changes on the ground.
With regard to leadership, I note the recent significant
appointments of women to strategic international
and regional peace and security roles. I welcome
the appointments of Ms. Zainab Bangura as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict; Ms. Leila Zerrougui as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict; and Ms. Fatou Bensouda as Chief
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court. I also
welcome the appointments of Ms. Nkosazana DlaminiZuma as Chair of the African Union Commission, and

12-62149

Ms. Mari Skåre as the NATO Special Representative
for Women, Peace and Security.
While these high-level appointments are welcome,
I note with concern that the United Nations itself must
do better in building the pipeline of women candidates
for these positions. Since June 2010, women’s share of
senior United Nations positions, from P-5 to D-2, in
political missions has actually dropped from 23 per
cent to 18 per cent, and in peacekeeping missions from
24 per cent to 21 per cent. The United Nations system
is currently reviewing this situation to take appropriate
action.
To conclude, the Secretary-General’s report notes
that we are not seeing results at the pace that we
expected or that women rightfully expect of us. For this,
we need to ensure that women have opportunities to
play their full role in peace and security. We know that
there is no shortage of women’s leadership. However,
as the Secretary-General’s report points out, there is
a shortage of opportunities for women to engage in
conflict resolution and peacebuilding. We must create
these opportunities.
Creating these opportunities is not impossible, but
it takes a special effort. It requires determination to
make a priority of preventing gender-based violence
in conflict. It requires determination to investigate
and prosecute abuses of women’s rights, or to insist
on including women in a donor conference or a peace
negotiation. This determination is not a matter of
simply going through the motions; it is about going the
extra mile. UN-Women and our partners in the United
Nations system and civil society are here to go that
extra mile.
The President: I thank Ms. Bachelet for her
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous: I would join the Deputy SecretaryGeneral and Michele Bachelet in thanking the presidency
of the Council for having invited me to discuss the
critical issue of women and peace and security.
Last month, in its presidential statement
S/PRST/2012/23, the Security Council underlined the
importance of enhancing the participation of women
in the prevention and resolution of conflict and in
peacebuilding within the framework of the women
and peace and security agenda. Today, I would like
to affirm, from the extensive field experience of the

5

S/PV.6877

Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support, that women indeed can
and must play a leading role in political participation,
conflict resolution and the transition from conflict to
peace. I will further illustrate how our missions support
the role of women in building peace and women’s civil
society organizations in protecting women’s rights. And
lastly, I hope to chart a path forward for overcoming
the political obstacles and security threats that impede
women’s groups from more effective engagement in
conflict prevention and peace consolidation.
I am grateful to the Security Council for welcoming
the contribution of gender advisers and women
protection advisers to the implementation of resolutions
on women and peace and security. I wish to express
my commitment to ensuring that gains made in the
protection and promotion of women’s and girls’ rights
and empowerment remain sustained, including during
United Nations mission drawdowns and transitions.
This year, peacekeeping missions have supported
important progress in some areas, notably women’s
political participation at the local and national levels.
Experience also showed that in other areas — including
the protection of women activists — more could be
achieved. Women continue, unfortunately, to be largely
absent from or to play merely symbolic roles in formal
peace processes. Social and cultural norms certainly
pose serious challenges to the full and meaningful
participation of women in peace processes. In addition,
women are frequently exposed to gender-based violence
and have limited access to decision-making.
Regarding political participation, I have seen our
missions work with women’s organizations to bring
women into State political institutions, to strengthen
advocacy efforts, and to form strong, effective networks
for peacebuilding, conflict resolution and leadership
skills development. We have seen, for example, that
women can successfully resolve conflicts relating to
land ownership, water and cattle raiding by establishing
dialogues with other women’s groups from across
border lines. In South Sudan, the women’s community
dialogue forum in the state of Central Equatoria has
held meetings with community’s leaders to discuss the
issues affecting women and children who had been
displaced after the conflicts between the Mundari and
Bari communities. Two women who were involved in
the community dialogue forum were nominated to the
state legislative assembly.

6

(spoke in French)
In situations where, strictly speaking, there is
no armed conflict, it is even more appropriate for
women’s organizations and civil society to play a part
in preventing and settling political and social tensions.
At present in Haiti, women account for fewer than 4 per
cent of members elected to the national Parliament, and
it must be acknowledged that most have been excluded
from the reconstruction process. By comparison, in
September this year women accounted for 19.5 per cent
of parliamentarians in the Caribbean and for 20.5 per
cent worldwide. It is true that the Haitian Constitution
has been amended to include a 30 per cent quota
for women, but that special measure has yet to be
implemented. While it could be an encouraging sign
of greater participation of women in political life,
representatives of women’s organizations in Haiti
appealed to the President of the Republic to find
solutions to the problem of appointing members of the
Cabinet and Permanent Electoral Council.
We need to do more to help States develop
constitutional reforms that include a gender-specific
perspective and take into account issues related to
gender-based violence. We must also support the
security sector and institutions for the rule of law,
both for professionals and for those who will be held
accountable. That can lead to the training of specialized
police force members and greater capacities for judges
and prosecutors in order to ensure a higher profile for
prosecutions in cases of sexual violence. We must also
strengthen networks for support to those who have
survived gender-based violence so that they can once
again take an active part in public life. Finally, we need
to work together to a greater extent with UN-Women and
our partners in country teams to help States to develop
national action plans for implementing resolutions on
women and peace and security.
We are moving forward in the right direction and
I belive that we have made significant progress. For
example, in 2011, in the Democratic Republic of Congo,
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
trained 380 members of the armed forces, 280 of whom
were women. It also trained 767 police officers, more
than a third of whom were women, in the prevention of
gender-based violence and in the search for appropriate
solutions. MONUSCO also provided training on the
gender-based analysis of conflict for members of the
Commission on the Resolution and Prevention of

12-62149

S/PV.6877

Conflicts in Goma. That training made it possible to
develop the capacity of the Commission to respond to
the serious problems stemming from movements of
women and girls in conflict areas, in collaboration with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.
(spoke in English)
Through outreach to Governments, Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General can help
provide a link between State-led mechanisms and
women’s groups to ensure that women’s priorities
are on the agenda. We need more initiatives like
that of Darfur, where the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur has been able
to support the establishment of the Darfur Regional
Women’s Legislative Caucus, State committees on
resolution 1325 (2000) and a high-level State committee
on combating violence against women.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
approximately 5,000 women of all political tendencies,
including from civil society, flooded Kinshasa’s main
commercial avenue a week ago to protest the fall
of Goma to rebels from the Mouvement du 23 mars.
That was the most massively organized non-violent
protest in the country following the fall of that city.
The women protesters were received by MONUSCO’s
senior management. However, women have not been
given any political leverage in the regional negotiations
aimed at bringing peace to the embattled eastern
part of the country pursuant to the provisions of
resolution 1325 (2000) that demand that women be a
core part of all peacebuilding processes and related
agreements.
Additionally,
when
supporting
women’s
organizations, we must mobilize all members of the
country team to serve as consultative partners for
civil society. That gives women’s groups confidence
to act with the assurance that they may turn to the
United Nations family if they perceive a threat. The
country team also supports women’s organizations with
funding, information-sharing and capacity-building
activities. For instance, women’s groups convened by
DPKO and UN-Women at the Open Day in Timor-Leste
in 2011 called upon country team members to help
sustain the participation of women in community-level
mediation and peacebuilding activities. As a result,
the United Nations Development Programme and the
Ministry of Social Solidarity implemented a project
12-62149

that helped establish a Department of Peacebuilding
and Social Cohesion within the Ministry of Solidarity.
That department specifically includes women at the
community level in local conflict resolution and
peacebuilding efforts. Another positive example is
the recently signed memorandum of understanding
between the Law and Order Trust Fund for Afghanistan
and five women’s non-governmental organizations on
the implementation of the Women’s Police Mentoring
Programme, which aims to build the capacity of
policewomen and to address the issue of abuse.
Finally, I would emphasize that the critical key
to removing the obstacles that impede women’s full
participation in conflict prevention and peacebuilding is
active and systematic consultation with local actors and
leaders, including women’s civil society organizations.
That is the only way to develop effective, contextspecific and gender-aware solutions.
Last month, DPKO and DFS participated in a
dialogue with women peacemakers from all over the
world who had gathered at the University of San Diego.
The women peacemakers recommended that the United
Nations formalize and systematize consultations with
women in every step of the United Nations peacekeeping
process, from pre-assessment to deployment of a
mission, to evaluation of a mission, to the renewal of a
mandate, and to the change of a mandate to transition
to peacebuilding.
Together with our partner, UN-Women, we call
on Member States to enhance women’s participation
and protection by supporting and strengthening their
commitment to conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
As Michelle Bachelet has said, together we must go the
extra mile.
Once again, Mr. President, I thank you for this
opportunity to brief the Council.
The President: I thank Mr. Ladsous for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Diop.
Ms. Diop: I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for the invitation to address the Security Council
this morning. I speak today on behalf of the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security.
I am also here today in my capacity as Founder and
President of Femmes Africa Solidarité, an international
non-governmental organization with over 15 years of
experience advocating for women’s human rights in
Africa.

7

S/PV.6877

The theme of this year’s open debate on women
and peace and security, which focuses on women’s civil
society organizations, is timely. Twelve years after the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the vital work of
civil society, particularly women’s groups, in ensuring
international peace and security must be recognized
and supported, specifically with political access,
resources and respect.

data in the Secretary-General’s report, as presented to
us by Ms. Bachelet. We also see a lack of women at the
table in current peace processes, such as those under
way in Colombia and Myanmar; in the negotiations
between the Sudan and South Sudan; and, as the UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations has just
told us, in the regional negotiations in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

I recently returned from the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, where I conducted a solidarity mission to
assess the situation of our sisters in the eastern part of
that country. I saw for myself the degrading situation of
women, in particular in the Kanyarucinya refugee and
displaced persons camp, and the immense suffering
of the women in HEAL Africa Hospital in Goma and
Panzi Hospital in Bukavu, where women’s bodies are
being repaired after sexual assaults and other violence.
I was caught in the fighting during the taking of Goma
by rebels from the Mouvement du 23 Mars, and I saw
people who were already displaced become displaced yet
again with nowhere to go. I promised the women whom
I met that I would echo their voices calling urgently for
peace, security, protection and humanitarian assistance
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I promised
them that I would come to talk to the Security Council.
We should not let them down this time.

Women are not absent because they lack negotiating
skills or because they cannot make vital contributions
to peace processes. In Colombia, women’s groups have
united to create Women for Peace, a new movement
offering concrete recommendations and proposals
for the nascent peace process. Malian women, as the
Deputy Secretary-General mentioned, together with
women from across West Africa, have been active for
months over the crisis in Mali, asserting their right to
engage in the efforts to bring about a political solution
to the crisis, and reminding all actors that women have
been specifically targeted in the violence, especially
in northern Mali. Women in Syria have been raising
their voices but are vastly underrepresented, if not
completely excluded, from efforts to seek a diplomatic
solution to the ongoing conflict.

Today, I will highlight three key issues — first, the
contribution of women’s organizations to international
peace and security; secondly, the importance of conflict
prevention; and, thirdly, the security threats women
and women’s human rights defenders face in conflict
settings.
First, despite the constraints and barriers we
face, women play a central role in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts and in peacebuilding at
community, national and international levels, from
early warning to post-conflict reconstruction. For
example, in the women’s “situation room”, mentioned in
the report of the Secretary-General, established during
the 2012 elections in Senegal, it was the combination of
women mobilizing communities for peace, mediating
between opposing groups, and monitoring and reporting
incidents of irregularity that contributed to peaceful
elections in Senegal.
Regarding conflict resolution, despite much
rhetoric and many commitments, the percentage
of women and gender expertise included in the
implementation of peace accords is unacceptably low.
That continuing exclusion is demonstrated in recent
8

Women’s priorities are not secondary or
special-interest concerns in these processes. They are
integral to making peace more robust and sustainable,
and it is the responsibility of all relevant actors to ensure
that women representatives, women’s human rights
and gender expertise are embedded in all efforts to
prevent and resolve conflict, be they informal or formal
conflict-resolution processes or related to rebuilding
after conflict. This includes disarmament programmes
and security sector, judicial, political and constitutional
reform.
Secondly, the most effective way to fulfil
commitments and obligations in the area of women and
peace and security is to prevent conflict from occurring.
We must challenge the underlying causes of human
rights violations against women and girls in armed
conflict, including gender discrimination, gender-based
violence, militarization and the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons. That means ensuring women’s
active participation in designing and implementing
disarmament and prevention strategies; it also means
that Member States should adopt a comprehensive
arms trade treaty with legal and enforceable prevention
criteria for gender-based violence.

12-62149

S/PV.6877

Thirdly, as we observe the 16 Days of Activism
against Gender Violence, violence against women and
girls remains widespread and far too often is committed
with impunity. During conflict and long after conflict
end, violence against women and girls is unacceptably
high and remains an enormous barrier to women’s full
participation in social, economic and political life. Due
to their work exposing violence against women and
other human rights violations, women’s human rights
defenders are exposed to threats, intimidation, violence
and at times alienation from their own communities.
Those in Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and throughout the Middle East often face
serious personal risk and sometimes death.
Last month, Denis Mukwege, an outspoken
supporter of victims of sexual violence in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, who has continually called for
peace in his country and who is well known to many
in this Chamber for his advocacy of women’s rights,
was attacked in his home. I was there visiting the Panzi
Hospital, and the women are asking for his return.
There are thousands of advocates like Mr. Mukwege
who, despite such risks, are working to implement the
Council’s resolutions on women and peace and security.
The Security Council and all Member States
should offer concrete support to efforts to achieve
accountability for violations of women’s rights, and
particularly of international humanitarian and human
rights laws. In addition, protection and prevention
measures must ensure the safety of women, including
those who are displaced, refugees or disabled.
I would like to conclude my statement with a call
for action to the international community, including
United Nations Member States and Security Council
members in particular. I urge them to engage women’s
groups as key partners in peace, mediation, negotiation
and governmental processes; demonstrate leadership
and prioritize women’s rights by implementing
national and regional action plans for compliance with
resolution 1325 (2000); meet regularly with women’s
groups and women leaders — and I commend the
proposal just made for the holding of regular meetings
rather than an annual one, particularly under the
leadership of UN-Women and other women’s groups;
and ensure that women’s priorities are substantively
incorporated into all relevant negotiations. We call on
the Council to make those priorities non-negotiable
and to allocate the political and financial resources to
women’s civil society organizations that are necessary

12-62149

to their engagement and authority as partners in
national, regional and international communities.
Finally, we call on Security Council members to show
themselves to be role models by consistently and fully
implementing resolution 1325 (2000).
Women whose communities and lives are affected
by conflict demand that the Security Council, with
its mandate for maintaining international peace and
security, and all Member States and United Nations
actors support them and champion women’s human
rights. From the women in Sri Lanka seeking to rebuild
their lives, to the women in Afghanistan demanding a
voice in shaping their country’s future; from the women
seeking protection and medical care in the Kivus, to
the women driven from their homes by violence in
Colombia; from the women in Sierra Leone, Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the Sudan still seeking justice,
to the human rights defenders in Iraq and the women
disarmament activists in Côte d’Ivoire — these women
are rightly expecting the Council to turn its words into
action. Women suffering count on us. Together, we
have innovative ideas, solutions and means. What are
we waiting for?
The President: I now give the floor to the members
of the Council.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for holding
this open debate on women and peace and security,
marking the twelfth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000). I would also like to thank the
Deputy Secretary-General, Michelle Bachelet, Hervé
Ladsous and Bineta Diop for their informative briefings
this morning.
I welcome the statement to be made later by the
observer of the European Union, and the important
contributions the European Union makes to this agenda.
The Chinese have a powerful proverb that says
“women hold up half the sky”. Twelve years after
the Council first made landmark commitments in
resolution 1325 (2000), we must all stand united behind
efforts to confront those who seek to exclude, harm or
marginalize half their populations.
As the Secretary-General has set out in his report
(S/2012/732), we in the Council have made a concerted
effort over the course of the past year to support the
rights, protection and empowerment of women in
strengthened peacekeeping mandates, in calls for more
female peacekeepers, greater representation for women
9

S/PV.6877

in United Nations leadership roles and a greater number
of gender experts in United Nations field missions. The
Council must respond to the Secretary-General’s call to
demonstrate continued and committed leadership.
Women have a unique and powerful role to play
in peacebuilding. But the lack of security for women
and girls continues to be a major factor inhibiting their
participation in decision-making in conflict and postconflict settings. Women must participate as voters and
candidates in post-conflict elections. They deserve to
have the security to do so safely. Women must be placed
at the centre of peace negotiations, not marginalized,
threatened and ignored. And women’s civil society
organizations, so often at the forefront in responding to
conflict and building peace in their own communities,
must be nurtured, funded and supported.
The United Kingdom itself benefits substantially
from early, regular and close consultation with women’s
civil society organizations. The United Kingdom civil
society umbrella group, Gender Action for Peace and
Security, played an integral part in our own recent
national action plan review process.
We must do more to prevent conflict-related
sexual violence and tackle its perpetrators more
aggressively. That remains an urgent priority for the
United Kingdom. Despite our best collective efforts,
the culture of impunity that has grown up around this
horrific crime is tough to crack. It is shocking how few
of those responsible are put on trial for the crimes they
commit. Governments must do more and must do so
urgently.
In September, the United Kingdom Foreign
Secretary launched a new initiative on preventing sexual
violence at an event co-hosted with Michelle Bachelet,
Zeinab Bangura and the International Campaign to
Stop Rape and Gender Violence in Conflict. The
initiative aims to replace the culture of impunity with
one of deterrence, bringing more perpetrators of sexual
violence to justice. We will work closely with the
United Nations, international partners and civil society
to launch a sustained campaign and to build a global
partnership to prevent sexual violence in conflict.
Nationally, we have recruited a specialist team
of experts who are available to work in support of
the United Nations and civil society to investigate
allegations of sexual violence, gather evidence and
help countries build their own capacity to do so. The
United Kingdom has also contributed $1.5 million to

10

the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence to support her team’s work. We hope
others will also find ways to renew their commitments.
Today we recognize in particular the invaluable
contribution civil society organizations make to
this agenda. Their contribution is vital. In Liberia,
organizations like the Women’s Situation Room help
promote women’s participation in political life and
prevent electoral violence. In Sierra Leone, the Rainbow
Institution has made great strides in helping survivors
of sexual and gender-based violence with medical
assistance and counseling, sensitizing communities and
empowering women and girls through village savings
and loans associations specifically for them. Such
organizations deserve to be nurtured and supported.
Women often bare a disproportionate burden in all
stages of conflict. We know that they play a critical role
in helping a country to draw back from recent conflict,
to ensure sustainable peace and to heal wounds in
societies torn apart by war. In that role, they surely hold
up more than half the sky.
We must ensure that together we support the
rights, protection and empowerment of women. Like
Mr. Ladsous, the United Kingdom, both in our national
capacity and as the Security Council lead on women
and peace and security, is ready to go the extra mile to
achieve that goal.
Mrs. DiCarlo (Unites States of America): I thank
Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson, Executive Director
Bachelet and Under-Secretary-General Ladsous for
their briefings and their commitment to the women,
peace and security agenda. I thank Ms. Diop for her
remarks today, and especially for carrying the message
of the women of Goma and Bukavu. We agree with her;
we must not let them down.
As we mark the twelfth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000), we can point to real progress.
United Nations mediation, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding increasingly tap the expertise and
address the concerns of women. Peace processes
include greater outreach to women. More countries are
developing their own national action plans on women,
peace and security, yet our work is very far from
complete. We must continue to increase out collective
efforts to address the challenges women face in conflict
and post-conflict situations, and civil society groups
can play a crucial role in peace and security initiatives.

12-62149

S/PV.6877

The participation of women in peace and political
processes is central to long-term peace and stability.
We see that more than half of all peace agreements
fail within five years. While the reasons for failure
are complex and unique to each conflict, there is
one common thread, historically: a lack of women’s
participation.

hundred women candidates running for the national
congress. And yet United Nations budgets remain well
below the agreed 15 per cent recommendation in the
Secretary-General’s action plan to ensure women’s
participation in post-conflict recovery. If that continues,
recent progress could stagnate. We must find ways to
accelerate progress on that front.

Of the hundreds of peace agreements signed in the
past 20 years, a sampling of those treaties shows that less
than 8 per cent of negotiators were women. Research
suggests that women who participate in peace talks often
raise issues like human rights, citizen security, justice,
employment and health care — issues that are key to
long-term recovery and stability but which are often
ignored. Civil society can be instrumental in increasing
the participation of women in these processes. Just this
month in Afghanistan, for example, over two hundred
representatives from Afghan civil society, political
parties, Government, provincial councils, the religious
community and the High Peace Council gathered for
the national conference for strengthening the role of
women in the peace process. They discussed increased
participation of women in reconciliation efforts, greater
protection for Afghan women and the importance of
compliance with resolution 1325 (2000) by the Afghan
Government. The delegates are currently drafting
an action plan to drive genuine progress for Afghan
women.

UN-Women’s focus on women’s leadership and
political participation has produced concrete results,
and we look forward to the forthcoming report of
the Secretary-General on implementation of General
Assembly resolution 66/130, on women and political
participation. We are also grateful for the work on
women’s political participation by the Human Rights
Council Working Group on Discrimination against
Women in Law and Practice.

The United Nations has made important strides
in advancing women’s roles in security, governance
and civic life. We support the Secretary-General’s
recommendation that greater attention should be
devoted to women’s empowerment and rights when
establishing or renewing mission mandates. And we
commend him for placing more women in leadership
positions and increasing the number of gender advisers
in the field. Their support to local civil society groups
has been critical, and it is clear that the United Nations
can have a significant impact when it partners with
civil society. UN-Women’s Fund for Gender Equality
typifies that approach by partnering with regional,
national and local women’s organizations as well as
with Government institutions to get more women
engaged economically and politically.
It is encouraging, moreover, to see that more
women parliamentarians are elected to office during
transitional periods where there is United Nations
assistance. Libya’s landmark elections on 7 July had
record levels of women’s participation, with over six

12-62149

The United States remains deeply concerned about
violence targeted at women and girls, especially sexual
violence. Not only is it horrific for the victims, but it
tears apart the fabric of societies. As Secretary Clinton
has said, these acts are not cultural but criminal. In the
peace and security context, they are not simply women’s
issues, but, rather, fundamental problems that must be
addressed for societies to reconcile, rebuild and find
peace.
We applaud the efforts made by the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations to prevent violence
against women in armed conflict by working to devise
innovative procedures such as random patrols in areas
commonly used by women and girls for gathering
firewood or water.
Beyond sharing best practices and lessons learned,
we need to do more to standardize mission-wide
strategies and policies, improve redeployment training
for peacekeepers, address victims’ needs and hold
perpetrators accountable. That is why United Nations
campaigns such as Stop Rape Now are so important.
The work of resolution 1325 (2000) is a national
responsibility. Less than year ago, President Obama
issued the first-ever United States national action plan
on women, peace and security. Based on wide-ranging
consultations with American civil society and with
other Governments, our action plan lays out how
the United States will help empower half the world’s
population as equal partners in preventing conflict and
building peace. Partnering with civil society groups is
a key component of this strategy.

11

S/PV.6877

In conclusion, let me reiterate that the international
community has made progress in including women
in conflict resolution and peacebuilding, tackling the
scourge of sexual violence in conflict and making
national commitments to act. But much more needs to
be done so that the world fully sees women as actors,
not victims, and as leaders, not followers.
Mr. Crowley (South Africa): My delegation thanks
all of the briefers for the insightful statements they
delivered here today. We also thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this important debate.
South Africa is fully committed to pursuing an
integrated, gender-oriented approach in the areas of
conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
in recognition of the powerful role of women as agents
of change.
The report of the Secretary-General on women and
peace and security (S/2012/732) shows that Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000) has provided for the
establishment of an enabling framework for the creation
of opportunities and spaces for women to be at the
centre of processes affecting their safety, security and
development, in equal partnership with men. However,
the report highlights the fact that 12 years after the
adoption of the resolution, despite some positive gains,
its implementation remains slow and uneven in many
cases.
My delegation notes that much work still needs to
be done to strengthen the role of women in preventive
diplomacy, formal peace processes and mediation.
We therefore remain fully committed to working,
in cooperation with the United Nations system and
Member States, towards the removal of barriers
impeding the full and effective implementation of the
resolution.
In that regard, we welcome the role played by
UN-Women to integrate a gender perspective under the
women, peace and security agenda, in keeping with the
broader United Nations system-wide mandate.
We
note
with
concern
the
continuing
underrepresentation of women in formal peace
processes. We therefore call for a more regular review of
the status of implementation within the United Nations
system and in Member States of the proposals made
by the Secretary-General on the inclusion of women in
conflict prevention and mediation, the nomination of
women to lead negotiation processes, and an increase

12

in the number of female police and troop personnel in
United Nations missions.
Equally, we urge the Secretary-General to give
specific attention to the appointment of women to
senior positions, including chief mediators and heads
of political, peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions.
We maintain that greater effort needs to be expended
towards the deployment of greater numbers of female
military and police personnel to United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
South Africa is pleased to note the valuable
contribution that gender advisers in post-conflict
settings continue to make through the provision of
training to and awareness-raising of peacekeepers and
assisting in the capacity-building activities of national
Governments and of civil society.
However, we remain concerned at the slow
deployment of women protection advisers to
peacekeeping missions. This presents a serious
protection gap, and every effort must be made to ensure
that the progress made in the protection and promotion
of the rights and empowerment of women and girls is
not lost.
We are supportive of the efforts undertaken by
the Council to ensure that more systematic attention
is given in all its work to the implementation of
commitments in the area of women, peace and security.
The integration of appropriate gender perspectives into
the mandates of the relevant peacekeeping missions and
in other thematic areas related to peace and security
would positively advance efforts in that regard.
We welcome the focus of this open debate on
giving prominence to the role of women’s civil society
organizations in contributing to the prevention and
resolution of armed conflict and to peacebuilding. From
our own perspective, South Africa continues to contribute
to the popularization of resolution 1325 (2000) through
such structures as the Southern African Development
Community, the African Union and the Pan-African
Women’s Organization.
We remain conscious of the fact that women and
children are the most vulnerable members of society.
They suffer disproportionately from conflict and State
incapacity. Their experience of conflict, violence and
repression, and their particular needs in such contexts
usually differ from those of men. Unfortunately, women
tend to be sidelined from formal conflict resolution and
peacebuilding processes. We must therefore create the
12-62149

S/PV.6877

space for women to assume positions of leadership and
decision-making in peacemaking and peacebuilding
processes. Better still, we need to focus more on
preventing conflicts from breaking out in the first
place.
Post-conflict
recovery
and
reconstruction
programmes often overlook women’s security needs,
which ultimately compromises the inclusiveness and
sustainability of peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding efforts. Access to justice for women
in post-conflict States through deliberate policies of
inclusion is essential to building fair, equitable and
equal societies. Women suffer disproportionately
from poverty, and the risks they face are heightened in
armed conflict and post-conflict situations. The United
Nations system and the international community must
therefore provide sufficient assistance to countries
emerging from conflict to build their national capacity
in terms of justice and security institutions, especially
in the police, prosecutorial, judicial and corrections
sectors and to ensure that women are well represented
in all of those structures.
Finally, much work needs to be done to narrow
the substantive implementation deficits that remain.
The burden of responsibility rests on the membership
of the Council to ensure measurable progress on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in the broader
context of the women, peace and security agenda and
the laudable objectives that it aspires to achieve.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this open debate on
an issue to which Portugal attaches great importance. I
wish also to thank Under-Secretary-General Eliasson;
the Executive Director of UN-Women, Michelle
Bachelet; Under-Secretary-General Hervé Ladsous;
and Ms. Bineta Diop, President of Femmes Africa
Solidarité, for their very useful briefings.
Portugal naturally aligns itself with the statement
to be made later by the observer of the European Union.
This open debate is an excellent and timely
opportunity for the Council to express its strong
support for the efforts of individual women and
women’s networks in organizations that are doing so
much for peace and security from the grass-roots to the
international level. Our British colleague has already
given us some concrete examples of that growing
involvement.

12-62149

Women are important, often indispensable
actors of change and development. With the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent Council
resolutions on this issue, the Council has recognized
that their active participation in political processes and
in discussions about their own countries’ futures is
extremely valuable and should be mandatory.
Women undeniably play a crucial role in rebuilding
post-conflict societies and in social cohesion. It is
therefore essential, as has been mentioned, to guarantee
that women are included in peace processes from the
early phases and to ensure that their perspectives, direct
knowledge and concerns are taken into account by
international and local actors in shaping peacebuilding
efforts. It is also essential to ensure that women’s
organizations and their leaders get the necessary
support and encouragement from the international
community to continue their work. The Council can and
should play an important and active role in that regard.
During the past few years in the Council, Portugal
has been working not only to support the promotion and
protection of the rights of women, but also to support
women’s political participation in situations on the
agenda of the Council, be it in Libya, Somalia, South
Sudan or Afghanistan. We have also encouraged more
interaction between the Council and women mediators
who have a direct and personal experience in engaging
with women in mediation and conflict prevention.
In an Arria Formula meeting that we coorganized
with the United Kingdom, we heard very useful
testimonies from experienced mediators with direct
and personal experience in engaging women in conflict
prevention and in the ways and means to enhance
their participation in peace processes. Likewise, we
also had the opportunity to meet with several gender
advisers from United Nations peacekeeping missions
and learned from them about the extremely valuable
work that they had been doing to support the political
participation of women in countries such as Côte
d’Ivoire, the Democratic People’s Republic of the Congo,
Timor-Leste and Haiti, as well as to implement broader
women and peace and security mandates. We believe
that the Council can only gain from organizing more
of these meetings in order to have direct information
from women and women’s organizations with regard to
the prevention of conflict and post-war consolidation
and reconstruction as essential elements for the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). In that
regard, let me also underline the importance of keeping

13

S/PV.6877

up the practice of organizing meetings with civil society
when the Council travels on a field mission.
Another key aspect of the Council’s work in
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) is its
monitoring of women’s participation in political
processes in post-conflict situations. In that context,
it is important to invite Ms. Bachelet, as was done
during the past two years, to regularly brief the Council
on women’s political participation and the concrete
situation on its agenda. Those briefings not only
complement the briefings that the Council receives
from other Secretariat representatives, but they also
help the Council in the implementation of the women
and peace and security mandate.
Indeed, important progress has been accomplished
in the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
the subsequent resolutions on women and peace and
security. Nevertheless, we have to recognize that
significant challenges still remain in order to ensure
the adequate representation of women and women’s
groups in formal peace processes, as Mr. Ladsous
underlined, and to benefit fully from their knowledge
and experience.
The Council adopted a presidential statement
encouraging efforts to strengthen the capacities of
women’s organizations to engage in conflict prevention
and mediation (S/PRST/2012/23). Portugal strongly
supports the specific efforts by Member States and
the United Nations. In that regard, we welcome
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
UN-Women’s efforts to give technical support to
women’s organizations at local and regional levels
to strengthen women’s civil society groups. The
presidential statement also recognizes that those who
protect the human rights of women are very often
placed in situations of serious risk, and it calls for
members to address those risks. In that regard, we
pay tribute to human rights defenders who fight for
women’s human rights in so many parts of the world
in extremely difficult conditions. We appeal for their
adequate protection.
Every effort must be made to promote women’s
full and equal participation in electoral processes,
as candidates and as voters, and to eliminate
discriminatory or legal barriers against women’s
participation. A lack of access to education, but also
the fight against violence, in particular sexual, violence
should be addressed in this context, as has been already
rightly underlined in previous statements.
14

In conclusion, resolution 1325 (2000) is a powerful
message to encourage women around the world in
countries at war and countries in peace to engage in
the future of their countries and in the promotion of
peace and security. Portugal remains fully committed
to that objective and engaged in enhancing action at the
national and international levels to fulfil those goals.
As was mentioned here today, we must go the extra
mile with UN-Women, the United Nations system as a
whole and with civil society. Let us do it!
Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
First of all, we would like to thank the Indian presidency
and the delegation of Guatemala for organizing today’s
meeting. We are grateful to all who have spoken for
their assessments and useful information.
Much has changed in the 12 years since the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). The major principles
enshrined in the resolution to enhance the role of women
in the prevention and settlement of conflicts and in
post-conflict reconstruction, as well as the protection
of women in conflict situations, have become a type
of road map for the implementation and practice of a
comprehensive approach regarding the issues of women
and peace and security.
Unfortunately, in spite of the multiple efforts
undertaken, the number of women who are victims
of various forms of violence in armed conflict is not
declining. That is why we believe that equal attention
should be paid to all categories of violence, including
instances of killing and wounding women and children
as a result of the indiscriminate or excessive use of
force. That problem is not only theoretical; it exists
currently.
The international community is expecting results
in the investigation of the cases of deaths of the civilian
population, including women and children, as a result
of the NATO operations in Libya. Specific information
with regard to the facts in this case has been published
by independent media on many occasions. The Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights has indicated, speaking also with regard to
the Council, that it is necessary to make sure that the
investigation is completed. As we know, during today’s
debate we will hear a representative of NATO speak. We
would like to hope that she will take this opportunity
as adviser to inform us about the status of the results
of the investigation. We are also seriously concerned
by statistics concerning the so-called collateral damage

12-62149

S/PV.6877

as a result of the use of new types of weapons, such as
drones.
Women are not only victims of armed conflicts;
they make a significant contribution to preventing and
settling them. The direct involvement of women in
conflict prevention and settlement is, in our view, an
important precondition for overcoming violence against
them. In that regard, we welcome the fact that this year
priority attention in the presidential statement was
given to issues of the role of women’s organizations in
civil society in the prevention and settlement of armed
conflict and in peacebuilding (see S/PRST/2012/23).
Although a critical role in protecting women at all stages
of armed conflict belongs to national Governments,
measures undertaken both by civil society and by
United Nations system bodies support and complement
the efforts of States.
Women particularly suffer during various crisis
situations, not only during armed conflicts that are a
threat to international peace and security. We welcome
the use of background information provided by the
Council on questions of violence against women by
the General Assembly, the Peacebuilding Commission,
the Human Rights Council and the Commission on the
Status of Women within their mandates. It is important,
however, to adhere to the existing division of labour in
the Organization and not duplicate efforts or intrude
upon one another’s area’s of authority. The problems
of family violence, women’s health, education and
many others are being successfully dealt with by
other United Nations bodies. The Council must, under
resolution 1325 (2000), consider women’s issues solely
as they relate to the theme of maintaining peace and
security and strictly with regard to those situations that
are included on its agenda.
We have attentively studied the report of the
Secretary-General prepared for today’s meeting
(S/2012/732). With regard to its contents, collected on
the basis of the first third of the assessment indicators
for implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), we
would like to underscore that the appropriateness and
relevance of individual indicators, as well as their scope
and application, still raise questions. The information
in the report given under the indicators is, for the most
part, dry statistics. There has been no serious analysis
of the information gathered. It has therefore not been
possible to understand the significance of the data, to
assess its value added or to draw specific conclusions
about the status of women from the information.

12-62149

We believe that work on the indicators, which is
now at the review stage, must be more transparent
and open, that is to say, with the participation of all
United Nations Member States. With regard to using
the so-called national action plans on implementing
resolution 1325 (2000) as a tool to assess a country’s
policy in improving the status of women, States in
situations of armed conflict should prepare such plans
on a voluntary basis. If other countries wish to draw
up similar national plans, they have the right, not the
obligation, to do so.
Russia is convinced that there exists a significant
and positive potential for women to participate in
various aspects of armed conflict settlement and postconflict recovery. The Council and relevant agencies
and mechanisms of the United Nations system must
pay more attention to ways to involve women in such
processes, as required under resolution 1325 (2000). We
also support the proposals on considering gender-based
issues when establishing peacekeeping contingents. We
also note the importance of including such issues in the
mandates of those missions. At the same time, we must
deal with such matters not with a standard model but by
taking into account the specific characteristics of each
situation.
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate our belief
that ensuring the rights of women and their protection
in armed conflict will be possible only through the joint
efforts of all interested parties, including civil society.
The guideline for us all on this issue continues to be
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for having convened this open
debate. I also thank Deputy Secretary-General
Eliasson; Ms. Michelle Bachelet, Executive Director
of UN-Women; Mr. Hervé Ladsous, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping; and Ms. Bineta Diop,
President of Femmes Africa Solidarité, for their
presentations.
The Security Council recognizes two facts. On
the one hand, women are the main civilian victims
of conflict. On the other, they are never or rarely
involved in the political negotiations to end crises. The
Council has drawn two main conclusions from that:
their protection, which must be strengthened, and their
necessary participation in peace and conflict resolution
processes.

15

S/PV.6877

That appeal was heard in part. Today, 12 years
since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the United
Nations increasingly takes the role of women into
account in its peace and security activities. Women are
ever more present, including as executive directors, in
mediation teams and in United Nations field missions.
Under the leadership of Ms. Bachelet, UN-Women
has improved the consistency and coordination of
efforts to protection and promote women. The Security
Council takes better account of the issue of women in
its resolutions. However, we need to do more in that
regard. France wants to see an increase in the number
of advisory posts for the protection of women, in
particular,
Those developments should not let it be forgotten
that women are still to a large extent excluded from
conflict prevention and resolution processes, which
is still too often the exclusive remit of men. In crisis
situations, in particular, women remain the main target
of intolerable violence. In post-crisis situations, their
suffering is often ignored.
That shortcoming is also often evident is peace
agreements. In 2011, nine peace agreements were
signed in the world but only two, in Yemen and Somalia,
included specific provisions on women. It is precisely
in transition situations that progress for women can be
achieved.
There must therefore be even more in-depth
consultation with women’s organization in civil society.
In that context, informal meetings of the Security
Council with women active in the field must continue
and be promoted and their number increased.
I also wish to commend the tireless efforts
of Ms. Bineta Diop, who, as the head of Femmes
Africa Solidarité, is working to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) in several African States,
including the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Rwanda and Côte d’Ivoire, and in Darfur. In the recent
tragic days, I would like to underscore the events in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, where, once
again, the civilian population, and women in particular,
are the victims of clashes.
Women in conflict situations continue to be regular
target of unacceptable violence. That happens when
they become involved. Recently, we have also seen
defenders of women’s rights targeted by all kinds of
extremists, who want to silence them. In Afghanistan,
women who play an active part in the reconstruction
16

of their country and participate in political life are
threatened by extremist groups. They also remain the
primary target for sexual violence, which is still used as
a weapon of war to terrorize civilian populations.
On many occasions, the Security Council has
made statements on the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo — which I have already
mentioned — condemning the savage campaigns of
rape and sexual violence by rebel groups in the Kivus.
Also in Mali, women are the first victims of the
violence unleashed against them by Islamic groups that
have taken control of the north of the country. There are
worrying reports by Islamist groups of the number of
unmarried women who have had children. Clearly, such
women will subsequently be the targets of violence. We
cannot remain inactive given that reality.
In that connection, I commend the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict. Thanks to her efforts, we
now have a list of groups systematically using sexual
violence. That list should help put an end to their
impunity. In view of such crimes, combating impunity
is indeed essential. In that regard, the International
Criminal Court should fully play its role. Furthermore,
France also welcomes the policy of zero tolerance
towards United Nations personnel implemented by the
Secretary-General, which must continue.
In 2010, France adopted a national action plan for
the implementation of the resolutions on women and
peace and security. In that context, we are cooperating at
the international level, in partnership with UN-Women.
We are thus funding programmes to combat violence in
six African countries and in the Arab world, including
Jordan, Mali and Niger. Those programmes are being
implemented by UN-Women in close coordination with
civil society organizations. Since 2011, we have also
worked with UN-Women to improve women’s access to
justice in Afghanistan.
Members can therefore rest assured of the
commitment and resolve of France to promote and to
defend women’s rights and to work tirelessly for the
implementation of the resolutions on women, peace and
security.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this open debate. You could not
have chosen a better topic to close the successful
presidency of your friendly country, India, of the

12-62149

S/PV.6877

Council this month. I would also like to thank Deputy
Secretary-General Mr. Eliasson for his clear and
concise presentation of the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2012/732), as well as Ms. Michelle Bachelet,
Executive Director of UN-Women; Mr. Hervé Ladsous,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations;
and Ms. Bineta Diop, President and Founder of Femmes
Africa Solidarité, for their respective contributions.
My delegation welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security
(S/2012/732) and the adoption in October of the
presidential statement on that issue (S/PRST/2012/23).
The statement sent a strong message of the firm and
ongoing commitment of the international community
to helping women to become independent and to
protecting their rights. Today’s debate will allow us to
take stock of the progress made in the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), in particular with respect to
strengthening women’s involvement in decision-making
processes and to mainstreaming gender into
peacekeeping operations and training programmes for
peacekeeping personnel.
The Council adopted resolution 1889 (2009) in the
context of the initiative to strengthen the existing legal
arsenal in promoting and protecting women’s rights and
participation in efforts to prevent and resolve conflict
and in post-conflict reconstruction. The resolution
allowed us to make significant progress towards the
independence of women in conflict situations through
the drafting of national action plans, with quantifiable
indicators, allowing for the establishment of an
effective mechanism to follow up the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). The Secretary-General’s report
also notes the important progress towards women’s
participation in peacekeeping operations and their
representation in decision-making processes.
The establishment of specific post-conflict
strategies is imperative and must go hand in hand with
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). In that
respect, particular attention must be focused on the
participation of African women in peace negotiations,
mediation efforts, electoral processes, constitutional
commissions and truth and reconciliation entities.
Because women are the most vulnerable and most
targeted members of a population in conflict situations,
they have an undeniable and precious contribution
to make and value to add to peace negotiations and
peacebuilding. Members of the Council will note that
experience in West Africa and Haiti has shown that
12-62149

when women are associated with peace processes, they
have been able to make a difference by bringing their
sensitivity, creativity and commitment to bear not only
on peace processes, but also on national reconcilation
and socioeconomic reintegration.
The establishment of genuine peace requires
sound and inclusive political, economic and social
structures. Local women’s organizations are engines
for promoting women’s independence and their
effective participation in political, economic and social
life. My delegation endorses the recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General’s report, in
particular those that encourage Member States to work
with women’s organizations effectively to implement
resolution 1325 (2000).
My delegation also welcomes the action undertaken
in the context of the on Joint Strategy on Gender and
Mediation launched by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) and UN-Women to enhance
the competence of mediators in promoting women’s
involvement in mediation and peacebuilding processes.
We further welcome the measures undertaken by the
DPKO to protect women in armed conflict and to
mainstream gender issues into peacekeeping. These
initiatives of the DPKO and the Department of Political
Affairs highlight the gender policy implemented by
the Secretary-General since he took office, which has
promoted undeniable progress to date. We commend
the Secretary-General’s determination to consolidate
and pursue that policy.
With respect to the protection aspect, the
Secretary-General’s report emphasizes that women
and girl refugees continue to fall victim to violations
of international humantarian law and refugee rights,
in particular with regard to access to humanitarian
assistance. Regional dialogues with women refugees,
regularly organized by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees show that
undocumented women and girls continue to suffer worst
from acts of gender-based discrimination, especially in
terms of access to health services, education and other
social services. According to the report, programmes
for emergency registration could have a positive effect
on making women and girls more independent. We
fully endorse that approach and recognize the need to
act to make it feasible.
In conclusion, the success of the international
community in implementing resolution 1325 (2000) will
depend on the political will to translate its provisions
17

S/PV.6877

into reality and to ensure their implementation. The
noble cause of women’s independence and effective
involvement in establishing and building peace is a longterm task. It is a vital and salutary mission, particularly
in countries in or emerging from conflict, especially
in Africa. It must be pursued and undertaken with
resolve and success. The role played by Ms. Bachelet at
the head of UN-Women is critical to that end, and we
support her efforts in that area.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank you, Sir, having convened this open debate. We
all know that the original idea was to hold it precisely
one month ago under the Guatemalan presidency of the
Council, but Hurricane Sandy decided otherwise and
everything had to be placed on hold. We are therefore
gratified that the initiative has been revived, which
will give greater meaning to presidential statement
S/PRST/2012/23, adopted on 31 October.
We thank Ms Bachelet for her briefing and
congratulate her on the high profile she has achieved
for UN-Women. We welcome the opportunity to
have an office of that new entity in our own country.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2012/732), which has served as the basis for this
debate, Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson and
Under Secretary-General Hervé Ladsous for their
briefings. I am especially grateful to Ms. Bineta Diop
for having provided a collective and vivid vision of the
civil society organizations related to today’s topic.

more than 30 years of domestic conflict have become
intertwined with our current concerns about promoting
women’s advancement in all sectors.
I should add that there are numerous fundamental
connections between both areas of concern, one
of which is the area of prevention. In that context,
resolution 1325 (2000) states that conflict-prevention is
the best way to ensure the protection of all civilians, in
particular women and girls, from the horrors of armed
conflict. But we also apply the prevention concept from
another vantage point. I am referring to policies, tools
and actions designed to enable women to break the
vicious cycle of poverty. A crucial part of those efforts
is the necessary achievement of women’s economic
empowerment.
Another fundamental connection is violence, which
is a core characteristic of armed conflict but is also
widely seen in societies supposedly living in peace.
I am thinking of domestic violence, or perhaps more
dramatically, the extreme violence that Guatemalans,
and especially Guatemalan women, have been exposed
to as a result of the alarming increase in organized
crime, from youth gangs to transnational cartels
involved in the illicit trafficking of goods and services.

On this occasion, we recall the pioneering
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security, adopted in October 2000. The resolution
explicitly addresses the condition of women and girls in
situations of armed conflict. Each year, the Council has
been building on the central premise of the resolution
that, without security for women, no lasting peace
can be achieved. The more specific topic of today’s
debate is the important role that women’s civil society
organizations can play, alongside States, in contributing
to the prevention and solution of armed conflicts and in
peacebuilding.

In that regard, if we address the root causes of
violence, we find that it frequently results from women’s
dependence on those who harm them or subject them
to violence, either in armed conflict or societies at
peace. That is why we believe, for example, that efforts
on the part of States or civil societies to improve the
situation of women by ensuring them greater economic
independence and increased opportunity must form
part of the tool kit of preventive action against violence
against women. That is also why we support improving
the indicators that measure progress and achievements
under resolution 1325 (2000). That is important,
because those results will enable an analysis of how
many and which causes of violence against women
have been eliminated, or at the least mitigated, through
preventive measures, as well as the lacunae to be
addressed through new policies.

As regards Guatemala, fortunately it has been more
than 15 years since we overcame our internal armed
conflict, which is the element of the agenda that falls
under the purview of the Security Council. However,
the dividing lines between peacemaking, peacebuilding
and economic and social transformation are not always
clear, with the result that, to date, our past concerns over
the situation of Guatemalan women and girls during the

Clearly, the United Nations has an important role
to play in that area, and we applaud the establishment
of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and
the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) as an
important and unique institutional advance. We should
strengthen its capacities for leadership and evaluation
of accountability with respect to gender equality
throughout the entire system.

18

12-62149

S/PV.6877

As to the mandate stemming from resolution 1325
(2000), we support women’s increased participation in
peacebuilding efforts and in assessing civil society’s
capacities in post-conflict situations with respect
to the topic of women, peace and security. In our
opinion, acknowledging women’s contribution to the
building of peace and stability is crucial. The fact of
their having disproportionately suffered the impacts
of conflict highlights precisely the importance of their
participation in the peace process.
Lastly, and referring now not only to the Security
Council but to the entire United Nations system, we
firmly support the greater participation of women in the
work of the Organization, just as we support it within
our own Government and society. I strongly urge the
United Nations system to expand women’s participation
at all hierarchical levels and to ensure that those efforts
are carried out in an equitable manner. In that context,
it is incumbent upon us to recall that all Member States
have something to contribute, particularly on the topic
of violence, of which we, unfortunately, have suffered
the consequences at first hand. However, we have also
learned certain lessons in that context.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): Let me at the outset thank
India for having organized today’s open debate, which
is important. I also thank Deputy Secretary-General
Eliasson, Ms. Bachelet, Mr. Ladsous and Ms. Bineta
Diop for their insightful briefings. Germany aligns
itself with the statement to be delivered on behalf of the
European Union (EU).
At the outset, let me stress that my country
unreservedly welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2012/732) and especially his analysis
using the set of indicators developed by the United
Nations. We also commend the United Nations Entity
for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women) for its work in leading the mainstreaming
efforts within the United Nations system. We encourage
UN-Women to continue to cooperate closely with other
United Nations entities.
While the need to involve women in peace processes
has been extensively addressed, progress is needed in
all spheres of society in order to strengthen the potential
of women as agents of change. So, we again need to
ask ourselves: What more can the Security Council, the
United Nations and Member States do to close the gap
between the normative framework and concrete action?

12-62149

Let me make five points here. First, today’s debate
and the presidential statement (S/PRST/2012/23) that
was adopted on 31 October focus explicitly, for the first
time, on the important role of women’s civil society
organizations. We very much welcome that focus, as
the inclusion of women and women’s organizations is
not a benevolent act, but rather a key requirement of
any sustainable peace.
Secondly, the protection of women in armed conflict
from all forms of violence, especially sexual violence,
is crucial. But we must also protect those who fight for
women’s rights. They deserve our unreserved backing.
Having met with several women’s organizations from
different parts of the world, I know that human rights
defenders often face severe risks in carrying out their
work.
Thirdly, women and women’s organizations
can also play a crucial role in the implementation
of disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
security sector reform mechanisms. They can also
occupy a crucial role in political and constitutional
reform and transitional justice efforts. To enable them
to play that role, women’s organizations need to receive
adequate support, including financial support.
Fourthly, Germany regularly supports women’s
organizations and human rights defenders financially
and logistically. To name but a few examples: we have
organized regional conferences in Tunisia and Argentina
in 2011, and we will be sponsoring a conference in
Panama on gender training, the prevention of sexual
violence and providing response tools and unhindered
access to justice. Germany has also committed itself to
the EU charter of the European Shelter Cities Initiative
to increase the protection of human rights defenders.
Furthermore, I am happy to announce that Germany is
working on a national action plan to further enhance
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
Lastly, the Security Council could do even more
itself to systematically integrate women and peace
and security issues into its daily work, including when
mandating or renewing United Nations missions.
Envoys and special representatives should address those
issues in their briefings to the Council. This should
also include considerations on how to sustain gains
made in the protection and advancement of women’s
rights during United Nations mission drawdowns and
transitions.

19

S/PV.6877

Mr. M’Beou (Togo) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to commend you, Mr. President, for
organizing this debate on the issue of women and peace
and security in the context of the role of women’s civil
society organizations in the prevention and settlement
of armed conflicts and peacebuilding. I would also like
to thank the Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Michelle
Bachelet, Ms. Bineta Diop and Mr. Hervé Ladsous for
their statements. I assure Ms. Diop of my country’s
support for her work at the head of her organization for
the effective protection of women’s rights, in particular
in Africa.
Twelve
years
after
the
adoption
of
resolution 1325 (2000), Togo welcomes the ongoing
reflections begun by the United Nations on the
implementation of the resolution. The importance of
this process resides in the fact that it is an opportunity
to take stock of the results achieved and difficulties
encountered, and to contemplate strategies to be
adopted in our future work. While tremendous efforts
have been made in the implementation of the resolution,
much remains to be done, in particular in areas such
as the implementation of peace agreements, seamless
transitions, the gradual drawndown of United Nations
missions, and the pursuit of a secure environment for
civil society organizations. All these elements must
be taken into consideration in order to strengthen
the process of preventing and resolving conflicts and
peacebuilding.
The report of the Secretary-General before us
(S/2012/732) indicates that women and girls continue
to suffer violations of their rights, in particular through
sexual and gender-based violence, forced displacement
and obstructions to humanitarian access, which are
serious violations of international human rights law
and international humanitarian and refugee law. While
the United Nations does its best to protect civilians, in
particular women and children, and calls on all parties
to the conflict to act accordingly, we must still note
that violence against women and children is growing,
as seen in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
and northern Mali.
In addition to these horrible, tragic and reprehensible
acts, we also note the use of heavy weapons in populated
areas, which leads to mass population movements,
in particular among women and children, thereby
exposing them to all types of violence and violations
of their rights. These actions must cease and their

20

perpetrators punished under the relevant international
legal instruments.
It is therefore important that national legislation
incorporate international criminal law, which provides
for such acts and punishes their perpetrators. The
Council must ensure that impunity is not the rule, but the
exception. My country welcomes the fact that measures
adopted by the United Nations to protect women and
girls include guidelines that have been drawn up by
the heads of military and police units in peacekeeping
operations. The sanctions laid out therein against
peacekeepers involved in cases of sexual violence meet
the expectations of the international community and
are designed to fully and completely protect vulnerable
women and girls.
The international community has deployed
immense efforts to promote such protection, but it
will be successful only if women are involved in the
crucial processes of conflict settlement. Unfortunately,
women’s organizations and civil society are very often
excluded from such processes. Yet the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) requires enhanced cooperation
among Member States, international and regional
security institutions, and civil society.
The gaps in the implementation of peace
agreements — which are undoubtedly complex — have
led the United Nations and international human rights
organizations to require the effective participation of
civil society, in particular women’s organizations.
These organizations have, of course, an important role
to play in the prevention and resolution of conflicts.
Their involvement in the settlement of conflicts
is an opportunity to influence peacekeeping and
peacebuilding policies. It is therefore appropriate for
women to participate actively in the different stages of
negotiations, as the peace process gains legitimacy and
credibility when women participate in it.
In 2011, women were represented in 12 — or 86 per
cent — of the 14 United Nations mediation support
teams. However, only four of fourteen delegations to
peace negotiations had a woman among their ranks. This
deplorable state of affairs underscores the urgent need
to impress upon the parties to conflicts that they should
give a significant role to women in peace negotiations
and in the implementation of peace agreements, as it
is women’s civil society organizations that ensure the
sustainability of peacebuilding on the ground.

12-62149

S/PV.6877

Women cannot play this positive role unless they
are given responsibilities within the support structures
for rebuilding the country. We are therefore welcome
the participation of women in the facilitation and
mediation processes for conflicts in countries such as
the Central African Republic, Cyprus and Malawi. In
this respect, we support the report of the SecretaryGeneral, which encourages Member States and regional
organizations that participate in peace processes to
appoint more women as mediators, co-mediators and
mediation advisors.
I note in that respect that my country since
2006 has included a gender mainstreaming strategy
in our development policies and programmes.
This strategy, in its preamble and in accordance
with resolution 1325 (2000), affirms the important
role that women play in the prevention and settlement
of conflicts and in peacebuilding, and emphasizes the
importance of their participation on an equal footing in
all efforts to maintain and promote peace and security.
In translating this strategy into reality, Togo
promoted the participation of women’s civil society
organizations in the signing of the comprehensive
political agreement of 2006, which allowed the country
to emerge from the socio-political crisis that began in
1990. They also played an active role in the work of the
truth, justice and reconciliation commission, the results
of which were accepted by almost all of the population.
The importance that the Government attaches to the
role of women in building the country is also evident
in the election of many women to Parliament and the
appointment of a number of others to Government
and other positions of responsibility. The aim of the
Government is to ensure that women’s participation
in our country’s political and administrative life is
increased to achieve in the long term percentages that
reflect their real commitment and interest in public
affairs.
To conclude, I wish to assure the Council of the
support of my Government in the full and complete
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We welcome
the fact that on 31 October the Council adopted a
presidential statement on this subject (S/PRST/2012/23),
under the Guatemalan presidency.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): Pakistan joins other
Council members in thanking India for convening
today’s important open debate on women and peace
and security. The presidential statement on the subject
(S/PRST/2012/23) is an expression of collective support
12-62149

by all Council members for this common cause and
of their strong commitment to address challenges
to women’s engagement at all levels. We would like
to place on record our appreciation for the excellent
work done by the United Kingdom and Guatemala in
developing the presidential statement.
Pakistan attaches highest importance to the
participation of women in all walks of life and has
taken concrete steps to that end. Our national vision
for women’s empowerment is guided by the words of
our country’s founding father, the Quaid-e-Azam,
Muhammad Ali Jinnah, who said:
“No nation could ever be worthy of its existence
that could not take its women along with the men
and no struggle could ever succeed without women
participating side by side with men. There are two
powers in the world; one is the sword and the other
is the pen. There is a great competition and rivalry
between the two. There is a third power stronger
than both, that of the women”.
In the recent past, Pakistan’s parliament has passed
a number of laws to eliminate discrimination against
women and to promote and protect their rights.
We are thankful to the Deputy Secretary-General
for his insights on the subject and for the efforts made
by the United Nations, under the Secretary-General’s
leadership, to mainstream a gender perspective both
within and outside the Organization. We also thank
Under-Secretary-General Hervé Ladsous for his useful
briefing on how the United Nations is carrying out the
women, peace and security agenda in peacekeeping
operations.
As one of the biggest troop contributors, Pakistan
supports efforts to mainstream a gender perspective in
peacekeeping operations. The appointment of gender
advisers in the field has served a useful purpose, and
the practice must be strengthened. Conscious of the
importance of gender sensitization of peacekeeping
troops, Pakistan has incorporated two United Nations
standard gender training modules. We are proud of our
women peacekeepers, who have served in a variety of
capacities such as police officers, doctors and nurses
in peacekeeping operations in Asia, Africa and the
Balkans. Shahzadi Gulfam, a Pakistani woman police
officer, received the 2011 International Female Police
Peacekeeper Award in recognition of her outstanding
performance in Timor-Leste. We are proud of her
meritorious services.

21

S/PV.6877

Pakistan is also grateful to Madam Bachelet for
her insightful presentation today. We commend the
valuable role UN-Women plays in promoting the wider
goal of gender equality in general and the women,
peace and security agenda in particular. Pakistan will
continue to play its part in strengthening UN-Women.
Human rights instruments, particularly the Geneva
Conventions, proscribe torture, violence, rape and other
forms of sexual violence and ill treatment of women
during conflicts. The Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court characterizes those acts in the context
of armed conflict as crimes against humanity. Despite
such progress in the normative framework, women’s
suffering in conflict situations continues. There is
growing awareness of their plight and there is increased
focus on their protection. Still, women and girls
continue to be the primary victims in conflict situations
and to suffer disproportionately. To start with, they are
vulnerable to violence and exploitation. What is worse,
they are purposefully targeted and are largely excluded
from the peace and reconstruction processes.
Resolution 1325 (2000) made an important
contribution to the normative framework for the
protection of women and girls in armed conflict.
It elevates women from hapless victims of conflict
situations to equal stakeholders in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts and in post-conflict
reconstruction.
Women are true agents of change. Their involvement
in different stages of conflict resolution and in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities produces
positive results that are needed for peaceful and
democratic societies. To enable the Security Council
and the United Nations system to do more to advance
the protection of women in conflict situations and to
enhance their participation in post-conflict processes,
we propose the following measures.
First, the United Nations must develop a
comprehensive strategy for conflict prevention and
resolution, with special emphasis on the protection of
women and girls in situations of armed conflict.
Second, the Security Council should continue
to strengthen the provisions in its resolutions on full
compliance with international humanitarian law and
on ending impunity and ensuring accountability for
the perpetrators of crimes against women, including
in transitional justice mechanisms. The morally
unacceptable scourge of gender-based violence persists

22

because a culture of impunity pervades situations of
armed conflict.
Third, the Council must continue to include gender
perspectives in its resolutions relating to peacekeeping
operations and should support the appointment of welltrained gender advisers and women protection advisers.
Fourth, the United Nations and its agencies should
develop ways to address the special needs of women
and girls affected by armed conflict, especially with
regard to health and psychological care.
Fifth, concerned States and the United Nations
system must work to ensure the fullest participation
of women, including all civil society actors, in peace
processes as well as in post-conflict peacebuilding
activities. Interaction with local women’s groups to
get first-hand knowledge of their concerns in conflict
situations is always useful.
Sixth, the United Nations system and concerned
States must cooperate to build the resources of gender
justice in post-conflict situations, incorporating
gender perspectives across the broad spectrum of
reconstruction efforts.
Seventh, the necessary technical assistance must be
provided, on request, to concerned States for reforming
and rebuilding judicial, legislative and electoral
sectors as well as for the economic, social and political
empowerment of women within a culturally sensitive
framework.
Eighth, the Council must demand from all parties
to armed conflicts full respect for and compliance
with international humanitarian law and other relevant
instruments on the protection of women.
Today’s debate underlines the important role of
women’s civil society organizations in the prevention
and resolution of armed conflict and in followup peacebuilding processes. Concerned States and
relevant United Nations entities should therefore make
use of the talent and experience of women leaders
from civil society to promote their active engagement
and participation in a variety of appropriate roles
to ensure the full and effective implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000).
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to express my thanks for the presentation
of the report of the Secretary-General on women and
peace and security (S/2012/732) and for the briefings
by Ms. Michelle Bachelet, the Executive Director of
12-62149

S/PV.6877

UN-Women, Under-Secretary-General Hervé Ladsous,
and Ms. Bineta Diop, who spoke on behalf of the
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security.

eradicating all forms of violence against women and
the special protection that should be provided to the
victims of this scourge are of fundamental importance.

This is a good opportunity to consider the work
being done by UN-Women, which as part of the General
Assembly’s strategy has integrated the international
community’s goals relating to gender equality and the
empowerment of women. It is also a good opportunity to
give special recognition to the enormous and dedicated
work being done by Madame Bachelet, her team and all
who collaborate with her to consolidate the agency as
an institution and to raise universal awareness of the
principles behind the mission of UN-Women.

In Colombia’s case, we should highlight the
adoption of policies intended to include women,
eliminating discrimination and promoting women’s
economic, political and social empowerment, and
their more active participation in development, both in
decision-making and in the benefits derived from it. We
emphasize successful initiatives such as the forming of
women’s community councils, regional workshops for
indigenous women, and local boards. Such instruments
seek to strengthen women’s links to public policies
and to maintain an ongoing dialogue with institutional
sectors and social organizations.

Colombia has benefited from United Nations
technical and financial assistance to ensure the
introduction of a gender approach into its national
policies and laws. We are firmly committed to
implementing resolution 1325 (2000), specifically
by gradually increasing women’s representation in
decision-making, supporting their peace initiatives,
strengthening their access to justice, empowering
them economically, creating jobs and identifying
their needs. Our purpose is to ensure the effective
enjoyment of women’s rights in terms of equality and
non-discrimination, through positive actions with a
calibrated approach and through laws, taking into
account the importance of giving special attention and
protection to those affected by such events as armed
conflict and displacement.

To that end, on 13 September, the Government
of Colombia launched its national public policy on
gender equality for women and the integrated plan
for a violence-free life, a national event at which,
moreover, Madame Bachelet was present, at the side
of our President and his Cabinet. Through such means
we intend to strengthen State action aimed at women’s
equality and empowerment and to combat the scourge
of violence against women in Colombia. My country
has also joined the UNiTE to End Violence against
Women campaign, coordinated by UN-Women.

With regard to the body of the Secretary-General’s
report, our attention is particularly drawn to the
prominent role assigned to the culture of preventing
situations negatively affecting women, with special
emphasis on conflict situations, through mechanisms
such as early warnings, cooperation, constructive
dialogue and effective support for them in the public
decision-making arena. Also important are the
considerations concerning the importance of including
a differentiated approach in mechanisms for protecting
women, in accordance with their special characteristics,
and the full reinstatement of their rights and economic
empowerment.

With reference to Ms. Diop’s mention of Colombia,
I should state that we have welcomed the creation
of a chapter of Women for Peace and its noble goal
of contributing to the process currently under way.
Regarding another reference to women’s participation
in the peace processes, I have just seen a photograph
on the BBC showing, among the negotiators, a woman
at the side of a man, both part of the guerrilla group’s
negotiating team. There are women in the Colombian
Government’s delegation as well. In fact, among the
signatures on the document launching the negotiation
agreements, there are those of women on both sides.
There are women in the support groups as well. I can
thus assure the Council that they will have a very
important voice throughout the peace process in my
country.

States should be aware of the challenge posed by
the integrated implementation of a broad legislative
framework and protection initiatives geared towards
women and girls, as well as the difficulties involved in
prosecuting and punishing the perpetrators of crimes
affecting women and girls, particularly sexual violence
and related crimes. Prevention strategies aimed at

Concerning the indicators adopted to evaluate
progress in implementing resolution 1325 (2000) and
subsequent resolutions on the same subject, these have
the potential to become an important tool for designing
mechanisms for preventing harmful acts against
women and girls and for strengthening the protection
of victims. We believe it is important to emphasize that

12-62149

23

S/PV.6877

such indicators should also be used in strict conformity
with the mandate as laid out by the various resolutions.
Maximum use should be made of the United Nations
reports and special political missions as references for
evaluating prevention. However, it is not helpful to take
those findings out of context when they have already
been discussed with States and do not contain new
information regarding the indicators.
In any case, what is highlighted are assessments
based on aspects particular to the internal functions of
the United Nations, such as the percentage of instances
of wrongful conduct by members of peacekeeping
missions, the proportion of women in high-level positions
in field missions, the percentage of field missions with
gender experts, the degree to which measures to protect
the human rights of women and girls are included in
directives issued by peacekeeping missions, and the
proportion of United Nations financing used to tackle
gender-equality issues.
To deal with that assessment, States will have to
include in their reports updated figures on the numbers
and percentages of women’s participation in their
Government bodies and parliaments, as well as the
percentage of temporary employment benefits received
by women in the context of early economic recovery
programmes.
It should be recognized that the primary
responsibility for protecting women in matters
related to peace and security belongs to States. Thus
multilateral bodies and reports submitted should
focus on coordinating procedures that facilitate
performances, help to reduce duplication of efforts and
build a coherent focus on the ground. The approaches
should not concentrate exclusively on mechanisms
designed to identify problems of human rights, since
they do not contribute to lasting solutions. What makes
a genuine contribution to reaching effective solutions
is mechanisms geared to cooperation, constructive
dialogue and effective support to countries.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson for
attending today’s meeting and for his statement. I have
listened carefully to the briefings by Ms. Bachelet,
Executive Director of UN-Women; Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations Ladsous; and
Ms. Diop, President of Femmes Africa Solidarité.
Women are a great force in the creation of human
civilization. The promotion of gender equality and the

24

protection of women’s rights have a direct bearing not
only on women’s vital concerns but also on world peace
and development. Although women tend to be victims
in conflict and post-conflict situations, they are also
important partners in the prevention and mediation of
conflicts and in post-conflict reconstruction.
In considering women and peace and security, it
is important that the Council not only focus on the
protection of women’s security and safeguarding their
rights in conflict and post-conflict situations, but also
recognize the unique role played by women in peace
processes and seek ways to bring them onboard in
advancing global peace and security.
By adopting resolution 1325 (2000), the Council
laid the foundations for the international community
to establish cooperation in the field of women and
peace and security. In recent years, thanks to joint
efforts by Member States, international organizations
such as the United Nations and regional organizations,
progress has been made in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). In furthering the implementation
of the Council’s resolutions on women and peace and
security, I wish to make the following four points.
First, the Council bears the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
The Council should focus on the prevention of conflicts,
peacekeeping and post-conflict reconstruction and
on creating an enabling political, security and legal
environment for the protection and promotion of
women’s rights. When deliberating on conflict and
post-conflict situations, the Council should include
as central elements the protection of women and their
rights. In honouring its commitment to women and
peace and security, the Council should abide strictly
by the mandate as conferred by the relevant Council
resolutions.
The primary focus of the Council is on conflict
and post-conflict situations. It is not an appropriate
platform for establishing universal standards with
regard to women’s issues and human rights. The Council
should strengthen its cooperation with the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the
Human Rights Council with a clear division of labour,
thereby strengthening the exchange of information and
communication.
Secondly, the national Governments of Member
States bear the primary responsibility for protecting
women’s rights in conflict and post-conflict situations.

12-62149

S/PV.6877

In our efforts to protect women’s rights and strengthen
their role in peace and security, we must respect the
ownership of national Governments. It is important
to respect the actions taken by national Governments
for the protection of women’s rights in view of each
country’s own specific conditions. In implementing
resolution 1325 (2000), the international community
may provide assistance to the countries concerned, on
the basis of full respect for the views of that country.
Thirdly, it is important to value and enhance the
status and role of women at the different stages of peace
processes. In preventing conflict, keeping and building
peace, it is important to take into consideration
the special needs and concerns of women and to
ensure that women enjoy full rights to participate in
decision-making and the peace process, thereby helping
to improve their disadvantaged status and effectively
support their rights.
China supports the call for the Secretary-General
to appoint more women to high-level positions such
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General or
Special Envoy entrusted with mediation good offices.
Fourthly, the international community should
enhance its attention and support to the issue of women
and development. Achieving women’s development
is the true foundation for achieving women’s genuine
empowerment. At present, international development
support and technical assistance fall short of the needs
of women worldwide. Achieving women’s development
therefore remains a daunting challenge in conflict and
post-conflict situations. The international community
should respond to calls from developing countries
effectively and step up assistance for women’s
development in developing countries on a basis that is
fully respectful of national ownership. The international
community, while lending capacity-building support
to the countries concerned, should also take note of
the useful support role that women’s groups and civil
society organizations can play in conflict prevention,
peacebuilding and national reconciliation.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening the present open
debate on women and peace and security. I thank the
Deputy Secretary-General, the Executive Director
of UN-Women, the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations and the President and Founder
of Femmes Afrique Solidarité for their statements and
presentations. We are also grateful to the SecretaryGeneral for his report on the topic (S/2012/732).
12-62149

Azerbaijan reiterates its strong condemnation
of all acts of violence committed against women and
girls in situations of armed conflict and calls upon
all parties to such conflicts to strictly abide by their
obligations under international humanitarian and
human rights law. All the necessary measures must
be taken to bring perpetrators of such acts to justice
and to put an end to impunity. Azerbaijan welcomes
the increasing attention of the Security Council and the
wider international community to the topic. Indeed,
the adoption by the Security Council of the landmark
resolution 1325 (2000) was an important milestone that
took up the issue of women and peace and security as
a separate thematic issue and brought international
visibility to the plight of women and girls in situations
of armed conflict. The subsequent Council resolutions,
presidential statements and other relevant documents
have contributed to developing a solid framework and
raising awareness of the impact that sexual violence has
on victims, families and societies.
As the Secretary-General has pointed out in his
report, 37 States have adopted national action plans
to implement that resolution. Several countries have
also adopted temporary special measures to increase
the number of women in decision-making bodies.
The protection of civilians has been included in the
mandates of 8 of 16 peacekeeping missions.
The establishment of the post of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict has added a new dimension to the
global efforts to fight that scourge. I would like to take
the opportunity to wish Ms. Zainab Bangura, newly
appointed Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, every success in carrying out her important
mandate.
Despite some achievements since the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), women’s participation in
conflict prevention and resolution remains too low. We
support the appointment of more women as mediators,
special representatives, special envoys and heads
of missions. We take positive note of the issuance
of Guidance for Effective Mediation on addressing
conflict-related sexual violence in ceasefire and peace
agreements, which provides mediators with normative
standards and strategies. We look forward to the
practical implementation of the Guidance.
There is a clear need to increase the number of
female military and police personnel in United Nations
missions, and we appreciate the efforts taken by troop25

S/PV.6877

and police-contributing countries to that end. At the
same time, as the report of the Secretary-General
underlines, increased numbers alone are not enough,
and gender expertise is also needed. We stress the
importance of regular training for gender advisers and
of the promotion the role of women protection advisers
in peacekeeping missions.
It is obvious that States bear the primary
responsibility for enhancing women’s participation in
conflict-prevention and resolution and in peacebuilding,
and all United Nations mechanisms should work
closely with respective Governments to support and
complement their efforts. We share the SecretaryGeneral’s view that international assistance for relief
and recovery work in essential in supporting countries
in ending violence and building peace.
We believe that women’s civil society organizations,
in close cooperation with the relevant Governments,
can advance the women and peace and security agenda
by bringing forward their concerns, priorities and
rights in conflict prevention and resolution, and in the
peacebuilding process. That will also allow women
not only to benefit from the gains achieved in such
processes, but also to be active contributors to peace,
security and development.
More resolute and targeted measures are required
to end impunity for the most serious crimes of concern
to the international community, including those
committed against women in situations of armed
conflict. Among the pressing issues requiring urgent
action and attention is that of women taken hostage and
reported missing in connection with armed conflict.
We are continuing our efforts to address that disturbing
phenomenon, including through the relevant biannual
resolution of the General Assembly and the Commission
on the Status of Women, of which Azerbaijan is a main
sponsor.
The heightened vulnerability of civilians in
wartime, in particular forcibly displaced persons,
refugees, women and children requires urgency,
dedication and strong commitment in all protection
efforts at the regional and global levels that must be
free of selectivity and politically motivated approaches
and purposes.
Azerbaijan notes the role that the relevant
humanitarian mandates must play in that regard
and thus ensure that all situations of armed conflict,

26

including of a protracted nature, receive due attention
by the international community.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity as the representative of India.
At the outset, I would like to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General for his remarks at this important
open debate under the agenda item on women and peace
and security. The fact that more than 50 countries have
expressed their interest in speaking in today’s debate
reflects the importance and resonance of this issue.
I would also like to thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral and Executive Director of UN-Women,
Ms. Michelle Bachelet, and the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, for their detailed briefings. I also thank
Ms. Bineta Diop, President of Femmes Africa Solidarité,
for sharing their insights, and other Council members
for their contributions to this debate.
Resolution 1325 (2000) highlights the impact of
armed conflict on women and the need for effective
institutional arrangements to guarantee their protection
and full participation in peace processes. India has
consistently held that the greater participation of women
in the areas of conflict resolution, peace negotiations,
peacekeeping and post-conflict reconstruction is a sine
qua non for lasting peace and security.
My full statement is being circulated, and I shall
therefore, in the interest of the efficient and effective
use of time, merely make a few remarks by way of
conclusion.
The promotion and protection of the human rights
of women and girls in armed conflict continues to pose
a pressing challenge. There should be zero tolerance
for gender-based violence. All cases of gender-based
violence must be promptly investigated and the
perpetrators prosecuted.
We agree with those who call for the increased
deployment of female military and police personnel
in United Nations peacekeeping operations and for
appropriate training to enable them to effectively
discharge their responsibilities.
India is the largest troop-contributing country in
United Nations history. India was the first country to
deploy a full female peacekeeping unit of 100 personnel
in Liberia, in 2007. We have offered to contribute more
such units. We are very proud of the exemplary record
of our peacekeepers, both men and women, in the
12-62149

S/PV.6877

protection of women, children and the weak in conflict
situations.
In conclusion, let me reaffirm India’s commitment
to positively contribute to United Nations efforts in
the area of women and peace and security. We also see
civil society and local communities as valued partners
in that endeavour.
I appeal to speakers to limit their statements to
four minutes in order to enable the Council to carry
out its work expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy
statements, like the delegation of India, are requested to
circulate the text in writing and to deliver a condensed
version when speaking in the Chamber.
I wish also to inform all concerned that we will be
carrying on this open debate right through the lunch
hour, because it is our intention to finish the debate by
6 p.m., as we have a very large number of speakers.
I now give the floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Khalek (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at
the outset to express our appreciation for the convening
of this annual open debate to review the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security. Our appreciation is also extended to all
previous speakers.
Egypt has read with interest the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2012/732) on women and peace
and security. Egypt would like to express its appreciation
for the efforts made in the preparation of the report
and for the progress that has been achieved over the
past year, in particular with regard to the involvement
of women in mediation efforts; in peace accords that
include special provisions to improve security for and
the situation of women and girls; and in the continuing
efforts for the follow-up, monitoring and evaluation of
the activities of United Nations missions. My delegation
hopes that future reports will reflect an increase in
the number of women who are in leadership positions
and involved in the decision-making processes of the
United Nations, in particular those related to peace and
security.
Women are key and active partners in
decision-making, conflict resolution, the development
of peace strategies and the promotion of the culture
of peace. The empowerment of women is therefore
an instrumental factor and a cornerstone in the
implementation of Security Council resolutions,
particularly resolution 1325 (2000), which remains

12-62149

pivotal, as it affirms the responsibility of the
international community to ensure women’s rights in
post-conflict situations and in peace processes.
Egypt reiterates its full commitment to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), in line with
its international obligations as well as its conviction
as to the central and indispensable role that could be
played by women at all stages of conflict, with the aim
of providing support and raising public awareness of
the need to achieve peace.
In that context, Egypt also stresses the need for
further efforts to include women in decision-making
processes at all stages of peace negotiations and
mediation, and the need to include the implementation
of all relevant resolutions of the Security Council.
Egypt believes that providing women with equal
opportunities in the context of decision-making
processes reflects not only our commitment to achieve
gender equality and the empowerment of women but
also a clear recognition by the international community
of the essential role that women play in their societies.
Egypt deeply appreciates the role of the United
Nations system in the area of peace and security and the
increased political participation of women in a number
of Arab States, as stated in the report, through its
joint strategy with the Department of Political Affairs
aimed at cultivating women’s expertise in mediation
and enhancing their role at all stages of mediation and
negotiation, and their contribution to United Nations
field operations.
Egypt welcomes the appointment of Ms. Zainab
Bangura, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and reaffirms
its commitment to fully cooperate with her. Egypt hopes
that her reports to the Security Council will mark the
distinction between violence in conflict situations and
violence in non-conflict situations, with full neutrality,
professionalism and objectivity.
Wars and armed conflicts have severe effects on all
communities, including on men, women and children,
but the Israeli occupation of Arab occupied territories
has had severely negative impacts, especially on
the status of Arab women psychologically, socially,
economically, legally and politically. Arab women
under foreign occupation bear a heavy burden because
of the practices of the Israeli occupation, such as severe
violations of human rights, the blockade that had led

27

S/PV.6877

to a deteriorating economic situation, restrictions on
freedom of movement, and displacement and poverty.
Egypt stresses the responsibility of the United
Nations system and of all international organizations
concerned with women’s issues towards women under
foreign occupation, and the need to pay greater attention
to their suffering and tragedy, in order to ensure them
enjoyment of their rights, in compliance with the
relevant provisions of international law, international
humanitarian law and human rights law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): At the outset, let
me join others in commending you, Mr. President, for
having organized this open debate, which highlights
in particular the crucial role of women’s civil society
organizations in contributing to the prevention and
resolution of armed conflict and peacebuilding.
We welcome the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2012/732), which reveals the lagging
participation of women in mediation efforts and
preventive diplomacy.
The slow progress made in ensuring the adequate
participation of women in peace talks and the inclusion
of women’s and girls’ rights in peace agreements
remains worrisome. Of the nine peace agreements
signed in 2012, only two contain provisions in that
regard — the same low percentage as in 2010. Peace
accords that fail to ensure the engagement of women in
post-conflict governance often neglect their access to
economic opportunities, justice and reparations.
When sexual violence is not addressed in the early
stages of mediation, such as in ceasefire agreements,
it usually remains ignored throughout the whole peace
process. We therefore call on the Security Council and
all relevant actors to increase efforts to promote women’s
participation in peace negotiations and mediation and
to meet the specific concerns of women during postconflict reconstruction. The Security Council should
also, hand in hand with the General Assembly, address
the lack of women as lead peace mediators, including by
encouraging the Secretary-General to appoint women
to such positions and to ensure that adequate gender
expertise is provided in peace processes.
Women’s civil society organizations are an
important asset in this regard. We must ensure that their
unique grass-roots perspective is taken into account

28

as we rethink how gender expertise is structured and
deployed in the United Nations system. My delegation
therefore welcomes the adoption of the presidential
statement, which highlights the important role of
women’s civil society organizations in this area.
My delegation has long advocated for the consistent
mainstreaming of the Council’s thematic agenda into
its country-specific work. A study recently published
by the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security reveals the inconsistency with which the
Council addresses women, peace and security concerns
in its decisions on country situations. We believe
that Council members should make greater efforts to
ensure that their country-specific experts receive the
information necessary to address those concerns in
relevant mission mandates.
To support such efforts, my delegation has undertaken
various initiatives. In partnership with Switzerland, we
supported the publication of a handbook on the women
and peace and security agenda by PeaceWomen. The
handbook has just been released in its second edition
and is available at the entrance to this Chamber. And
I am particularly pleased to inform the Council that
my delegation will launch, in close partnership with
the Liechtenstein Institute on Self-Determination at
Princeton University and with PeaceWomen, a series
of panel discussions dealing with different aspects of
the women and peace and security agenda. The first
such event at United Nations Headquarters will take
place on 12 December in Conference Room 1 at 3 p.m.
The Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, will speak there about the work of
the Court to prevent and prosecute sexual and genderbased crimes.
The President: I give the floor to the observer of
the European Union.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: I am speaking on behalf of
the European Union (EU) and its member States. The
acceding country Croatia; the candidate countries the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro
and Serbia; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania
and Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine and
Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
We thank the Deputy Secretary-General; the
Under-Secretary-General and Executive Director
of UN-Women, Ms. Michelle Bachelet; the UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,

12-62149

S/PV.6877

Mr. Hervé Ladsous; and the President of Femmes Africa
Solidarité, Ms. Bineta Diop, for their statements.

the Secretary-General that the gains made in access to
information have yet to produce consistent early action.

We find the focus of today’s debate pertinent as we
move forward in the practical implementation of our
commitments in the field of women, peace and security.
Conflict prevention, conflict resolution and building
sustainable peace require cooperation between all
stakeholders at all levels, and women’s organizations
play a particularly important role in that regard. We
therefore welcome the focus on the contributions of
women’s civil society organizations to peace and
security in the presidential statement adopted by the
Council on 31 October (S/PRST/2012/23).

We thank the Secretary-General for his report on
strengthening the role of mediation in the peaceful
settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and resolution
(A/66/811) and its annex I, entitled “Guidance for
Effective Mediation”, which highlight the importance
of women’s participation in peace processes. While
women were present in 86 per cent of the United
Nations mediation support teams involved in 14 peace
negotiations in 2011, only four of the negotiating party
delegations included a woman delegate. Only two out
of nine peace agreements signed contained women and
peace and security provisions.

The number of national and regional action plans
adopted for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) has continued to increase. This provides us
with an opportunity to compare different experiences
to guide the formulation of new plans and review the
existing plans. Moreover, with 26 out of 37 national
action plans now equipped with indicators, we are better
placed to evaluate their actual implementation and
results. The European Union adopted a comprehensive
approach for the implementation of resolutions 1325
(2000) and 1820 (2008) in 2008. It has also established
indicators to evaluate and assess gaps in its action
plans. In March 2012, the European Union reported on
its implementation of those resolutions in the context of
our Common Security and Defence Policy. More than
half of all European Union member States have by now
adopted national action plans.
We value the increased reporting and briefings
to the Council on the situation of women and girls
in armed conflict. We take note of the SecretaryGeneral’s conclusion in his report (S/2012/732) that the
information flow to the Council and its response remain
uneven, and encourage further efforts in that regard.
We welcome the insights provided by the updated
information collected against the set of indicators on
women and peace and security, and look forward to the
continued provision and analysis of that data.
We need to continue to take real steps to move from
a culture of reaction to a culture of prevention. Eight
out of 16 peacekeeping missions include the protection
of civilians in their mandate. Early warning and
response tools have been established, and an increasing
number of actors, including civil society, are engaged
in assessing risks and the escalation of violence in
armed conflict, including through new technologies for
incident and crisis mapping. However, we agree with
12-62149

Yet, as recent experience has shown, periods of
transition offer a unique opportunity to break the cycle
of women’s marginalization and make significant gains
in women’s participation. We need to address factors
discouraging women’s candidacy and equal electoral
participation, and security for women in elections.
Provisions on women, peace and security should be
included in peace negotiations as early as possible. We
warmly welcome the concrete targets the SecretaryGeneral has set for women and mediation, especially
that of appointing a female United Nations chief
mediator.
Women’s perspectives and voices are essential to
tackling the security, social and economic challenges
facing communities emerging from conflict. The
engagement of women’s leaders and organizations needs
to be systematically supported in peace processes to
ensure their involvement from the early stages. Lack of
security, limiting mobility and access, has an immense
and negative impact on women’s participation in
decision-making in conflict and post-conflict settings.
Moreover, women who engage actively to promote
women’s rights and perspectives often become targets
for violence. We urge the Council to continue to work
to ensure the protection of human rights defenders.
The EU Concept on Strengthening EU Mediation and
Dialogue Capacities aims to promote the representation
of women and the availability of adequate resources
for dedicated mediation gender expertise from an early
stage in mediation processes. Today, almost all of our
15 ongoing civilian missions and military operations
have a human rights and/or gender adviser on the
ground. We are stepping up predeployment training
efforts on gender and Security Council resolutions on
women, peace and security.
29

S/PV.6877

In July 2011, the EU set out an initial programme
in response to a Libyan request for capacity-building
training for both civil society and new public service
bodies. As part of those projects, a course for women
was delivered in Misrata in June to support women
in leadership positions and emerging women leaders
and managers. The partnership established with the
EU, UN-Women and the United Nations Development
Programme on enhancing women’s participation in
peacebuilding and post-conflict planning aims to
promote close cooperation among all stakeholders.
The commitment to break down barriers to
women’s political and economic empowerment was
also expressed at the high-level event on the margins
of this year’s General Assembly ministerial week on
the Equal Futures Partnership, co-founded by the
United States, Australia, Benin, Bangladesh, Denmark,
Finland, Indonesia, Jordan, the Netherlands, Peru,
Senegal, Tunisia and the European Union.
In conclusion, we are deeply concerned about
the references in the Secretary-General’s report to
the continued use of sexual violence and threats of
sexual violence as tactics of conflict over the past year,
including in Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Libya, Syria and northern Mali. We
welcome and further encourage drawing on the support
of gender experts in United Nations commissions of
inquiry.
We commend the work of the former Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Margot Wallström, and the
Team of Experts on the Rule of Law. We welcome
the nomination of the new Special Representative on
sexual violence in conflict, Ms. Zainab Bangura, who
brings extensive personal experience and a strong
commitment to the post.
Finally, our actions need to measure up to our
words. The European Union continues to be active
with regard to women and peace and security in
more than 70 countries. It supports the development
and implementation of national action plans,
non-governmental organizations and training for
governmental agencies. Let me affirm our commitment
to continue that work in cooperation with all partners,
including women’s organizations, whose contributions
remain key to the legitimacy and sustainability of our
efforts.

30

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): Allow me to begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for organizing this
open debate of the Security Council. I also thank the
Deputy Secretary-General, the Executive Director
of UN-Women, the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations and Ms. Bineta Diop,
President and Founder of Femmes Africa Solidarité.
Italy aligns itself with the statement just delivered
by the observer of the European Union, and wishes to
make some additional remarks in its national capacity.
We welcome the debate’s focus on the contribution
of women’s organizations to preventing and settling
armed conflicts and to fostering peacebuilding.
Throughout the world, women’s rights advocates are
fighting, and at times risking their lives, to ensure that
women and girls are not excluded from decision-making
about the political future of their country. They are
fighting to ensure that their voices are heard when
peace agreements are brokered and that they receive
justice when the dignity of women is violated. We are
here not only to pay tribute to their work and courage,
but also to pledge concrete action to work with them
towards together realizing the women and peace and
security agenda.
Italy recalls the Secretary-General’s appeal to
involve women’s organizations from the early stages
of conflict resolution and peacebuilding efforts. That
should become standard practice. Women leaders also
have an important role to play in transitions, including
in the drawdown of United Nations and international
missions, when the previous gains in gender equality
can be at risk. As a country engaged in peace missions
in the world, Italy is committed to ensuring that respect
for women’s rights is strengthened during such critical
phases.
We cannot promote the participation of women and
girls unless we ensure their full protection. The Security
Council must be vigilant in that regard. The targeting
of women human rights defenders is a matter of grave
concern. The Secretary-General’s report (S/2012/732)
describes the use of sexual violence as a conflict tactic
across a wide range of scenarios. Greater efforts are
needed to increase the prosecution of such crimes at both
the national and the international levels and to address
the needs of survivors. In that regard, we welcome the
appointment of the new Special Representative of the

12-62149

S/PV.6877

Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Zainab Bangura, and we stand ready to support her
fully in that endeavour.
Italy welcomes the presidential statement adopted
by the Security Council on 31 October (S/PRST/2012/23)
and the reaffirmation of its commitment to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) and the follow-up resolutions.
We strongly urge the Council to live up to that
commitment, in particular by ensuring that all decisions
on country-specific and thematic issues, as well as
the authorization or renewal of mission mandates, are
reviewed in terms of their impact on women and girls.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s commitment to
increasing women’s participation and representation in
conflict resolution and prevention efforts. Women are
formidable negotiators, mediators and peacebuilders.
They are a resource that we cannot afford to leave
untapped.
Italy is a long-standing supporter of the women
and peace and security agenda. In December 2010,
we adopted a three-year action plan to implement
resolution 1325 (2000). Next year, we will review
the plan in order to assess its progress. Action plans
and strategies are indeed a critical tool to advance
implementation and to enhance accountability at both
the national and the regional levels. We also welcome
the increasing work done by regional organizations,
such as NATO, to mainstream women and peace and
security in their action.
Support to Governments and civil society through
development cooperation programmes has been another
key component of Italy’s efforts to advance the agenda,
particularly in Afghanistan, Liberia and Sierra Leone.
I wish to conclude by echoing the SecretaryGeneral. Effective conflict prevention is inevitably
embedded in long-term investments in women’s and
girls’ empowerment and in support for women’s efforts
to build peace. If we are serious about peace, we must
also be serious about the rights of women and girls.
The better we understand that equation, the more
successful we will be in our efforts to ensure peace and
development throughout the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Mr. Kolga (Estonia): First of all, I would like
to thank the Deputy Secretary-General, Executive
Director of UN-Women Michelle Bachelet, UnderSecretary-General Ladsous and Ms. Bineta Diop, the
12-62149

representative of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security, for their presentations.
Estonia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union.
Women have always played a unique role in
preventing and in solving conflicts. However, it was
only 12 years ago that a resolution adopted at the
international level was dedicated solely to that issue.
Today, 12 years after the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), further implementing the principles enshrined
in the resolution remains a challenge in many parts of
the world.
We welcome the focus of today’s debate on the role
of women’s civil society organizations in contributing
to the prevention and resolution of armed conflict
and peacebuilding. As expressed in many statements
made here today, Estonia, too, is of the firm opinion
that the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
requires cooperation among all stakeholders: Member
States, regional and international organizations
and civil society. The role of non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) cannot be overestimated. What
could international organizations or States accomplish
if there were no support for such work on the ground?
Not much, I assume. Nevertheless, in reality, the role of
civil society organizations remains too often, if not for
the most part, unrecognized.
We find it particularly pertinent to stress the
value of engaging women’s organizations and female
community leaders in all aspects of conflicts, from
prevention to post-conflict engagement. They are a
crucial factor in securing the credibility and legitimacy
of international efforts. We therefore deplore the
fact that women human rights defenders so often
become targets in conflicts. Ensuring their safety and
opportunity to be heard is of the utmost importance.
Promoting the rights of women is one of the
priorities of Estonia’s foreign policy. In all aspects of
that work, special attention is paid to the participation
of women’s NGOs in policymaking and peace
processes. Estonia contributes to international military
and civilian missions in countries where conflict
resolution and peacebuilding are directly linked to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and where
the inclusion of a gender dimension in the planning and
implementation of missions will enhance the efficiency
of international efforts. Estonia intends to take on even
greater responsibilities, and my country is proud to have

31

S/PV.6877

been elected a member of the Human Rights Council
for the next term, 2013-2015. I can guarantee that one
of our top priorities as a member of that Council will
be the promotion of women’s rights and participation.
There is a growing understanding that women and
children are impacted uniquely and disproportionately
by the effects of conflicts and their aftermath. Estonia
has focused its development cooperation as well as its
humanitarian assistance and human rights activities
on supporting those vulnerable groups. We therefore
regularly contribute to international programmes
and funds, including UN-Women, the United Nations
Population Fund, UNICEF, the United Nations Girls’
Education Initiative and the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs. In fact, Estonia is proud to
announce that it is significantly increasing all of its
voluntary contributions to United Nations agencies in
2013.
We welcome the fact that, at the national level, the
number of countries that have given priority to women
and peace and security through national action plans
has continued to grow, and that 37 Member States
have already adopted national action plans. Estonia
adopted its national action plan for the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) in 2010 and has since shared
its process of preparing an action plan with other
countries. One of the most important conclusions of our
2011 implementation report is that NGOs play a crucial
role in furthering the agenda of resolution 1325 (2000).
The cooperation between the public sector and NGOs is
crucial in that regard.
Estonia welcomes the important steps taken in that
area within the framework of the United Nations in the
past two years. However, the fact that, according to
the Secretary-General’s report entitled “Strengthening
the role of mediation in the peaceful settlement of
disputes, conflict prevention and resolution” (A/66/81),
only four of the United Nations negotiating party
delegations out of the 14 peace processes under way
in 2011 included a woman delegate, which shows that
there is still a lot of room for improvement. We would
therefore encourage taking steps to ensure the inclusion
of women in the ongoing peace processes. In a similar
vein, it is regrettable that, in 2011, out of the nine peace
agreements signed only two contained women and
peace and security provisions.
We fully agree with the Secretary-General that
the gender dimensions of mediation should be clearly
and consistently articulated. Indeed, it is important
32

to raise gender-specific issues from the onset of the
conflict analysis phase and during the earliest moments
of the peace negotiations. That can help ensure that
provisions dealing with gender equality are included in
peace accords.
We are deeply concerned that, according to the
Secretary-General’s most recent report (S/2012/732),
sexual violence and the threat of sexual violence
continue to be employed as weapons of war in a range of
conflicts. In some cases, even an increase of incidents
was reported in 2011. Sexual and gender-based violence
are gross human rights violations that are present in
every armed conflict. It cannot be overemphasized how
important it is to educate and engage men and boys to
be active participants in preventing sexual violence.
Estonia remains concerned about the lack of
accountability for those who have committed gross
violations of human rights. In that context, we would
like to stress the role of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), a significant actor in the fight against
impunity for the most serious crimes of international
concern committed against women and girls. We
welcome the principles set out in the ICC’s first-ever
decision on reparations, in particular the confirmation
that the needs of vulnerable victims — including
women, children and victims of sexual and genderbased violence — must be addressed as a priority.
Reparations can be used as a vehicle to empower
women and girls and to address gender inequality, one
of the root causes of violence against women.
As a member of the UN-Women Executive
Board — which plays a significant role in contributing
to the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) — and
of the Commission on the Status of Women, we support
the objective of empowering women in society. We
fully agree with the Secretary-General that translating
norms into practice must, in the end, be measured
against real change in the lives of women, girls, boys
and men across the continuum from conflict to peace.
Finally, we have noted that, according to the
data published in the Secretary-General’s report,
the information flow to the Security Council and the
Council’s response to women and peace and security
concerns continue to be uneven, and we would like to
encourage the Council to pay greater attention to the
matter. In that regard, today’s debate is a very good
example of affording the question of women and peace
and security the consideration it deserves.

12-62149

S/PV.6877

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.

women participate in more than 20 such workshops.
Just last month, the Center held its most recent seminar.

Mr. Waxman (Israel): At the outset, I would like
to express my appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
convening this open debate on women and peace and
security — a subject of great importance for all of us in
the international community.

We are honoured to serve as a member of the
Commission on the Status of Women — the principal
global policymaking body dedicated to gender equality
and the advancement of women. We are especially
proud to serve as Chair of the Commission’s Working
Group on Communications on the Status of Women.

Israel believes that women must play an equal role
in all aspects of the State and civil society. The Jewish
people and the Jewish State have always understood
that the progress of women is critical for the progress
of all. The principle of gender equality has been a
fundamental principle of the State of Israel since its
inception. The World Zionist Organization, founded
by Theodore Herzl as an umbrella organization for the
modern Zionist movement, as early as in 1898 granted
equal voting rights to women.
Gender equality is enshrined in our 1948 Declaration
of Independence and in the 1951 Equal Rights for
Women Law. Israel was the third country in the world
to elect a female Prime Minister, Golda Meir, and
women in Israel today hold senior leadership positions
in Government, business, law and academia. Women
take an active, vibrant and visible role throughout
Israeli civil society. Israeli women from across the
political, cultural and religious spectrum are involved
in a broad variety of issues, including advocating for
conflict resolution and peace.
Israel continues to strongly support the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and its
subsequent resolutions. The Israeli Knesset, our
Parliament, recognizes the importance of gender
equality in peacemaking and conflict resolution. It
recently enacted legislation requiring that Israeli
women be included on all Government investigative
committees and all Israeli peace negotiating teams.
Israel is proud of the progress it has made in ensuring
women’s social equality and is deeply committed to
empowering women worldwide.
In 2003, the Golda Meir Mount Carmel Training
Center hosted an international conference for women
leaders entitled “Women’s Role in Conflict Resolution
and Peacebuilding”. As a result of the conference, the
Center initiated a series of seminars entitled “Women
Building a New Reality”. Those seminars promote
dialogue between Israeli and Palestinian women. The
past decade has seen over 1,000 Israeli and Palestinian

12-62149

Israel welcomes the United Nations call to move
from a culture of reaction to one of prevention. The
Kampala Declaration of December 2011 represents a
unique and historic opportunity to take meaningful
action to prevent sexual and gender-based violence. We
hope that the Declaration will end the impunity of the
perpetrators of such violence and ensure that its victims
receive the necessary and appropriate support.
It is important that we do more to ensure women’s
participation in decision-making on mission drawdowns
and transitions. The United Nations must take the lead
in the involvement of women and set an example for
the international community. Israel supports the work
of UN-Women in that regard. We encourage the United
Nations to increase the number of women in United
Nations leadership positions, including as special
representatives and deputy special representatives of
the Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General’s annual report (S/2012/732)
on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
noted progress in investigating accusations of sexual
misconduct committed by United Nations personnel
in peacekeeping operations. That progress is
encouraging. Let me emphasize that the United Nations
should investigate all accusations swiftly, fully and
transparently. In addition, all United Nations personnel
must be properly trained in the appropriate conduct.
The United Nations policy of zero tolerance must be
strictly enforced. The reputation of all United Nations
peacekeepers is at stake.
We echo the call of the Secretary-General to
exercise special vigilance to protect women human
rights defenders. Last month brought another reminder
about what is at stake, when the Taliban attacked
15-year-old Malala Yousafzai, because she dared to
promote education for girls.
We must recognize the clear link between promoting
peace and promoting equal rights for women. In too
many parts of the world, especially in the Middle East,
women have been subjugated and denied even the most
33

S/PV.6877

basic of rights, including the right to vote, the right to
drive and even the right to control their own bodies.
That mistreatment of women cannot be ignored. It has
created and will continue to create major barriers to
understanding and conflict resolution. It is high time
that the United Nations seriously address the dire
situation of women in the Arab world. We know from
our own history that when women lead, society gains.
And Israel will continue to stand with the international
community to work for the empowerment of women in
all corners of the world.
The President: I now call on the representative of
Thailand.
Mr. Sinhaseni (Thailand): Let me first commend
India, as the President of the Security Council for the
month of November, for convening this important open
date on women and peace and security. We also thank
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2012/732) and Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson
and Under-Secretaries-General Bachelet and Ladsous
for their statements.
Thailand is a country where women have long
played a role in peace and security. Today, Thai women
can be found in executive and leadership positions in
every area of activity, including business, education,
charity, non-governmental organizations, civil society,
and of course, politics. Thailand has also been active in
promoting the role of women in society.
In implementing resolution 1325 (2000), Thailand
established a subcommittee on women and the promotion
of peace and security. A wide range of activities have
been carried out, from raising awareness of women’s
rights to the exchange of views on legal issues aimed
at ensuring equal access by women to justice and
sound legal advice. In that connection, we are grateful
to UN-Women for co-organizing a workshop on the
subject of women and peace and security in Bangkok
on 15 October. It was a valuable opportunity for
representatives of UN-Women and Thai participants to
engage in an extensive exchange of views, experiences
and best practices.
Thailand shares the view of the Secretary-General
that we should move from a culture of reaction to a
culture of prevention. To that end, we have established
the Thai Women’s Empowerment Fund to address the
lack of economic opportunities for women by offering
low-interest loans to help women develop their skills
and careers. The Fund can also be used to strengthen

34

women’s civil society networks and enhance women’s
role.
When the situation demands it, Thai women can
also be effective agents of peace, as caring peacekeepers
and peacebuilders. We were pleased to see the role of
female peacekeepers mentioned in several parts of the
Secretary-General’s report. Thailand also attaches great
importance to enhancing the role and participation of
women in peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations.
There are currently many Thai female military
observers and officers serving in various United
Nations missions. They are well trained in international
humanitarian law and international law with regard
to the rights and protection of women and children.
Pre-deployment training for our peacekeepers, with the
assistance of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, also focuses on the issue of gender sensitivity in
order to facilitate the building of trust.
Another milestone for women in Thailand was the
admission of female cadets, in 2009, to the century-old
Police Cadet Academy. After graduation, the first batch
of female cadets will be assigned the important task of
dealing with cases involving violence against women
and children. Those female cadets were also inspired
by the great work of their senior female police officers
who participated in nation-building processes in Haiti
and Timor-Leste. It is our fervent hope that those Thai
female cadets will join United Nations missions in
different parts of the world.
Finally, let me emphasize the necessity of the
universal implementation of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) and relevant resolutions and
their translation into practice. For our part, Thailand
reiterates its readiness and commitment to join the
efforts of the international community aimed at
ensuring that the voices of women will be heard, their
rights respected and protected, and their concerns
and needs addressed. Their role and contribution with
respect to peace and security must be both enhanced
and recognized.
The President: I now call on the representative of
Armenia.
Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): Allow me first to express
my thanks to you, Sir, for convening this debate on a
topic that my delegation is particularly pleased to see
addressed. We join previous speakers in thanking the
Deputy Secretary-General and Under-Secretaries-

12-62149

S/PV.6877

General Bachelet and Ladsous and Ms. Bineta Diop for
their statements.

recognize the important contributions that women have
made in that regard.

All of the United Nations world conferences
on women have recognized the linkages among
gender equality, development and peace. Today, it is
heartening to observe how much the issue has gained
in terms of visibility and traction. It is now taken up
in various intergovernmental bodies, including the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Peacebuilding Commission. Member States and civil
society organizations at the national and global levels
are demonstrating their commitment to tackle the
challenge through concrete action.

This open debate serves as an opportunity
to address the importance of women’s political
participation, especially in regions and countries
affected by conflict. In that context, the efforts of
the European Union (EU) to launch the second phase
of its civil society programme, entitled “European
Partnership for the Peaceful Settlement of the Conflict
over Nagorno-Karabakh”, may also prove useful in
promoting a dynamic dialogue among a broad range
of policymakers, media and civil society on all sides
of the conflict. It also supports the wider participation
of conflict-affected people, including women, in peace
processes.

Despite the measures taken to prevent and address
violence against women, previous debates in the
Council and reports from the field have made it clear
that it persists. Efforts to address violence against
women are often neither comprehensive, consistent nor
sustained, and insufficient coordination persists among
relevant actors.
Knowledge regarding the scope, prevalence, impact
and cost of violence against women remains inadequate.
Greater efforts are needed to collect more information
and data of better quality on such violence. That would
support policymakers in their efforts to design effective
legislative and policy reforms, ensure the adequate
provision of targeted and effective services, monitor
trends and progress in addressing and eliminating
violence against women, and assess the impact of the
measures taken.
In its presidential statement of last month
(S/PRST/2012/23), the Council underlined the primary
role of Governments in enhancing women’s participation
in the prevention and resolution of conflict in areas
affected by armed conflict. As noted by the SecretaryGeneral, many peace processes now regularly include
consultations with women’s peace groups, and in
many post-conflict countries, the number of women in
Government has increased.
However, women have, by and large, remained
excluded, especially in efforts to find workable
solutions to conflict. In that regard, one of the most
important tasks should be to increase the presence of
women in decision-making processes. The inclusion of
women at all stages of the peace process will ensure
a more lasting and representative settlement. As such,
we should further promote their participation and

12-62149

As a newly elected member of the International
Organization of la Francophonie, we would also like to
welcome the May 2012 agreement between UN-Women
and the International Organization of la Francophonie,
which will further strengthen and reinforce genderresponsive policies and actions among Member States.
In conclusion, let me mention that Armenia
recognizes and welcomes the key role and critical
efforts of the Security Council in preventing violence
and combating impunity in conflict and post-conflict
situations. We will work closely with the United Nations,
civil society and the international organizations and
institutions concerned to expand and implement the
agenda of resolution 1325 (2000) to better the situation
of women around the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Mr. De Alba (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to begin by commending you, Mr. President, on
your sterling leadership of the presidency of the Council
for this month, and your clear sense of responsibility,
including your presence here at this hour. Allow me to
also commend you for the initiative to hold this debate
on women and peace and security and to provide followup to the efforts of the delegation of Guatemala.
Mexico welcomes the presentation of the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2012/732) and the subsequent
statements by Ms. Bachelet, Ms. Diop and Mr. Eliasson
this morning. We would also like to join other
delegations in underscoring the importance of today’s
debate.

35

S/PV.6877

Twelve years after the historic adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), Mexico recognizes the
progress that has been made in creating favourable
conditions for the participation of women in all phases
of peace processes. The deployment of women gender
advisers in all peacekeeping operations is a very
positive development that we hope to see replicated in
peacebuilding processes. We also recognize that the
inclusion of early warning and response mechanisms
in the mandates of peacekeeping operations and special
political missions play a very important role.
As a member of the Group of Friends of Mediation,
my delegation welcomes in particular the inclusion of
the gender dimension in the most recent report of the
Secretary-General (A/66/811) on the strengthening
of mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes,
conflict prevention and resolution as well as in
guidelines for effective mediation.
While recognizing the progress that has been
achieved, it is also important to recognize the challenges
and the work that remain, in particular with respect to
the implementation of the resolution. We must identify
additional actions that promote the participation of
women’s organizations in the peace processes and peace
accords, an issue that has quite rightly been identified
as central to the debate.
Unfortunately, peace processes and accords rarely
include concrete provisions for promoting access to
justice and women’s representation in government
bodies to enable inclusive access to power or prevent
and punish sexual violence. This perpetuates the
exclusion and vulnerable conditions in which half of the
population lives and is an obstacle to peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. The inclusion of women’s organizations
in peace processes and agreements is therefore
necessary in order to overcome the injustices that
often predate conflict situations, and offers a valuable
opportunity to avoid structural problems of exclusion
in the design of national institutions.
It is evident, in reading the concept paper circulated
by Guatemala (S/2012/774, annex), that the work of
women’s organizations is truly admirable, especially
since they are often intentionally excluded from official
processes and political dialogue and yet are able to move
forward. We recognize the importance of the work of
such non-governmental organizations from the very
onset of these processes. We echo the recommendation
of the Secretary-General that his envoys, representatives

36

and mediators consult with women’s organizations and
with those affected by crisis — the victims.
Mexico also believes it essential that we include
the gender dimension in all phases of building our new
societies, in particular in the electoral processes. This is
important not just when votes are cast, but also during
the process of electoral observation and in subsequent
political representation.
Regarding the transition of United Nations
presences, including the drawdown of peacekeeping
operations, we must ensure that these transition
processes do not entail a reduction in the attention given
to this topic, or put at risk the protection and security
of women.
We have immense challenges ahead when it comes
to fully including women in processes to promote
peace and security. The inclusion of women in conflict
resolution and in post-conflict situations is without a
doubt essential. It is the only way that we will achieve
the full inclusion of women on an equal footing for
the building of societies that have better prospects for
development and peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland thanks the Guatemalan presidency for
proposing this discussion, as well as the Indian
presidency, which took it up again after Hurricane Sandy.
We would also like to thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for having presented the report (S/2012/732)
on the implementation of the strategic framework for
the promotion of women and peace and security. The
report shows, in our view, the usefulness of the global
indicators in measuring progress — or sometimes the
lack of progress — in a systematic, transparent, honest
and critical way.
Let me first address the main topic of today’s open
debate, the inclusion of women’s civil society networks
in the prevention and resolution of armed conflicts and
peacebuilding. I will concentrate on three main issues
that we believe to be crucial.
First, on mediation, the Secretary-General’s
report provides us with important facts and figures.
Unfortunately, it comes to the conclusion that progress
remains limited with regard to the inclusion of women
in peace talks and the inclusion of women’s issues in
peace agreements. Our challenge today is to identify

12-62149

S/PV.6877

opportunities for their participation and to offer them
such opportunities at all levels. There is no shortage
of capable and well-trained women, as a number of
mediation training events for women and women’s
networks have taken place all over the world.
In the framework of our programme dedicated to
dealing with the past, we have attached great importance
to a gender-sensitive implementation of the transitional
justice mechanisms. Women’s perspectives and needs
must be an essential component of all four principles of
the fight against impunity: the search for truth, justice,
reparations and guarantees of non-recurrence.
On security sector reform, gender-based violence
can be rooted in traditional values and norms,
stereotypes and structures that are transmitted through
education and perpetuated by civil society. These
stereotypes, values and norms are mirrored in the
security sector, which is also one of the key areas to
focus on in the fight against discrimination and genderbased violence. If the security sector is to be effective
in fighting impunity for crimes committed against
women, it must be reformed, taking into account sexist
clichés and patterns of deep-rooted discrimination
against women, and by including women’s networks in
the process.
Allow me to conclude with a quick advertisement.
The NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security has prepared a report parallel to the work of
the Security Council entitled “Mapping Women, Peace
and Security in the UN Security Council: 2011-2012”.
We recently launched the report with Liechtenstein,
and we warmly encourage all Council members and the
entire United Nations membership to read it and to take
into account its recommendations in their daily work.
Finally, I have the pleasure today to announce the
launch of another important publication supported
by Switzerland and Liechtenstein, the Handbook on
Women, Peace and Security, by the NGO Women’s
International League for Peace and Freedom. It is the
second edition of the Handbook and examines the
degree to which the Security Council has incorporated
women, peace and security into its geographical work
over the past 12 years, specifically in the Council’s
country-specific resolutions. The Handbook also
contains important recommendations and is available
electronically as a smartphone application so that all
can have access at any point to language involving
women, peace and security. We encourage all Council

12-62149

members to use the Handbook to better strengthen the
links between geographical and thematic work.
If I may, I would like to distribute a copy of the
Handbook to each member of the Council. I know it
is lunchtime and I would very much have preferred to
provide members with more material sustenance, but I
do hope that this intellectual nourishment will also be
of interest to the Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, we would like to thank the Permanent
Representative and delegation of India for having held
today’s debate, which was originally organized by the
Guatemalan presidency of the Council in October. We
also wish to thank the speakers who took the floor today.
Special appreciation goes to Ms. Michelle Bachelet,
Executive Director of UN-Women, for her sterling work
for equality for women.
Each anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) gives us an opportunity to reaffirm our
commitment to its objectives and at the same time to
focus on some of the many dimensions it covers. Today
we have the opportunity to reflect on the central role
of civil society, especially women‘s organizations, in
the drafting and subsequent implementation of the
normative framework launched by the Council in the
year 2000. We wish to recognize the work undertaken
by the civil society Working Group on Women, Peace
and Security, which at the start of this year began
specifically to push Council action in the matter. The
encouragement and guidance of the Working Group
were decisive for the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), and that continues to be the case for its effective
implementation.
Allow me, as Ambassador of my country, to recall
that Argentina has been one of the countries promoting
resolution 1325 (2000). In my case, as an activist for
human rights and the equality of women, I wish to recall
that the resolution was a new “enough!” in women’s fight
for international peace and security, the prevention and
eradication of all forms of violence against women, the
elimination of impunity, and progress towards a real
and legal equality between men and women.
It was this Organization that took on the calls by and
the initiative of millions of women around the world in
order to say “enough!” to a double situation of injustice
and discrimination against women that consisted of, on
37

S/PV.6877

the one hand, silencing the voices of the victims and,
on the other hand, hiding the faces of women and girls
as rights holders and protagonists of social, economic
and cultural changes that could promote, protect and
ensure international peace and security and contribute
to mediation processes and capacity-building for a real
and lasting peace.
Twelve years after the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), the decisive contributions from women‘s
movements and organizations in conflict prevention,
and the commitment of organizations focusing on the
human rights of women and girls to make a reality of the
responsibility to protect — those are no longer matters
of opinion. The international community today shares
the certainty that the inclusion and incorporation of
women and their organizations before, during and after
conflicts is not merely ethically necessary, but is also
socially just and politically efficacious.
The best way that we have found to respond
to the theme of this debate is to refer briefly to the
National Action Plan of the Argentine Republic for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), which is
in its final phase of adoption. It will be adopted by a
presidential decree once the final review phase, is under
way right now, has been completed. The Plan is the
result of efforts by an interministerial working group in
which nine ministries participated. From the beginning,
women‘s organizations, feminist organizations and
human rights organizations in our country have
provided momentum and participated actively. Just to
note some examples, objective 2 of the Plan — on an
increase in political participation of women in peace
negotiation processes, in conflict management and
in decision-making — provides for holding periodic
public debates with women‘s organizations, feminist
organizations, human rights organizations and other
civil society organizations that incorporate gender
perspectives, in order to broaden the participation of
women and the sharing of experiences.
In addition, the actions taken to comply with
objective 3 — on the inclusion of the gender
perspective in all peacebuilding and humanitarian
assistance missions — include the promotion of joint
work by national institutions with expertise in the area
of women’s equality and civil society, with particular
emphasis on the situation of women in armed conflict,
post-conflict situations and socio-natural disasters.
Finally, in the section of the National Plan that
focuses on monitoring and follow-up, it is expressly
38

indicated that the Plan is the result of a participatory
process launched by the Ministry for Foreign Affairs,
with the support of the Defence Ministry and with
the participation of civil society organizations. To
succeed, it requires coordination among different areas
of the Argentine State and the cooperation of other
countries in the region, civil society organizations and
international organizations.
During its 1999-2000 term as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council, Argentina maintained
an active participation in the negotiations and
consultations undertaken with women’s organizations
and civil society organizations focusing on gender
issues that culminated in the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000). The same spirit and the same criteria will
guide the implementation of our Action Plan and the
participation of Argentina in the Security Council in
2013 and 2014. That is a responsibility with which we
were honoured by the General Assembly on 18 October.
We wish to offer the Council our full willingness
to contribute to the universalization of resolution 1325
(2000) and its effective implementation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French):
We would like to thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to take the floor.
(spoke in English)
On behalf of the Government of Canada, I wish
to thank the Indian presidency for convening this
open debate that provides focus on the important role
of women in establishing and maintaining peace and
security.
As our Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Honourable
John Baird, stated at the Montreal Council on Foreign
Relations in September, women are the key to the
development of pluralistic societies, and the full and
active participation of women in all parts of civil society
and throughout society as a whole is very important in
that regard. Last year, our Foreign Minister met with
women in Libya to discuss the role women could play in
that country’s transition. He also met with the Afghan
Women’s Network at the International Conference on
Afghanistan in Bonn to hear their concerns. Canada also
advocated for, and facilitated the inclusion of, women’s
civil society groups at the International Conference on
Afghanistan this year, and continues to work with the

12-62149

S/PV.6877

Afghan Women’s Network to raise awareness of issues
relating to women, peace and security among provincial
and national officials, parliamentarians and influential
community leaders.
(spoke in French)
Canada heartily welcomes the Secretary-General’s
recognition of the need to take effective measures
to address conflict-related sexual violence such as
rape as a weapon of war, and calls for the protection
of human rights defenders. Governments have the
responsibility to deal with the issues of women and
peace and security. Civil society can potentially play
a constructive role. For example, in Sierra Leone, for
which Canada has the honour to chair the countryspecific configuration for peacebuilding, the defence
of women’s rights by local organizations has led the
State to act to protect particularly vulnerable groups of
women, leading specifically to a new law criminalizing
sexual offences and imposing stiffer minimum
penalties for offenders. The law is a step forward in
holding perpetrators of sexual violence accountable in
that country.
Women can play an important role in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts and in peacebuilding.
We therefore call for the continued constructive
participation of women throughout peace processes,
mission drawdowns and political transitions.
(spoke in English)
In conclusion, Canada wishes to note that the
Secretary-General’s report outlines the considerable
progress that the international community has made on
issues of women and peace and security, even just in
the past year, but we are equally cognizant that much
more remains to be done.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representatiave of Austria.
Mr. Riecken (Austria): Austria aligns itself with
the statement made earlier on behalf of the European
Union.
We thank today’s briefers, and are grateful to the
delegation of India for rescheduling this open debate
on the important topic of the contributioni of women’s
civil society organizations to conflict prevention and
resolution. We particularly welcome the participation
in this debate of the representative of the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security.

12-62149

Women and women’s civil society organizations
are all too often excluded from participating in peace
efforts and negotiations. The very instructive data,
collected against the indicators, contained in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2012/732) clearly shows
the need for improvement in the meaningful inclusion
and participation of women from an early stage in all
efforts towards conflict prevention and resolution,
including peace negotiations and peacebuilding.
Measures to improve women’s security are crucial to
ensuring their political and economic participation
in post-conflict settings. We are concerned about the
information in the Secretary-General’s report on the
high number of attacks on human rights defenders in
some of the countries and territories reviewed in the
past year. We fully support the Secretary-General’s
recommendation that the Security Council pay special
attention to protecting women human rights defenders.
We should also step up our efforts with regard to
women in decision-making positions. While temporary
special measures, including electoral gender quotas,
can be an effective tool for increasing women’s political
participation both as voters and as candidates, we agree
that more attention must be paid to addressing the
structural factors that discourage women’s candidacy
and electoral participation.
Much has been achieved in the 12 years since the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). However, as the
Secretary-General has pointed out, we clearly need
to do more. The number of women in United Nations
peacekeeping operations and political missions,
including in senior positions in field missions, as
well as appointments of women mediators, must be
enhanced. We encourage the Security Council to
include the consideration of issues related to women
and peace and security in all its thematic and countryspecific discussions, as well as to address it in missions’
mandates.
In accordance with presidential statement
S/PRST/2010/22, 1 would like to inform the Council
about the measures taken by Austria in the past year
to implement resolution 1325 (2000). Austria has
completed the revision of its national action plan on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The revised
plan, adopted in January, is guided by the United Nations
indicators on women and peace and security. Civil
society was closely involved in the revision process.
This year Austria also adopted its third national action
plan on combating trafficking in human beings. Women

39

S/PV.6877

are particularly vulnerable to becoming victims of this
sort of organized crime, mainly for sexual exploitation.
Austria has developed an interdisciplinary training
course on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
The training course is tailored to the requirements
of command personnel active in international crisis
management. It will be held for the first time in December
at the Austrian Peace Center in Stadtschlaining, with
participants from 20 Member States and international
organizations. Modules on women in armed conflict
will make up an important part of the course, with
the objective for participants to develop a gendersensitive needs analysis and practical solutions aimed
at effectively addressing those needs. Nine mission
gender advisers have been trained and their deployment
began to the Balkans in 2011. After a first assignment
to Kosovo, which proved extremely successful, Austria
will continue that engagement in 2013. Furthermore,
Austria will continue with its support to UN-Women
and has offered support for developing a national action
plan for partnering countries with a view to launching
concrete cooperation early next year.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Skåre.
Ms. Skåre: Thank you, Mr. President, for letting
NATO participate in this important debate. I would
also like to thank the briefers for their excellent
presentations.
Civil society organizations have been instrumental
in promoting women’s rights and gender equality.
To a large degree, it was thanks to civil society that
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and security
saw the light of day 12 years ago. As much as States
and intergovernmental organizations show leadership
in advancing that agenda, we have to recognize the
important role that members of civil society play as
opinion leaders and sources of information, as well as
in keeping us accountable.
While States have the primary responsibility
for ensuring the implementation of the resolutions
on women and peace and security, NATO, as a
political-military organization, is playing its part within
NATO-led operations and within our partnerships. We
have a policy, we have an action plan and, together with
partners, we are turning words into deeds.
On the political level, NATO is actively encouraging
all its partners to adopt specific goals related to the
promotion of women, peace and security issues in the
various partnership programmes they develop with
40

our organization. The overall aim is to raise awareness
and to work towards greater female participation in
the areas of defence and security. Women are still
underrepresented in peace and reconciliation processes,
and we encourage States and our partners to ensure
women’s participation in the prevention, management
and resolution of conflicts.
At the operational level, NATO and its operational
partners in the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) and Kosovo Force have demonstrated a
strong commitment to promoting the important role
that women can play, and have engaged with women
leaders and activists to understand their views and
perspectives. The Alliance has gender advisers and
focal points at its various headquarters, as well as in
operational theatres in Afghanistan and Kosovo. I work
with these dedicated people and see the significant
efforts they are making to mainstream resolution 1325
(2000) and related resolutions and to integrate the
gender perspective into operations.
Experience to date has shown that having gender
expertise, as well as having more female soldiers in
theatre, improves our ability to conduct operations
more effectively. For example, we have learned that
female soldiers in Afghanistan are at times able to better
connect with members of the population otherwise
closed off from their male colleagues. This has led to
greater awareness of the specific situation and area,
and led to better dialogue and understanding between
NATO forces and the local community. Our experience
has also shown that training and education are strategic
tools for security forces and for defence and security
sector reform. If used correctly, they can be major force
multipliers, as the attitudes of those trained can spread
to walks of life beyond the security sphere.
As Council members are aware, the mandate of
the ISAF mission was recently renewed, and the plans
to hand over full security responsibility from ISAF
forces to their Afghan counterparts are on course, as
reaffirmed at the Chicago Summit. Throughout the
transition process and beyond, we will continue to
focus on gender-related training and to support the
recruitment and retention of women in the security
forces.
NATO works shoulder to shoulder with other
international organizations maintaining international
peace and security, and we seek to strengthen further
our cooperation with the United Nations and others to

12-62149

S/PV.6877

make sure we learn from each other’s experiences and
pave the way for greater efficiency and more results.
Since my appointment as the NATO Secretary
General’s Special Representative for Women,
Peace and Security, I have had the great pleasure of
engaging in dialogue with women’s associations in
the security sector, womens’ rights activists, female
parliamentarians and other representatives of civil
society. I intend to deepen this dialogue.
NATO and its member States remain committed
to upholding human rights and the rule of law. As
we face up to the security challenges of the twentyfirst century, we will continue to work with partners
and other members of the international community to
achieve better security and the greater empowerment
of women.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Luxembourg.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you warmly, Sir, for having rescheduled
the open debate originally scheduled by the Guatemalan
presidency, and for giving us this opportunity to take
stock of progress made and the challenges remaining
in the advancement of women in the framework of
resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions. I
would like to particularly welcome the focus in today’s
debate on the important role that women’s civil society
organizations play in the prevention of conflicts and
their commitment to peacebuilding.
I also thank today’s speakers for their enlightening
briefings. While I fully align myself with the statement
made by observer of the European Union, I would
like to underline a few aspects that are of particular
importance to us.
The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/732) shows the headway we have made over the
past two years. Let me mention the progress made in
implementing the seven-point action plan on women’s
participation in peacebuilding, as well as the adoption
of a strategic results framework on women and peace
and security on the occasion of the tenth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
There is a self-evident interconnection. There can
be no prevention of conflict without the participation
of women, and no participation without effective
protection of the rights and the physical and moral
integrity of women. It is therefore necessary to make

12-62149

progress simultaneously on all these issues. It is
also encouraging that a growing number of regional
cooperation mechanisms and national action plans have
been launched.
However, the overall result remains mixed. We
can only share the Secretary-General’s disappointment
at the weak representation of women in peace
talks, at the structural problems that limit women’s
participation in political life, and at the resurgence
of violence against women. The figures concerning
women’s participation in politics in the broadest
sense — of which conflict prevention and peacebuilding
are but an extension — speak for themselves. Among
the delegations involved in 14 peace processes in
2011, only four benefited from women’s participation.
During the same year, out of the nine peace accords that
were signed, only two contained specific provisions on
women and peace and security. The situation regarding
political representation is no more encouraging.
Women still represent only 20 per cent of members of
Parliament, and only slightly more at the ministerial
level. This is hardly sufficient.
The regions most affected by conflicts are, alas,
often also the regions in which the social and political
situation of women is the least advantageous. For this
reason, we must lay stress not only on women’s training
for political participation, but also on improving
material conditions so that women can participate
in elections, as well as on protecting women during
electoral processes, including before and after the
elections.
In this context, since 2010 Luxembourg has
supported an important programme set up by the United
Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
Through this programme, which is being implemented
in close consultation with national authorities and
women’s civil society organizations, we are proud
of having contributed to the significant increase
of women’s political representation in Timor-Leste
following the parliamentary elections of July 2012. The
mobilization of women has also been strengthened in
Haiti through the organization of some 350 training
workshops at the community level. In November 2011,
we supported a regional workshop in Goma, in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which allowed
for an exchange of experiences among women’s
organizations in the Great Lakes region in the field of
peace, security and the prevention of elections-related
violence. This year, we are supporting the participation

41

S/PV.6877

of women in political life in the Republic of South
Sudan through training and other capacity-building
measures, which also benefit women’s civil society
organizations. Before the end of the year, again with the
support of Luxembourg, a regional workshop wili be
held in Liberia in order to consolidate the achievements
of the United Nations Mission in Liberia, to promote
the role of women in peacebuilding in West Africa,
and to strengthen women’s regional peace and security
networks.
“The future of men is women”, wrote Louis Aragon.
I leave the poet’s assertion to listeners’ interpretation.
In any case, the conviction that women have a specific
role to play in the future of a world liberated from
the scourge of war is gaining ground. It is up to us to
seize this chance by continuing to support women and
women’s civil society organizations in their actions for
peace. The Security Council can count on Luxembourg
to contribute to this collective endeavour.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. Fernandes (Brazil): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having organized this debate. It gives
me great pleasure to see you, Sir, presiding over this
meeting.
I thank the Deputy Secretary-General for his
intervention. Brazil is grateful for the briefing provided
by Ms. Michelle Bachelet and for the work that she
has been doing as head of UN-Women. We also thank
Under-Secretary-General Ladsous for his briefing and
the representative of the non-governmental organization
Femmes Africa Solidarité for her intervention.
Supporting and promoting women’s participation
in the maintenance of international peace and security
is an increasingly important aspect of the Security
Council’s responsibility under the Charter. Since
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), this body has
contributed significantly to United Nations efforts to
refine our collective understanding of the implications
of armed conflict for women and, just as important,
to support them as agents of peace. The establishment
of UN-Women and the appointment of a Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict testify
to the progress made.
There is, however, a long way to go before
women are fully and duly integrated into national and
multilateral peace efforts around the world. In various
respects, such as the number of women representatives
42

and mediators; the number, substance and relative
importance of provisions in peace agreements; and postconflict strategies or policies, women’s participation in
peace and security processes is still insufficient.
We are therefore confronted with a real need
for the United Nations, Governments and non-State
actors to foster and support their involvement in the
field of international peace and security. Among the
several strategies that can be used to attain that goal,
one of the most important is enhancing dialogue with
women’s groups in conflict and post-conflict situations.
Frequent consultations with them, for example, can be
an important vehicle to convey the specific concerns
and needs of women to all stakeholders in peace efforts,
including United Nations Special Representatives,
mediators and special envoys.
Meaningful interaction with women’s groups
must also be an integral part of our peacekeeping and
peacebuilding activities. Besides assisting missions
in fulfilling their mandates, in particular regarding
the protection of civilians, such groups can help
ensure a sustained commitment to gender sensitivity.
This is especially important when preparing mission
drawdowns or transitions from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding, as dialogue with women can stimulate
national Governments and the United Nations family
to streamline gender issues into their policies after
missions leave the country.
Building capacity in the area of women and peace
and security is also key. Late last year, Brazil signed
a letter of intent with UN-Women, in order to deepen
our cooperation regarding the training of peacekeepers
on gender issues and the promotion of South-South
cooperation on gender issues involving peacekeeping
training centres in Latin America and Africa.
Women’s economic empowerment in post-conflict
situations is also vital to making them full partners in
peace efforts and increasing their ability to contribute to
the consolidation of peace. Responding to their needs in
areas such as education, employment, land and property
rights and health services will likely reduce the chances
of relapse into conflict, for example, as women tend to
be the first ones to appreciate tangible peace dividends
in the daily lives of families and communities.
Although Brazil’s reality differs greatly from that
of post-conflict countries, some of our experiences may
be useful for such societies. One interesting example
is the Bolsa Familia, a conditional cash transfer

12-62149

S/PV.6877

programme that has lifted millions of Brazilians out of
poverty. Under the programme, women are the preferred
recipients of transfers, and experience has shown that
this practice increases their bargaining power within
the family structure and communities.
It is also worth mentioning that, on the margins
of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development, Brazil organized, in collaboration
with UN-Women, the Women Leaders’ Summit on
the Future Women Want. The meeting highlighted
the need to accelerate women’s full participation in
governance at all levels, including women’s leadership
in all decision-making processes. It also underlined
the importance of ensuring the elimination of all
discriminatory barriers preventing women from having
equal access to, owning and managing productive
resources and assets, and from contributing to and
benefiting from the opportunities provided by the
pursuit of sustainable development. Although this
applies to all countries, we know that empowering
women may be especially important in post-conflict
situations, as it tends to enhance the chances of avoiding
a relapse into conflict.
There is compelling evidence that women, when
empowered, can have a significant positive impact on
the lives of many people in their societies, particularly
in countries emerging from conflict.
The Security Council is therefore called on to
continue to make a significant contribution to ensure
that such impact is fully felt in all pertinent situations
on its agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Spain wishes
to express its gratitude for the opportunity to participate
in today’s Security Council debate and to discuss the
specific measures that need to be promoted in order
to ensure the full participation of women and girls in
peace processes.
Currently, we have at our disposal a large body
of relevant resolutions and reports. Moreover, and as
Spain has already stated during previous debates,
experience has shown that when women have the means
and the legal framework to do so, they are extremely
effective in building peace. That is why this debate is so
important, because the role of women in peacebuilding
is indispensable.

12-62149

Spain welcomes the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2012/732) and supports its observations and
recommendations, in particular the attention that the
role of women’s organizations deserves in the context
of the prevention and resolution of conflicts and in
peacebuilding. In that regard, Spain wishes to highlight
the need for the Security Council to not only hold
thematic debates and continue to strengthen normative
standards on the issue of women, peace and security,
but also to decisively promote the mainstreaming of
this key issue in all of its activities and decisions.
I would also like to make special mention of the
recent report of the Special Rapporteur on violence
against women, its causes and consequences, which
highlights the invisibility of women with disabilities in
times of conflict. They are the forgotten ones in wars,
refugee camps, reconciliation processes and in terms
of access to justice. It is therefore important that the
Security Council keep them in mind and appeals to
States to adopt the necessary measures to ensure the
safety and protection of persons with disabilities in
situations of armed conflict, humanitarian emergencies,
natural disasters and other hazardous situations.
My country also wishes to acknowledge the work
done in this area by UN-Women and its Executive
Director, Ms. Michelle Bachelet, and to convey our
appreciation and gratitude for the recent publication
of the sourcebook on women, peace and security,
which is a very practical contribution to the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We also
would like to encourage UN-Women to continue its
fruitful cooperation with other departments, agencies
and programmes of the United Nations system in order
to perform its role fully in addressing this issue. It will
have the full political support of Spain in that respect.
Spain has devoted significant efforts to the
promotion of the role of women and the gender
perspective in conflict situations. In that regard, I
would like to recall that my country drafted an action
plan on women, peace and security in 2007, which has
been updated several times since; in fact, the third
monitoring report was presented during the second half
of 2012.
Spain has also been promoting a number of
initiatives in the field of foreign policy, cooperation for
development and defence policy to ensure the proper
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). Those efforts
entail two main lines of action, namely, promoting the
role of women in peacebuilding in conflict and post43

S/PV.6877

conflict situations, on the one hand; and, on the other
hand, curbing violence against women in conflict
situations in order to contribute to the elimination of
sexual violence, and especially of such outrageous
abuses as the systematic use of rape as a weapon of war.
At the same time, in response to the appeals of
the international community for greater efforts to
train civilian and military personnel on gender issues,
this year once again the Ministries of Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation and the Ministry of Defence of my
country, in collaboration with their counterparts in the
Netherlands, held the third iteration of the International
Course on Gender-Integrated Approach in Operations.
The course was held from 10 to 15 June in Madrid,
with the aim of providing the know-how and skills
needed to effectively implement gender mainstreaming
in international missions and operations. The course
focused on how to include the gender perspective in
the civilian and military aspects of peace operations
in various conflicts. Throughout the course, speakers
from the academic, civilian and military world took
part, coming from the United Nations, NATO and the
European Union. The fourth course will be held in the
Netherlands from 19 to 23 November.
Moreover, we continue to work in close collaboration
with civil society on future activities focused on
training inspired in large part by the recommendations
of the latest report of the Secretary-General.
Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), many
variables have changed in our approach to peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. In that changing
context, questions of gender have become an ever more
important factor when it comes to the planning, training
and evaluation of missions. However, the reasons that
led to the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) still persist.
Among them, the following are worth mentioning: the
neglect of the gender perspective in conflict prevention
and early warning; the lack of protection of women
and girls against the various forms of gender-based
violence, in particular rape and other forms of sexual
abuse; the particular vulnerability of certain groups,
such as indigenous women or women with disabilities,
in the context of conflict; the exclusion of women from
peace processes and post-conflict institutions; and the
limited role of women’s organizations in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts and peacebuilding. The
international community must therefore step up its
efforts in the interest of peace and security to take

44

advantage of the immense potential of women as agents
of change.
In conclusion, Spain would like to associate itself
with the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
congratulates India on its presidency and thanks it for
having convened this important open debate in the
Security Council on women and peace and security.
My delegation thanks the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for having introduced the report (S/2012/732),
as well as the Executive Director of UN-Women
Michelle Bachelet for her statement, and Mr. Hervé
Ladsous and Ms. Bineta Diop.
The present debate is without a doubt an opportunity
to strengthen action in the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda. This year’s theme
reflects the central role played by women’s groups in
the implementation of this agenda and the work they
carry out in favour of peace and the empowerment of
women.
Twelve years after the adoption of the historic
resolution 1325 (2000), the Council has continued to
make progress in providing guidance for the greater
protection of women in armed conflict situations.
Nevertheless, it can be seen that the situation of
women in conflict and post-conflict situations has
not improved. Likewise, many women’s organizations
around the world face particular risks and challenges,
especially those in violent situations.
The international community bore witness to the
case of Malala Yousafzai. In that regard, we view
women human rights defenders are often targets of
attack in conflict situations, which is greater protection
and support are need for the participation of women and
girls in peace processes and reconstruction.
The report of the Secretary-General presents
the progress made since last year relating to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in four areas
of action: prevention, participation, protection, and
relief and recovery. It also covers the steps announced
with a view to improving monitoring and evaluation
systems aimed at fulfilling commitments relating to
women and peace and security.

12-62149

S/PV.6877

It should be underscored that in 2008 my
country established a working group, composed of
representatives of the Ministries for Foreign Affairs
and of National Defence, the National Service for
Women and civil society organizations, with the aim
of developing a national action plan in keeping with the
requirements of resolution 1325 (2000). In that regard,
we have sought to create an action plan through an
inclusive process of open and participatory discussions
to faithfully represent the interests of our society.
The Chilean national action plan covers a range
of actions aimed at promoting the inclusion of gender
perspective in the understanding of and approach
to conflict-prevention and post-conflict processes;
respecting, guaranteeing and protecting the rights of
women and girls; and generating conditions for the
equitable participation of women in peace processes
and decision-making with regard to international peace
and security.
In our view, it is important to promote the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) through the
exchange of experiences and international cooperation,
both bilaterally and within the regional peacekeeping
mechanisms in which Chile participates, in particular
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti. We
also believe it is important to join forces and pool
resources to collect data and provide technical support
so as to improve indicators for the adequate monitoring
and evaluation of national action plans.
The universal promotion of fundamental human
rights is one of the basic principles of Chile’s foreign
policy. In that regard, we will continue to join ongoing
efforts to ensure women’s participation in and
contribution to conflict prevention and mediation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Shin Dong Ik (Republic of Korea): This
year marks the twelfth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security. While the achievements of the past decade
have been remarkable, there remain persistent gaps
and challenges, including the low level of women’s
participation in conflict prevention and peacebuilding
processes.
We are satisfied that the presidential statement
adopted last year (S/PRST/2011/20) gave renewed
attention to the issue of the participation and role
of women in conflict prevention and mediation.
12-62149

We also welcome the fact that this year’s
annual report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/732)
provides us with valuable information on the issue and
updates us on the progress in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).
Against that backdrop, I would like to underscore the
following four points with regard to the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and women’s participation in
that regard.
First, my delegation welcomes the growing
attention of United Nations human rights mechanisms
on women, peace and security issues. We would like to
encourage all Member States to cooperate closely with
such mechanisms in order to ensure implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) at the national level. As the
report of the Secretary-General rightly points out,
consistency is crucial in ensuring robust progress on
the women, peace and security agenda. We believe that
the recommendations of United Nations human rights
mechanisms, including treaty bodies and the special
procedures of the Human Rights Council, serve as
significant tools to ensure consistency in implementing
resolution 1325 (2000).
Secondly, we need to pay more attention to the role
and participation of women in post-conflict settings. It
is regrettable that, of the nine peace agreements signed
in 2011, only two contain specific provisions on women,
peace and security. That means that we are missing
invaluable opportunities to enhance women’s political
participation and empowerment in transition periods.
My delegation notes that temporary special measures,
including gender quotas in post-conflict elections, have
proved effective in increasing women’s representation
in decision-making bodies. We believe that serious
consideration should be given to such measures in other
post-conflict situations.
Thirdly, my delegation would like to underline
the crucial role played by women’s civil society
organizations in conflict resolution and peacebuilding
processes. Their special expertise, skills and capacities
have been critical to building confidence between parties
and to integrating a gender perspective in transition
structures. However, women’s organizations still face a
number of challenges, ranging from few opportunities
to participate in formal conflict resolution or political
dialogue, poor funding and cultural and social barriers
to frequent security threats, which all prevent their
long-term planning. In that regard, we welcome the fact
that the report of the Secretary-General highlights the
45

S/PV.6877

importance of the financial sustainability of women’s
organization, as well as their sufficient representation
in the formal peacebuilding discourse.

resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009) and
1960 (2010) were adopted to strengthen the process
initiated through resolution 1325 (2000).

Fourthly, we should continue to strengthen efforts
to prevent and respond to conflict-related sexual and
gender-based violence. It is disturbing that there are
continuing reports of rape and other forms of sexual
violence not only in situations of armed conflict, but in
the context of elections, political strife and civil unrest.
We support the Secretary-General’s recommendation
in his report to ensure the gender-responsiveness of
transitional justice mechanisms, including targeted
outreach to victims, reparation programmes and
explicit references to sexual violence, in the mandates
of transitional justice actors.

There have been some developments in women,
peace and security, such as the steps taken to implement
the seven-point action plan on gender-responsive
peacebuilding, the adoption of the United Nations
strategic results framework on women and peace and
security and the civilian capacity review. Prevention
also gained an increased focus with the inclusion of the
protection of civilians in the mandates of 8 out of 16
peacekeeping missions.

We truly appreciate all the support shown for the
Republic of Korea during our successful campaign for
a non-permanent seat on the Security Council for 20132014. As a staunch supporter of the Council’s activities
on women, peace and security and as current President
of the Executive Board of UN-Women, the Republic of
Korea will do its utmost while serving on the Council
to address the most pressing issues on women, peace
and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): I thank Mr. Hardeep
Singh Puri, Permanent Representative of India, and
his country’s presidency for organizing this open
debate. I also thank the Deputy Secretary General,
the Executive Director of UN-Women and the UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations for
their insightful presentations this morning.
I welcome the Secretary-General’s most recent
report on women and peace and security (S/2012/732).
In the report, the Secretary-General calls for enhanced
women’s participation and a stronger commitment to
addressing the challenges to women’s engagement in
the prevention and resolution of armed conflicts and in
peacebuilding at all levels.
Twelve years ago, we adopted the landmark
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security in the Council. As a member of the Council
at the time and one of its core sponsors, Bangladesh
was closely associated with the adoption of that
historic document. That was our humble contribution
to ensuring the rights and role of women in peace
and security. Thereafter, several resolutions, such as
46

However, women and girls still suffer violations of
international human rights, humanitarian and refugee
law, including forced displacement, constraints on
humanitarian access and sexual and gender-based
violence. Therefore, much needs to be done.
The core message of resolution 1325 (2000)
was to ensure women’s equal participation at all
decision-making levels. In the United Nations context,
women’s participation should be ensured through
achieving a 50/50 gender balance, with a special
emphasis on the recruitment of women at higher levels.
In general, more female military and police personnel
need to be deployed to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. For an adequate global balance, women
from the South should be considered with special
preference for such leadership positions. For all genderbased violence, there should be a zero tolerance policy,
and all incidents of such violence must be unequivocally
condemned.
The participation of women in mediation and
peacebuilding efforts needs to be enhanced. In 2011,
out of 14 United Nations peace negotiations, only four
included woman delegates. As agreements without
gender-sensitive provisions can limit the opportunities
for women to achieve basic security, as well as their
political, economic and social empowerment, the
gender dimension of mediation should be clearly and
consistently articulated. It is also important to ensure
measures to improve security for women in elections.
Poverty, the struggle and rivalry for resources,
socioeconomic injustices and forced occupation lie at
the heart of conflicts. They create a breeding ground
for such social scourges as conflicts, including violence
against women and girls, increase. The impact of that
violence not only weakens the safety and security of
women and girls but also tears the entire political,

12-62149

S/PV.6877

economic and social fabric. Therefore, we need to
prevent conflict and establish sustainable peace.
When we talk about the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), we see the presence of women’s
civil society organizations at the grass-roots level.
They can help implement peace agreements, ensuring
the protection of women’s human rights defenders in
conflict and post-conflict settings and integrating
women’s and girl’s security into the priorities set
during transitions, such as drawdowns of United
Nations missions. We strongly believe that our debate
and discussion should transcend boundaries and reach
grass-roots women, who sometimes lack even the
language to express their agony. That has to be done
through people’s empowerment — the empowerment
of distressed people, particularly women at the grassroots level.
In Bangladesh, from our experience of nationbuilding, we have embraced a perspective of
women’s empowerment and developed a model that
our Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina calls a “peace
model”. The central message conveyed in the model
is the empowerment of people, including women and
vulnerable groups, through a focus on seven interlinked
issues. The model advocates empowering people by
eliminating hunger and poverty, by providing them
with skills, education and training, by including the
excluded, by eliminating all forms of discrimination,
by providing decent jobs, by guaranteeing participation
in governance, and by ending terrorism. I am pleased
to note here that at its sixty-sixth session the General
Assembly adopted resolution 66/224, entitled, “People’s
empowerment and development”, and we have proposed
a follow-up draft resolution in the current session of the
General Assembly. We seek Members’ support for it.
Women occupy top political leadership positions
in our country, from the Prime Minister to ministers
of many important ministries. The Constitution of
Bangladesh guarantees the equality of men and women,
within the broad framework of non-discrimination on
the grounds of religion, race or gender. The Government
has adopted the National Policy for the Advancement
of Women and the National Action Plan for the
Advancement of Women. The Women’s Development
Implementation Committee, headed by the Minister of
Women and Children Affairs — basically the Prime
Minister — monitors the implementation of policies for
women’s empowerment. The result is highly positive.
To cite just one example, the enrolment of girls in both

12-62149

primary and secondary schools exceeds that of boys,
helped by a waiver of tuition and the provision of
stipends for girls in the secondary level.
The Government has enacted laws to protect
women against domestic violence, and is currently
implementing a number of innovative projects for
developing women’s capabilities. In order to involve
women in decision-making processes, the Government
has adopted a quota system for women in the national
Parliament and in recruitment for our civil service
jobs — alongside direct election and open competition.
It also expanded effective gender-based budgeting in
20 of the country’s ministries. It has been providing
microfinancing, mostly to women, and has started
providing small business enterprise loans to womenrun small and medium-sized enterprises at preferential
rates.
In the maintenance of international peace and
security, we take pride in our modest contribution
of troops and police to United Nations peacekeeping
missions. We have made the necessary provisions
to recruit women in the police and military. We are
pleased that we could deploy two full contingents of
all-female formed police units to the United Nations
peacekeeping operations in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and in Haiti. We are committed to
continuing our contribution of women to operations for
the maintenance of peace and security. I am pleased
to report that our all-male troop contingents are fully
briefed on gender issues and we have zero tolerance for
sexual misconduct.
In conclusion, I reiterate that we in Bangladesh
have been making our best efforts to ensure women’s
empowerment and participation in all spheres of our
lives. We know that much more needs to be done. We
are willing to replicate in our national policy any good
practices that we learn about from around the world,
and we are similarly ready to share our experience with
others.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Mikec (Croatia): We thank the Indian
presidency for holding this debate on the specific role
of women’s civil society organizations in conflict
prevention and conflict resolution and recovery — the
first on this particular issue.

47

S/PV.6877

Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union. I would like to
make some additional remarks in my national capacity.
The issue of the overall empowerment of women
has a special place in both the internal and external
policy of the Government of Croatia. We deem the
role of women’s civil society organizations to be an
indispensable part of those policies. A perception of
women as victims often obscures their significant role
in conflict prevention, mediation and peacebuilding
processes, as well as the significant role of women’s civil
society organizations worldwide. The implementation
of our national action plan for the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security is therefore one of our priorities.
With regard to enhancing the specific role of
women’s civil society organizations in situations of
armed conflict and peacebuilding, I would like to
underline that legislative, judicial and public awarenessraising measures are part of the synergy of the process.
In our experience, one of the best ways to bring into
focus the specific role of women in the area of peace
and security is certainly by strengthening relevant
legislative measures and institutional frameworks,
particularly in the judiciary and education, together
with gender mainstreaming efforts and gender training
programmes within State administrative bodies.
However, the existence of laws does not guarantee
their exercise in practice, in particular in traditionally
conservative societies and cultures. Therefore, the
closer cooperation of State bodies with broad layers of
society and the more intensive involvement of men in all
gender equality promotion activities remain essential.
Finally, all such efforts can succeed only with the full
and honest cooperation of Government bodies with
women’s civil society organizations, which is crucial to
increasing and improving public awareness.
Moreover, empowered women’s civil society
organizations not only play an important external
observer role in State measures, but also can direct State
actions according to the real needs of women citizens.
It is therefore essential to encourage and support
Governments and civil society organizations to work
jointly to create targeted campaigns, seminars, forums
and workshops aimed at raising public awareness and
knowledge of the importance of the greater participation
of women in all activities and decision-making
processes related to peace and security.

48

In our view, an indispensable part of the whole
process is the development of focused and concrete
regional cooperation. An example from our own region
of South-East Europe is the Regional Women’s Lobby
for Peace, Security and Justice in Southeast Europe,
established in 2006, which has grown into a respected,
internationally recognized, strong lobby group for
women. The Lobby is a real-life example of women
contributing to their own empowerment and inclusion
in peace and security matters and decision-making
processes. It is fully supported by Croatia’s and other
States’ highest officials.
The honest commitment of Governments to women’s
civil society organizations is essential, particularly in
the context of armed conflict, post-conflict situations,
transition periods and the withdrawal of United Nations
missions. There must be a commitment to giving proper
attention to gender equality issues, with appropriate
levels of security and protection and sufficient funding.
All such measures involving coordinated efforts of
State bodies and women’s civil society organizations
should also contribute to a safer environment for
women’s human rights defenders and activists.
Our common efforts in enabling women and
women’s civil society organizations to participate in all
activities of conflict prevention, peace processes and
rebuilding societies is of the utmost importance, as their
role is vital in fostering sustainable peace and stability.
Croatia has stood and stands ready to engage actively
with relevant women’s civil society organizations and
their respective Governments to share with them our
positive experiences and practices in conflict, postconflict and transition, in support of our joint efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Marn (Slovenia): I would like to thank India
for organizing today’s important discussion and to
express special thanks to Ms. Bineta Diop for her
insightful briefing.
Slovenia aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
welcomes the adoption of the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2012/23) on 31 October. Slovenia views issues
related to the promotion of the rights of women as one
of the key priorities in the field of human rights.
We welcome this year’s focus on the role of
women’s civil society organizations in contributing to
the prevention and resolution of armed conflict and to
12-62149

S/PV.6877

peacebuilding. We consider the role of women’s civil
society organizations important in ensuring that the
needs and rights not just of women as citizens, but also
of members of all vulnerable groups, are taken into
account, since women are usually represented among
caregivers to the most vulnerable members of their
families, communities and societies.
I would like to also welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s annual report on women and peace and
security (S/2012/732) and to express my country’s
support for the recommendations contained therein on
more solid progress throughout the women and peace
and security agenda.
We fully support the need to ensure consistency
in the implementation of international norms and
standards on the human rights of women and girls
and in efforts to prevent and resolve conflict and
build peace. We commend the increased number of
explicit references to women, peace and security in
commitments made with respect to actions of the
Security Council, including specific instructions
included in mission mandates on promoting women’s
rights, their protection and empowerment and support
for the development of civil society. We therefore
encourage the Council to consistently continue that
practice in order to ensure that all country-specific
and thematic decisions in terms of the establishment or
renewal of mission mandates include such provisions.
Let me highlight the importance of addressing
the challenges to women’s and girls’ participation and
representation. We welcome the increased number of
women on the roster of mediation experts and among
the Secretary-General’s Special Representatives
and Deputy Representatives. We consider that in
some situations, women mediators or representatives
facilitate interactions with local women and civil
society organizations. We also consider that investing in
education for girls is of key importance to assure them
the prominent role they deserve in their communities
and societies in the future.
There are many persistent obstacles to
women’s participation and representation in public
decision-making processes. An important one is
the lack of security. Sexual violence and other
forms of gender-based violence, as well as a lack of
accountability and, consequently, impunity for such
acts impede women from actively engaging in public
life and decision-making. It is therefore important to

12-62149

ensure gender-responsiveness in transitional justice
mechanisms.
In conclusion, allow me please to shortly brief the
Council on the implementation of Slovenia’s national
action plan to implement the resolutions on women and
peace and security adopted two years ago. Slovenia is
preparing its first report in accordance with the action
plan to review the progress on implementation since
its adoption. We have continued to contribute to the
implementation of resolutions on women and peace and
security in international and regional organizations at
various levels. During the period under consideration,
Slovenia actively contributed to promoting the
implementation of the resolutions in the Western
Balkans by contributing to the development of some of
the national action plans in the region.
As the promotion of gender equality and women’s
rights in conflict and post-conflict situations has also
been high on Slovenia’s foreign policy agenda, we have
strengthened efforts to promote women’s rights in
general and in specific country situations, especially
in the framework of the United Nations Human Rights
Council and its various mechanisms, including the
universal periodic review.
The promotion and protection of the rights of
women and girls was raised also by Slovene highlevel representatives in various international forums.
Slovenia has made progress in training civilian and
military personnel to be deployed to international
operations and missions on issues regarding women,
peace and security. In the past two years, the
participation of policewomen in training programmes
of international missions increased immensely.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden.
Ms. Burgstaller (Sweden): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the Nordic countries, namely,
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden.
I would like to begin by thanking the Indian
presidency for organizing this debate. I also thank the
Deputy Secretary-General, Under-Secretary-General
Michelle Bachelet and Under-Secretary-General Hervé
Ladsous for their valuable remarks at the beginning of
this meeting. I also wish to express special thanks for
the valuable insights of Ms. Bineta Diop on behalf of
civil society.

49

S/PV.6877

The full implementation of all Security Council
resolutions on women and peace and security is a
priority for the Nordic countries. The issues at stake
are central to the core mandate of the Security Council,
namely, the maintenance of peace and security.
We welcome the presidential statement adopted by
the Council on 31 October (S/PRST/2012/23). We are
also grateful for the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/732) and fully support its recommendations.
The Nordic countries echo the concern about the
lack of implementation, as shown by the information
collected and analyzed while using the indicators. We
call for renewed urgency and greater consistency in
implementing the resolutions on women and peace and
security, all of which were unanimously adopted and
are thus binding and relevant to all Member States.
Not providing protection for women in conflict
constitutes serious neglect; not tapping the resources of
women in building peace is seriously wasteful.
The Nordic countries support civil society, in
particular women’s organizations that tirelessly work to
prevent and solve conflicts, build peace and stability and
defend human rights, while often putting themselves at
great personal risk in difficult conditions. Their work
contributes to more sustainable and legitimate peace.
They deserve our full political and financial support,
as well as physical protection.
The Nordic countries work with numerous civil
society organizations from many different countries
and we plan to do so in the future. The implementation
and review of our own national action plans has greatly
benefitted from our close cooperation with civil society.
This year, through a series of meetings with women’s
rights advocates from several countries on the Council’s
agenda, the Security Council has had an opportunity,
before renewing mission mandates, to hear directly
from women who are working for peace and security
in their respective countries. We are encouraged by
the steps taken by the Council in its country-specific
work to address the concerns brought forward by those
women advocates.
The incorporation of a gender perspective in peace
and security efforts is not only necessary, but effective
and strategically opportune. Not only women, but
whole families and communities will benefit; as will
national institutions, the overall security situation
and the rule of law, which is strengthened through,

50

for example, measures to address impunity for human
rights violations, including sexual violence.
Women and men must have full and equal
opportunity to participate in all political processes
linked to conflict resolution and the promotion of
stability, peace and security. That includes conflict
prevention, mediation processes at all levels, including
contact groups and informal consultations, as well as
formal negotiation, peace-agreement implementation
mechanisms and donor conferences. It is of particular
importance to support women’s full and effective
participation in post-conflict constitutional and
electoral processes, including through special measures
and security arrangements. Special attention should
also be paid during times of mission drawdown.
That of course requires everyone to do their part.
As committed Member States, we commit to supporting
women’s active participation and to fostering a gender
perspective in all our peace and security efforts.
That includes promoting women’s inclusion in peace
processes and ensuring that personnel and troops
are adequately trained to take women’s rights and
perspectives fully into account.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(A/66/811) on strengthening the role of mediation in
the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention
and resolution and its annex I, entitled “Guidance for
Effective Mediation”. Both the report and the Guidance
highlight the importance of the role of women. We
call on the Secretary-General to nominate women as
chief mediators and special envoys and as members of
mediation teams.
Let me finish by commending UN-Women for
its crucial work in leading and coordinating the
United Nations system work on women and peace and
security. We commend the work of the former Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Margot Wallström. We also
welcome the appointment of her successor, Ms. Zainab
Hawa Bangura, and look forward to working closely
with her, as well as with the United Nations Action
Against Sexual Violence in Conflict.
In conclusion, 12 years after the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), we, the Nordic countries,
renew our commitment to the equal right of women
to determine the peaceful future of their societies.
We recognize that full and effective participation of
women and men alike enhances the legitimacy of peace

12-62149

S/PV.6877

processes, as well as the prospect for a durable and
lasting peace. We have a collective responsibility to
translate that awareness into further actions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand
appreciates the opportunity to mark the twelfth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) and thanks both
last month’s President, Guatemala, and now India for
organizing this very important debate.
It is appropriate that this particular debate should
focus on the role of women’s civil society organizations.
Resolution 1325 (2000) was neither created in a vacuum,
nor did it result from the foresight of Member States.
Rather, it was women’s civil society organizations that
were particularly instrumental in the initial passage of
resolution 1325 (2000), as the culmination of many years
of active campaigning, and they continue to play a key
role in ensuring the inclusion of gender perspectives in
all United Nations debates on peace and security issues.
We particularly note the important role played by
women’s organizations in our own region. They were
vital components of peace processes in Bougainville in
Papua New Guinea and in the Solomon Islands. And we
anticipate that Papua New Guinea will speak on that
in some detail shortly. As Luxembourg highlighted in
its statement to the Council, that was also the case in
Timor-Leste. Again in our own region, in September
of this year, we were very pleased to see the launch
of the first Pacific Regional Action Plan on Women,
Peace and Security, on which occasion Prime Minister
Puna of the Cook Islands underscored the contribution
that Pacific women’s civil society organizations had
made to the development of that Plan. We repeat that
sentiment in this forum today. Indeed, we emphasize
the need to mainstream gender perspectives across all
issues in the peace and security agenda.
We also welcome the Secretary-General’s report
on women and peace and security (S/2012/732) and
draw attention to several points. First, in planning
for the transition phase in peacekeeping missions, we
must ensure that we do not lose gender expertise and
the United Nations-led advances for women, peace and
security. It is critically important that the full women,
peace and security agenda be considered as part of the
planning for drawdown and handover, as has just been
highlighted by the representative of Sweden in her
statement.

12-62149

Secondly, we must continue to push for an enhanced
role for women in political-level peace discussions,
both as mediators — again as highlighted by the
representative of Sweden — and as principal political
actors. That can be best achieved through the increased
political representation of women in both elected and
appointed posts, a point that was highlighted by Croatia
among others.
We are pleased at the growing acknowledgement
of the need to address the negative impact of armed
violence on women and the need to integrate gender
perspectives into disarmament policy and practice,
particularly with regard to small arms and light
weapons. For most of us, those arms are indeed the real
weapons of mass destruction, killing over half a million
people each and every year.
In that regard, we particularly commend the
leadership of Trinidad and Tobago in bringing to the
United Nations the issues of women, disarmament,
non-proliferation and arms control, and we are very
pleased that this year’s First Committee draft resolution
(A/C.1/67/L.35/Rev.1) was adopted by consensus.
We hope we can make further progress, drawing
on the positive outcomes from this year’s United
Nations Conference to Review Progress Made in the
Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. New Zealand
particularly highlights the importance of further
research and analysis to improve our understanding of
the role that women can and must play in that area.
At a time when many national action plans
are up for review, New Zealand is very pleased to
acknowledge that, as we continue to develop our own
plan, we are learning much from the experience of
many others. Overall, however, we must all continue to
push ahead with the women, peace and security agenda
through ongoing and enhanced collaboration among
Member States, international, regional and subregional
organizations and civil society. New Zealand will
certainly play its part in that important endeavour.
The President: I now call on the representative of
Lithuania.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): Let me begin by
thanking India for convening this open debate on women
and peace and security. Lithuania aligns itself with
the statement of the European Union. My delegation
appreciates the analysis and recommendations of the

51

S/PV.6877

Secretary-General contained in document S/2012/732,
which notes the significant progress achieved at the
normative level. We believe that the focus should
now be on implementation, which must be consistent,
coherent and comprehensive. Continuous engagement
by the Security Council on the subject is required,
because mainstreaming gender perspectives into
conflict prevention, conflict resolution and postconflict rehabilitation remains an unfinished business.
In that ongoing endeavour, civil society
organizations have an important role to play in
monitoring implementation, holding international
and national leaders to account, providing ideas and
feedback on what works and how it works best and giving
a voice to the most vulnerable groups. Furthermore, as
some countries are renewing their national action plans,
civil society organizations can provide useful inputs on
the best practices and lessons learned, which would be
helpful in further improving those plans.
Lithuania adopted its national action plan for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in
December 2011. One of the first things we did in drafting
the plan was to turn to women’s non-governmental
organizations for their input. Their insights and
practical experience helped make our plan more
focused, measurable and results-oriented. Lithuania
will continue working with women’s organizations,
including in developing gender awareness and gender
adviser training programmes intended for our future
peacekeeping and civilian police mission participants.
As a member of the Group of Friends of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000) and the Group of
Friends of Mediation, Lithuania concurs with the
Secretary-General that the gender dimension of
mediation must be clearly and consistently articulated.
Women must be part of the process, as mediators and
peace negotiators, as that makes it possible to take
into account their needs for political, economic and
social empowerment. Special envoys, United Nations
mediators, peacekeeping operations, political missions
and peacebuilding support offices should regularly
consult with women’s organizations on the ground
and maintain their efforts aimed at facilitating and
supporting women’s equal participation as active agents
of change with full involvement in peace negotiations,
post-conflict reconstruction, electoral processes and
recovery. We call on the Security Council to make
sure that all peacekeeping missions’ mandates have an
integrated gender perspective.

52

An important factor affecting women’s greater
participation in conflict resolution and post-conflict
recovery is their safety and security. Sadly, women and
girl activists and women’s rights defenders are often
subject to intimidation and violent attacks, including
sexual violence. We must step up our efforts to provide
protection for women human rights defenders and must
tackle impunity with due severity and determination.
Creating an enabling environment for women’s
equal participation also requires a change in mentality
and efforts to overcome existing gender stereotypes and
prejudices. That, in turn, demands consistent efforts
to involve male local activists, traditional leaders
and, more generally, the male half of the communities
concerned, including boys.
Furthermore, it is of the utmost importance that
sexual exploitation and abuse by United Nations staff
and related personnel should be fully eliminated. Such
cases constitute a double breach of women’s rights
and dignity, by both local militants and warlords and
by those who are supposed to protect them on the
ground. We fully support the Secretary-General in his
call to enforce a zero-tolerance policy vis-à-vis sexual
exploitation.
My delegation would like to stress the importance
of further efforts in raising awareness of, and ensuring
consistent adherence to, the implementation of
necessary measures in the codes of conduct of States’
armed forces. Sharing best practices and encouraging
the integration of measures for the protection of women
in armed conflicts into operational documents should
be a part of our efforts.
Finally, let me also note that my delegation
supports the Secretary-General on the need to look
into the gender aspect of armed violence fuelled by the
availability, limited control and illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons. In that regard, my country
looks forward to the upcoming final conference on the
arms trade treaty in March 2013 and strongly supports
calls for including a gender perspective in the future
treaty, including in connection with the need to retain
the obligation on exporting States to avoid arms being
used to commit or facilitate gender-based violence or
violence against children.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Latvia.
Ms. Freimane-Deksne (Latvia): Latvia aligns
itself with the statement made by the observer of the
12-62149

S/PV.6877

European Union and would like to make a few remarks
in our national capacity.
I thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2012/732) and Ms. Bachelet, Mr. Ladsous and
Ms. Diop for their statements.
The topic of today’s debate is of particular
importance. The sustainable political, social and
economic development of a country is possible only
with a strong civil society that is involved in all stages of
decision-making, including in conflict prevention and
resolution and peacebuilding. Women’s civil society
organizations play a particular role in that regard by
voicing women’s rights and concerns early on, laying
the foundations for non-discriminatory and inclusive
decision-making processes and, most importantly,
contributing to overall international peace and security.
In order to increase the representation of women’s
civil society leaders in peace processes and post-confl ict
peace consolidation, formal arrangements — such as
on the security of women human rights defenders,
security prior to and during elections and childcare
arrangements — and capacity-building in leadership,
conflict analysis and negotiation skills should be
provided. Capacity development for women’s leaders
and organizations during and after conflict is crucial
for women’s further effective participation in the
political and economic life of a country.

beginning in January 2013, Latvia will contribute to
their implementation. To reaffirm Latvia’s commitment
to promoting the empowerment of women at both the
national and international levels, Latvia expressed
its intent to join the Equal Futures Partnership at the
launch event hosted by Secretary of State Clinton on
24 September, as well as to announce new commitments
in that regard in the spring of 2013.
We fully agree with the statement made by
Ms. Bachelet in the Security Council in April
(see S/PV.6759) that we should build on women’s role
as agents of conflict resolution and sustained recovery,
without focusing exclusively on the way conflict
victimizes women. The role of women is important
in the whole crisis cycle, from the prevention and
resolution of conflict to peacebuilding, post-conflict
reconciliation and reintegration. Women leaders and
women’s organizations can provide important input
in decreasing the challenges facing women in conflict
zones and can function as early-warning mechanisms
to prevent backsliding on women’s rights and to sustain
progress in women’s protection.

Latvia participates in capacity-building in several
conflict situations and post-conflict countries. Women’s
leadership, participation and economic empowerment
are among the main priorities of our capacitybuilding initiatives. Latvia has shared its experience
and implemented projects in Afghanistan, Iraq and
other countries. In all those initiatives, the Latvian
Government has closely cooperated with women’s
civil society organizations, and activities in that regard
continue. Women’s non-governmental organizations
in Latvia are also implementing their own capacitybuilding projects, for example by facilitating the
establishment of women’s resource centres in Central
Asia, sharing expertise in the prevention of human
trafficking and providing assistance to victims in Iraq.

The international community’s involvement
in scaling up women’s community initiatives and
improving their access to national and international
dialogue and mediation processes is of particular
relevance. The Security Council recognized as much
in its presidential statement on this topic last year
(S/PRST/2011/20). Women civil society representatives
should be systematically invited to participate in
international dialogues, contact groups, international
engagement events and donor conferences, as well
as regularly consulted on conflict resolution and
peacebuilding efforts. The Security Council should
provide regular and even responses to women’s
peace and security concerns by, inter alia, inserting
specific instructions for women’s engagement in the
establishment and renewal of mandates, ensuring
regular reporting on women’s human rights violations
by United Nations peacekeeping and special political
missions and continuing to use Arria Formula meetings
and other formats to facilitate open dialogue with
women’s civil society representatives.

Latvia believes that women’s political leadership
and economic empowerment are key to ensuring
women’s participation in the prevention of conflict,
conflict resolution and long-term recovery efforts. They
are also part of UN-Women’s main thematic prioritie
and, as a member of the UN-Women Executive Board

Moreover, the United Nations itself should
live up to its own standards by ensuring women’s
adequate representation in peacekeeping operations
at different levels and by improving training on genderspecific issues for military and police in peacekeeping
missions. The United Nations gender expertise

12-62149

53

S/PV.6877

is crucial for capacity-building and for increased
engagement of women’s civil society representatives
in peace-making and peacebuilding processes, as
demonstrated by recent examples in South Sudan,
Somalia and Yemen. In that regard, Latvia welcomes
the formalization of the gender expert position in the
Mediation Support Standby Team and the inclusion of
gender advisers in all multidimensional peacekeeping
operations and political missions. We look forward
to the results of the review on how gender expertise
is structured and deployed within the United Nations
system.
In conclusion, let me reiterate Latvia’s commitment
to the promotion of gender equality and the participation
of women and their civil society organizations at all
levels and in different contexts of decision-making.
We encourage further coordinated work by United
Nations institutions and Member States in effectively
implementatinig resolution 1325 (2000).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Yamazaki (Japan): I thank the Deputy
Secretary-General, the Executive Director of
UN-Women and the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations for their informative
briefings. We also thank the representative from civil
society and welcome her participation here today.
Japan welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2012/732), which demonstrates the clear
commitment of the Secretary-General to the issue
being discussed today. We are very much aware that
the Secretary-General announced “Working with and
for women and young people” as one of the five priority
agenda items for his second term.
We are very encouraged that, under the strong
leadership of Ms. Bachelet, UN-Women has been
resolutely promoting the agenda of women and peace
and security as one of its priorities. It is with great
satisfaction that we note that, during her recent visit
to Japan, Ms. Bachelet had an opportunity to meet and
exchange views with members of Japanese civil society,
political leaders, including the Prime Minister, Foreign
Minister and Minister for Gender Issues, and leaders of
the private sector, the press and youth groups.
The security of women and girls is an indicator
of peace and stability. In that regard, we note that
the Secretary-General’s report refers to the fact that
Afghan women’s groups have voiced concerns over
54

the potential for a peace deal to be made at the cost of
women’s hard-fought rights. On that point, we would
like to mention that, in July, Japan hosted the Tokyo
Conference on Afghanistan, which reaffirmed and
further consolidated the international community’s
partnership with the Afghan Government in the
Partnership for Self-Reliance in Afghanistan from
Transition to the Transformation Decade (2015-2024).
Thirty Afghans from civil society, half of whom were
women, were invited to the Conference. It should
be noted that, the Tokyo declaration which resulted
from the Conference, stressed the importance of
the participation of civil society organizations and
women’s groups in support of the peace process and the
culture of peace and human rights in Afghan society, in
particular in the light of resolution 1325 (2000).
Relief and recovery initiatives for women in
conflict or post-conflict situations are also key when
conflict prevention efforts unfortunately fail. As an
example, in close collaboration and consultation with
a wide range of women’s civil society organizations in
the Sudan, Japan supported finding employment for
women in poverty, including widows, women in rural
places and women with disabilities.
As to refugees and persons displaced as a result of
conflicts, Japan supported the efforts to prevent sexual
violence in Ivorian refugee camps located in Liberia by
providing lighting and electricity in common areas of
the camps, as well as vocational training that included
awareness-raising activities. That effort also included
our support to establish a relief and recovery system,
including legal support and mental care to victims
of sexual violence. In the Republic of Uganda, Japan
implemented awareness-raising activities for sexual
violence prevention in communities of refugees from
neighbouring countries, and over 10,000 people
participated.
As we move towards the fifteenth anniversary
of the adoption of the resolution, Japan, for its part,
will continue to exert its utmost efforts towards the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in cooperation
with our partners, and in particular with women’s civil
society organizations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Adi (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me, first of all, to thank Ms. Michelle Bachelet
for presenting the report of the Secretary-General on

12-62149

S/PV.6877

women and peace and security (S/2012/732). We would
like to tell her how much we appreciate her work since
she assumed her post.
The Syrian Arab Republic has sought to develop
in a qualitative fashion the lives of women, as well
as to advance their status, based on international
commitments and in line with the principles of our
national Constitution. In so doing, we confirm the
implementation of our commitment. In that regard,
pursuant to the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women, the Syrian
Arab Republic has presented its second and third
periodic reports on its implementation of the provisions
of the Convention.
Unfortunately, in the wake of the events taking place
in my country today, armed terrorist groups supported,
financed and armed by regional and international Arab
sides, are seeking to push my country backwards and
negate the social progress that Syria had achieved in
terms of gender equality. Individuals or elements in
those armed groups — be they Takfirist, Wahabists
or Salafists — are seeking to sow psychological panic
within society by turning back time to the Dark Ages,
particularly with regard to the role of women in Syrian
society. As a result, working women now are fearful in
going to work, and girls are afraid to go to school or
university.
The armed groups are continuing to violate women’s
rights in Syria and are hampering the evacuation of
injured and sick people, including women, children
and disabled persons, to areas where refuge is being
offered, as was the case in the city of Homs, where
representatives of the International Committee of the
Red Cross were present. Furthermore, those armed
groups have committed numerous types of sexual
violence, targeting women and girls. All such incidents
have been documented and reported to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict.
We also deplore the fact that some people are
exploiting the difficult situation that Syrian female
refugees are finding themselves in in camps in
neighbouring countries — marrying Syrian women
under the pretext that they are going to help them escape
their difficult situation through what has come to be
crudely called sexual jihad. That is in addition to the
sexual violence and abuse that have been perpetrated
against those women, in violation of all international
human rights agreements.
12-62149

Despite all of that, Syria is continuing to deal with
the challenges it faces as it seeks, specifically, to liberate
the occupied Syrian territories in the Golan Heights by
promoting efforts to reach a just and comprehensive
peace based on the resolutions of international
legitimacy in order to bring an end to the suffering of
civilian Syrians resulting from Israeli occupation, in
particular, Syrian women. In that regard, my delegation
reiterates its call to the Secretary-General to include
in his reports references to the challenges, harrowing
reality and types of violence that Arab women are
having to face in occupied Palestine and in the occupied
Syrian Golan Heights.
Syrian women in occupied Golan have not been
spared repeated detention. Since the Israeli occupation
in 1967, nearly 2,500 Syrian citizens have been
detained in Israeli prisons, including women and
children. Women who live in the occupied Golan region
do not have the right to return to their country of origin;
even those who are sick and require humanitarian or
emergency attention are not allowed to cross the border
except with a permit.
We hope that Ms. Bachelet and UN-Women will
undertake to provide the necessary assistance to Syrians
to achieve gender equality and to empower women to
help find an end to the bloodshed by cooperating with
the Syrian Government, first and foremost, and by
continuing to exert pressure on external parties in order
to prevent them from spreading bloodshed and conflict
within the country and getting them to put an end to
their terroristic interference and their violations of
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
We would also call on them to play an active role in
terms of protecting the rights of Syrian women and
advancing their status in the Israeli-occupied Syrian
Golan.
Finally, we would call particular attention to
the threats stemming from the unilateral economic
measures that have been imposed against my country
by international entities in violation of international
legitimacy, which are negating its economic and social
development and hampering the active exercise by the
Syrian people of their full rights, especially their right
to development.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Schaper (Netherlands): My delegation
welcomes this debate, and would like to make

55

S/PV.6877

a few remarks in addition to the statements by
the observer of the European Union and others
underlining the importance of women’s civil society
organizations in contributing to the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).
The Netherlands has placed gender equality at the
heart of its policies for decades. On the international
level, we support female leadership, the followup to resolution 1325 (2000), women’s economic
empowerment and the elimination of violence against
women.
In December 2011, the Netherlands launched
its second 1325 national action plan, covering the
period 2012-2015. As we see it, the plan is unique of
its kind, since it is based on and encompasses close
cooperation between Government, civil society
and research institutions. It brings together Dutch
Government ministries and research institutions and
32 civil society organizations, including multinational
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), women’s
peace movements and diaspora organizations. Our
national action plan is based on many different sources
of knowledge and experience and is designed to be
both ambitious and feasible. It has a thematic and a
geographical focus. Thematically, it is fully dedicated
to enhancing female leadership and political leverage
in conflict-affected societies. Geographically, it
focuses on six countries — Afghanistan, Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Sudan, the
Sudan and Colombia — as well as on the Middle East
and North Africa region.
As a result of that approach, the Dutch national
action plan includes many joint activities that benefit
from the complementarity between Government bodies
and civil society in the Netherlands and their partner
organizations in the focus countries. I would like to
mention a few examples in that regard.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Netherlands will support the national women’s fund
in promoting Congolese women’s participation in
the coming elections. We will also support women
in the eastern part of the country who can play a
mediation role in the conflict that is still raging in the
Kivus. Similarly, in Burundi as well as in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the signatories to
the Dutch national action plan will support a regional
organization programme that will cooperate with local
women’s and media organizations to increase public
support for women’s political participation and to
56

strengthen the capacity of women’s organizations to
campaign, including by using media technologies.
In Afghanistan, a group of signatories is working
with a local telephone and Internet provider to start
a programme connecting poor rural women and men
with more modern youth in the main towns via an SMS
platform, using SMS-based blogging. The objective
is to keep the rural poor better informed on national
women’s issues and to foster dialogue between rural
poor and urban youth. In Libya, we support a capacitybuilding programme to enable women to make a
meaningful contribution to the development of the new
constitution.
The Dutch Government also attaches a high priority
to the financial implementation of its second national
action plan. An amount of €2 million is available
annually for the period 2012-2015 for programmes
in the six partner countries, with the same amount
reserved for the Middle East and North Africa regions.
Last year, the Netherlands Ministry of Foreign Affairs
established the Funding Leadership and Opportunities
for Women fund (FLOW), the largest women’s fund
in the world. Between 2012 and 2015 FLOW will
invest €78 million in women’s organizations, many of
them in conflict-affected areas. Finally, a new fund
is being established with the Dutch NGO HIVOS and
the accounting firm of PriceWaterhouseCoopers to
strengthen the financial and organizational management
of women’s organizations in the Middle East and North
Africa regions. In that way, we hope to be able to share
and support the commitments made during the Equal
Futures Partnership event hosted by United States
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton last month.
In conclusion, the potential role of women’s
organizations in any social or political transformation
is huge. Women can and should play a pivotal role in
their societies, and they deserve our support in helping
them to take the lead more effectively. Transition
processes like the ones in the North Africa region are
an opportunity for women to translate their influence
into formal roles. The same is true for women and
their organizations working in fragile countries.
Women across the world involved in peacebuilding,
reconciliation and democratization will continue to
find the Netherlands at their side.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.

12-62149

S/PV.6877

Ms. Anderson (Ireland): I would like to thank the
delegations of Guatemala and India for preparing and
scheduling today’s important debate. To respect the
time constraints, I will touch on just a couple of points,
and circulate a slightly longer written text.
The first point relates to transitions. The Secretary
General’s report of 2 October bluntly states that
“considerable obstacles persist to women’s participation
and representation in public decision-making in relation
to peace and transition processes” (S/2012/732, para. 65).
Times of transition are absolutely critical; as a society
is being reshaped, opportunities can be either seized
or squandered. If such periods of transition are used
to comprehensively strengthen women’s political and
economic participation, the foundations will be laid for
more just, more stable and more prosperous societies.
The prospect of critical transitional opportunities
being squandered should concern us all deeply. And
the risks are clearly and visibly there. Although we
are witnessing parts of the world, especially the Arab
world, undergoing social and political tumult and
transformation, when the smoke clears there tends to
be one striking constant: women still struggling to
secure a place at the table. It would seem that there is a
deep-seated reluctance, even more ingrained than fear
of authoritarian rulers, to let women play their rightful
role in charting the way forward.

seek to ensure the adequate representation of women in
that opposition.
It may be objected that in the immediacy of a
crisis there are other priorities requiring more urgent
attention. But there is a clear message in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, that is, if a proper role for women is
not built in at the key moment, it will become much
harder to graft it on later. Women’s role and concerns
are time and again pushed down the priority list; they
become in effect preamble or postscript issues, instead
of getting the front-and-centre treatment they need.
To make just a quick point in relation to civil society,
the Secretary-General’s report makes specific mention
of one model for civil society engagement, namely, the
election “situation room”. It was my privilege recently
to co-host at the Irish Mission a panel discussion on
the contribution made by the women’s situation room
to ensuring peace and stability during the Senegalese
presidential elections held earlier this year. Ms. Bineta
Diop, who addressed the Security Council this
morning, was our main speaker. It was immensely
encouraging to hear about this participative, bottom-up
initiative. In the dynamism and proactive participation
of civil society at the grassroots level, empowering and
building on the capacities and real-life experiences of
local women, the women’s situation room is a model to
be emulated and replicated widely.

The empowerment agenda is not an outsider’s
agenda; it is one that is arising organically from within
those societies. Women, either individually or in civil
society organizations, have demonstrated, often at great
personal cost, their hunger and passion for change. And
we know that change is both necessary and possible.
The Secretary-General points out in his report that a
combination of strong gender analysis, active efforts by
his Special Adviser on Yemen and close engagement
with women leaders and groups resulted in the
inclusion of gender-specific commitments in the Yemen
Transition Agreement.

The challenge is to document and disseminate such
initiatives in different countries so as to transform
single experiences into mainstream policy. The
strength of civil society initiatives often lies in their
spontaneity and local buy-in; the weaknesses can be in
ensuring structure, durability and transferability. The
Senegalese experiment was a particularly successful
one, and it is encouraging that UN-Women and the
United Nations Development Programme are working
to ensure that it is properly recorded and adapted for
use in other situations.

In its recent statements on women and peace and
security, the Security Council has recognized the primary
role and responsibility of national Governments. That
is indeed true, and we all recognize the importance of
national ownership. But national ownership can never
become a rationale or alibi for inaction by the rest of
us. For example, Member States taking an active role in
supporting the Syrian opposition coalition that is trying
to organize itself have themselves a responsibility to

It is evident from the Secretary-General’s report
that there is a substantial and expanding conceptual
infrastructure dedicated to women and peace and
security issues. As in so many other areas of United
Nations work, the challenge is implementation,
implementation, implementation. We need to ensure
that fine words in New York translate into measurable
and meaningful results on the ground. These regular
Security Council debates are worthwhile insofar as
they allow us to make that connection.

12-62149

57

S/PV.6877

The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Fiji.
Mr. Thomson (Fiji): Allow me at the outset to
thank you, Sir, for having convened this important
debate, which provides an opportunity for all Members
to contribute to the discussion on the global women and
peace and security agenda.
Fiji recognizes the importance of resolution 1325
(2000) and acknowledges the progress that has been
made globally towards achieving its objectives.
We appreciate the specific actions taken in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), as identified
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2012/732), and we
thank the Secretary-General for his report. We also
appreciate the increased coordination and coherence
in policy and programming in the area of women and
peace and security through the work of UN-Women,
and particularly in the Pacific region through a
strengthened UN-Women’s office in Fiji.
We recognize, however, that national implementation
will remain the key to meeting the objectives of the
resolution. In that respect, Fiji is working within
the framework of its Roadmap for Democracy
and Sustainable Socio-Economic Development to
create enabling environments for women in both
the public and the private domains. Recognizing the
importance of women in public leadership positions,
the Fiji Government has a target of achieving at least
30 per cent representation of women in all Governmentappointed boards and committees. Meanwhile, Fijian
authorities continue to implement and raise awareness
of the Crimes Decree (2009) and the Domestic Violence
Decree (2010), which contain provisions, inter alia, on
sexual violence and trafficking.
Since our open debate in the Security Council on
this subject last year (S/PV.6642), the Pacific region
has taken the lead in developing and launching a
regional action plan on women, peace and security.
The plan will support national efforts to ensure that
women are included as active participants at all stages
of conflict prevention, resolution and peacebuilding.
It is a landmark achievement for our region, and I
would like to acknowledge the collaborative efforts
of various United Nations agencies with regional
intergovernmental organizations and with the Fijibased civil society organization FemLINKPACIFIC,
which allowed the plan to be articulated at the regional
level.

58

In considering the crucial role of women as agents
of positive change in conflict prevention, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, Fiji has made a concerted effort
to increase the number of well-qualified female
peacekeepers that it sends to United Nations
peacekeeping missions across the world. In its most
recent nominations of police personnel for rotation in
the United Nations Mission in Liberia and the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan, 55 per cent of police
personnel nominated for deployment by Fiji were
women. Bearing in mind in particular the growing role
of peacekeeping missions in supporting the capacity
of local authorities, Fiji will continue to send its best
qualified people to mentor and train local counterparts,
in particular in dealing with sexual violence and
encouraging women’s participation in helping to build
post-conflict societies.
A discussion of women, peace and security is
incomplete without factoring in the security challenges
posed by the consequences of climate change. This
is so because for exposed countries like Fiji, women
and children are among the most affected by natural
disasters. The realities of climate change and the
consequent proliferation of natural disasters are
inescapable challenges for our people and for our land.
Adverse impacts on food security and access to arable
land, as well as the destabilization of communities,
disproportionately affect women. Women must
therefore be part of the policy formation dialogue at the
community and national levels with regard to responses
to climate change.
We also recognize that women play a leading
role in the rebuilding of communities after natural
disasters. We therefore appreciate the theme of this
year’s International Day for Disaster Reduction that
women and girls are the “Visible force of resilience”.
Finally, we acknowledge that much progress has
been made, but it is self-evident that the international
community still has a long way to go to ensure that
the dignity, peace and security of women worldwide are
realized.
Mr. Rakhmetullin (Kazakhstan): I thank you,
Sir, for having convened this open debate on women
and peace and security, which enables the Security
Council to focus on the paramount role of women and
their civil society organizations in contributing to the
prevention and resolution of armed conflicts, as well
as to peacebuilding. Today’s deliberations provide a

12-62149

S/PV.6877

valuable opportunity to assess the extent of the real,
positive and lasting change that we can make in the
lives of women affected by armed conflicts.
Promoting the rights of women is at the core of the
human rights policy of my country, and Kazakhstan,
as a member of the Executive Board of UN-Women,
wholeheartedly supports the multilateral effort in that
direction. At the same time, we need to assess and
overcome the factors facing women’s organizations,
such as the lack of security, resources and access to
information, to ensure their effective involvement in
the peace and security agenda. Those and many other
obstacles can be overcome by including women’s groups
in strategies for the prevention, resolution and recovery
from conflict. It is therefore critical to strengthen
women’s interventions not just at the international but
also the national and regional levels.
We believe that the fourth ministerial meeting of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, to be held
in Jakarta this December, will reaffirm such a strong
commitment to implementing resolution 1325 (2000)
as an integral part of the development agenda. My
delegation also appreciates the efforts made by the
United Nations system to strengthen mechanisms for
monitoring and reporting on regional initiatives. We
propose encouraging Member States to report on their
commitments and actions plans related to women and
peace and security.
My country is of the conviction that gender
mainstreaming is an absolute necessity and a
prerequisite for ensuring a place for women on the
peace and security agenda. Gender mainstreaming
should be an inalienable component of peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, and not an add-on or secondary
concern. We have seen a positive trend of women
themselves being the driving force for bringing the
gender perspective to conflict and post-conflict
situations. In this regard, Kazakhstan welcomes the
increasing number of national action plans that are
being designed and implemented worldwide, as well
as the broad inclusion of indicators to assess women’s
participation in peacekeeping and peacebuilding in
these national plans.
It is noteworthy that half of the field missions
managed by the Department of Political Affairs have
gender advisers. We fully support the process of
including women’s participation in field missions to
ensure that programmes focus on the specific needs of

12-62149

girls and women as a means to advance gender equality
and the empowerment of women.
As we assess progress, there is also an
acknowledgement of the reality that much more needs
to be done so that resolution 1325 (2000) is no longer
merely a statement of aspirations, with little action to
record since 2000. We have to be conscious of the voices
of women around the world who feel unrepresented in
international and regional peace processes.
In designing peacebuilding strategies, we need
to be more sensitive and take into consideration the
knowledge and insights of local women at the grassroots level. It is also important to gather information
about the incidence of sexual violence, insecurity and
human rights violations as perceived by women, and for
women to be represented at all levels. Local women’s
networks and grass-roots organizations therefore need
to be consulted in the process of designing our genderresponsible policies and programmes. We also need to
draw on traditional and indigenous methods of conflict
resolution used by local women’s groups and avail
ourselves of the wisdom of elder women.
Advisers on gender issues must also consistently
take account of and utilize the information gathered
by local women’s organizations. Every effort must be
made to ensure that their perspectives are heard and
considered by the highest decision-making entities and
structures. It is equally important that women be fully
represented in those bodies in field missions and all
other platforms. Wherever necessary, training, capacitybuilding and assistance need to be provided for women’s
full participation in the areas of non-governmental
organization leadership skills, advocacy, management,
administration, communication and dealing with
the media, for only then will true empowerment be
possible. We can benefit from best-practice models,
lessons learned and exchanges of information between
missions and United Nations country teams.
My delegation would therefore also propose
United Nations system-wide coherence on gender
empowerment in conflict resolution through closer
coordination between United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes. Furthermore, the best results will
be achieved if all stakeholders, together with Member
States, the private sector, academia and the media form
a strong partnership to achieve our common objective.
In conclusion, we commend the Security
Council’s continuing attention to the urgent and

59

S/PV.6877

critical issue of further promoting the full realization
of resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security, and at the same time we call for greater efforts
on our part to include women in our deliberations.

made by the United Nations system, Member States,
civil society and other actors. In that regard, a number
of activities covering a broad range of areas have been
undertaken over the past decade.

The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Botswana.

As noted in the Secretary-General’s report, we are
encouraged by the fact that the number of countries
that have articulated their priorities on women and
peace and security through national action plans has
continued to grow.

Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): Let me begin by
thanking and congratulating the Indian presidency of
the Council for the initiative to hold this open debate
today on women, peace and security, with a focus
on the role of women civil society organizations in
contributing to the prevention and resolution of armed
conflict and peacebuilding.
We believe that today’s open debate will offer an
opportunity to reflect on the lessons learned and the
actions needed to accelerate the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions, as
well as related international commitments on women
and peace and security.
Botswana welcomes the Security Council’s
continued focus on issues related to women, peace
and security, particularly its call for the enhanced
participation, representation and involvement of women
in the prevention and resolution of armed conflicts and
in peacebuilding, as well as a stronger commitment to
address challenges to the engagement of women at all
levels.
We sincerely thank the Secretary-General for his
informative report (S/2012/732) and for the detailed
analysis it contains on the progress made in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
By taking part in today’s deliberations, Botswana
reaffirms the great importance and its recognition of
the contribution and role of women in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts and renews its commitment
to address issues related to women and gender equality
at the national level.
Botswana’s support for United States-led resolution
66/130, aimed at encouraging the greater political
participation of women and their expanded role in
decision- making and peacekeeping, and which was
adopted by the General Assembly’s Third Committee
in 2011, is a practical demonstration of our strong
commitment in that regard.
Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000)
in 2000, significant progress has been made in its
implementation, as demonstrated by the notable efforts
60

We are, however, concerned that despite the
normative framework and the wide range of activities
spurred by the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
the underrepresentation of women in formal peace
processes, as well as violence against women and girls,
continues. This situation certainly has to be corrected.
To that end, Botswana reiterates its strong
condemnation of all violations committed against
women and girls, including sexual and gender-based
violence in armed conflict and post-conflict situations.
In that connection, we wish to stress the importance
of promoting and protecting the human rights of
women and girls in the context of the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and bringing to justice those
responsible for crimes of that nature.
My delegation is convinced that peace is
inextricably linked to the issue of equality between
women and men, and, as such, we fully share the view
that gender equality should be recognized as a core
issue in the maintenance of peace and security.
In this regard, we also believe that if women are to
play a key role in conflict-prevention and peacebuilding
processes, the obstacles and challenges that limit their
involvement need to be addressed, including their
underrepresentation in formal peace and security
processes.
The effective participation of women’s civil society
organizations in conflict prevention and resolution
is essential for the sustainability of peace processes.
Learning from the examples of success stories
concerning the involvement of women and women’s
organizations in conflict resolution and peacebuilding,
as was the case in Rwanda, Liberia, Sierra Leone
and Timor-Leste, we also recognize the important
contribution of women’s civil society organizations in
the prevention and resolution of conflict. To that end,
the need to facilitate the inclusion and participation of
women in all efforts aimed at peacebuilding remains
critical.
12-62149

S/PV.6877

Furthermore, we are also of the belief that in order
to achieve the goals of resolution 1325 (2000), the
efforts of women’s civil society organizations should
be encouraged and supported.
I wish to conclude by reiterating the call made
in General Assembly resolution 66/130 regarding the
need to enhance the role of women in decision-making
with regard to conflict prevention and resolution, in
accordance with resolution 1325 (2000). In the same
vein, I wish to also stress the importance of creating
enabling conditions for women’s participation during
all stages of peace processes and of countering
negative societal attitudes regarding the full and equal
participation of women in conflict resolution and
mediation.
I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity you have given me to address the Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): At the outset, I would like
to note that this statement was supposed to have been
delivered by the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs,
Ms. Viola Onwuliri, but, as the meeting was postponed
and rescheduled for today, I am very happy to deliver
this statement on her behalf.
On behalf of my delegation, Mr. President, I
should like to join other speakers in commending your
leadership of the Security Council for this month.
We also commend your initiative of organizing this
debate on women and peace and security. We wish
also to commend the delegation of Guatemala for the
presidential statement (S/PRST/2012/23) that it put
forward under its presidency.
We thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report on the subject (S/2012/732). We
also thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson for
his introductory remarks this morning, as well as UnderSecretaries-General Michelle Bachelet and Hervé
Ladsous, and Ms. Bineta Diop for their statements.
The Council adopted resolution 1325 (2000), which
was a milestone achievement towards the recognition
of the importance of women’s equal participation and
full involvement in the maintenance of peace and
security, including conflict management, peacekeeping
and post-conflict peacebuilding. It is particularly
significant that this debate is breaking new ground
by focusing on the specific role played by women’s

12-62149

civil society organizations in the areas of conflict
prevention, resolution and recovery. We are delighted
to see Ms. Diop involved in this activity for so long.
It is common knowledge that women seldom
or hardly ever initiate violent conflicts, yet they
bear a great burden on various levels: physical,
psychological, economical, social and political. Their
suffering is compounded by their exclusion from key
decision-making processes that could potentially lead
to peace and stability.
Today’s discussion affords us the distinct
opportunity to reflect on our achievements so
far, but more importantly to make an assessment
of outstanding requirements to realize those objectives.
As the Council strives to ensure that the provisions
of the women and peace and security agenda are
integrated into its work, it stands to benefit from the
unique grass-roots perspectives that women’s civil
society organizations could provide. In that regard,
we acknowledge the progress made in the promotion
of women’s rights in conflict prevention, resolution
and peacebuilding, as demonstrated by the increase in
the number of dedicated implementation frameworks,
strategies and coordination mechanisms.
We believe that more needs to be done to create an
enabling environment for the participation of women in
all stages of the peace process. Such efforts to create the
right conditions for ensuring women’s full participation
should include increasing their participation and
representation in preventive diplomacy and in conflict
resolution and peacebuilding initiatives. They should
also include strengthening the capacities of the relevant
Government institutions and women’s organizations
involved with conflict and post-conflict issues.
Nigeria recognizes the central role of UN-Women,
working in close partnership and collaboration
with the Special Representatives of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict and for
Children and Armed Conflict, respectively. The gaps
and challenges hindering the full implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) are indeed substantial.
National, regional and international actors must
rededicate themselves to addressing them. We believe
that developing and implementing national action
plans constitutes a viable strategy for fulfilling the
obligations under resolution 1325 (2000).
As a signatory to the Dakar Declaration of the
Economic Community of West African States, Nigeria

61

S/PV.6877

has committed itself to accelerating the national and
regional implementation of that important resolution.
Nigeria is also committed to fulfilling its obligations
under the African Charter of Human and Peoples’
Rights on the rights of women in Africa. Violence,
poverty, lack of access to education and health care,
and limited economic opportunities all combine to
undermine the role of women and girls in conflict
prevention, peace negotiations and peacebuilding. It is
therefore necessary that we develop and take measures
to address these inherent obstacles.
Promoting women’s equality and empowerment
is, in our view, one of the best ways to address the
root causes of conflicts and thereby prevent them. We
recognize the relevance of and relationship between
the Council’s preventive diplomacy initiatives and its
women and peace and security agenda.
We remain committed to improving the status
of women in all parts of Nigeria and to enhancing
their vital and meaningful participation in conflict
resolution. Nigeria has over the years proved its
consistent commitment to the achievement of women’s
empowerment and gender equality. Gender equity and
equality have gained a high degree of prominence in
Nigeria’s national development agenda. At the level
of legislation, for instance, the Gender and Equal
Opportunities Bill, as a means to further enhance
women’s equal access to social and economic activities
and resources, is now before our National Assembly
for consideration. The Bill seeks to domesticate the
provisions of the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women and the
protocol to the African Charter of Human and Peoples’
Rights on the rights of women in Africa.
In compliance with those principles and the
provisions of the various gender frameworks, and as a
means to confront the challenges of meeting gender
equality and women’s empowerment, Nigeria, under
the leadership of President Goodluck Ebele Jonathan,
has for the first time attained 33 per cent representation
for women in the decision-making process, appointing,
for instance, 13 women ministers in the federal Cabinet.
We have also attained 50 per cent representation in the
judiciary, with the Chief Justice of the Federation being
a woman for the first time in Nigeria’s history.
In the area of assistance to women, Nigeria will
ensure the provision of social security and safety
nets that can guarantee a better future for vulnerable
members of society, especially women and children.
62

We look forward to the high-level review to be held
in 2015 on the progress made in the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and will remain confident
that this and future initiatives of the Council will play
pivotal roles in national, regional and global strategies
on the women and peace and security agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Khan (Indonesia): At the outset, please allow
me to join the previous speakers in expressing the
appreciation of the Government of Indonesia for the
convening of this open debate on women, peace and
security. I would also like to thank the Executive Director
of UN-Women and the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations for their important briefings.
Let me begin by quoting the message of SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon that
“sustainable peace is possible only with women’s
full participation — their perspectives, their
leadership, their daily, equal presence wherever we
seek to make and keep the peace”.
In keeping with that message, Indonesia does not
view women as merely passive victims of conflict
situations. They are also agents and important
contributors to the many dimensions of peacebuilding
processes. Therefore, Indonesia is committed to
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) on women and
peace and security and will work to ensure women’s
full participation at all levels in conflict prevention,
conflict resolution and peacebuilding.
While we have covered significant ground towards
fully implementing resolution 1325 (2000), progress
has yet to be made in implementing some key aspects of
that resolution. We recognize that decisive action must
be taken in the following areas. First, the number of
women involved as United Nations peacekeepers needs
to be increased in the future. Secondly, the security,
legal and justice infrastructure required to ensure the
safety and security of women in many conflict and postconflict settings needs to be strengthened. Thirdly, the
level of participation of women in peace negotiations,
preventive efforts and key decision-making processes
related to peace and security needs to be enhanced.
In light of those objectives, Indonesia has taken
steps at various levels towards their achievement.
For example, women personnel have been actively
involved as military and police observers in Indonesia’s

12-62149

S/PV.6877

contingents in the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon, the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
On the other hand, the measures already adopted
by Indonesia have advanced its implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). Among other things, the
Government of Indonesia is currently in the process
of drafting a presidential decree to establish a legal
basis for the drawing up of a national action plan on the
implementation of that resolution.
When completed, the action plan will facilitate
the integration of gender issues into the policies,
programmes, activities, data collecting mechanisms
and reporting systems of each ministry and related
institutions that have a bearing on peace and security
matters. The plan, which will operate at the central
and the regional levels, will cover all phases of a peace
process from prevention to conflict resolution, as well
as recovery from social conflict.
Under the leadership of the Ministry of Women’s
Empowerment and Child Protection, the action plan
will focus on creating greater awareness of the role
of women in conflict resolution and peacebuilding
processes, on strengthening the capacity of various
stakeholders within Government and civil society
organizations, and on building a strong participation in
and ownership of the plan to ensure accountability in its
implementation. In that regard, the role of UN-Women
is greatly appreciated in providing technical assistance
and advocacy in our process to develop the action plan.
Indonesia is also conducting schools of peace for
women programmes in post-conflict areas, where the
principle of non-violence has been introduced and
capacity-building activities are being implemented.
Those programmes will ultimately empower and enable
women to become equal partners in achieving peace,
rather than merely suffering as victims of conflict.
Two years ago, a number of women’s civil
society organizations, supported by the Indonesian
Government, organized the Asian Women Peacemaker’s
Conference on the interfaith perspective in realizing
the role of women peacemakers in the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). As a result of that two-day
Conference, in addition to identifying a number of
important issues related to the protection, promotion

12-62149

and participation of women in peace and security, the
following recommendations were made.
First, States should prepare a national action plan
to ensure implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) as
part of their national agenda, strategy and commitment.
That should be accomplished through detailed national
policies. Secondly, States must undertake bureaucratic
reform, in particular security sector reform, to support
the prevention and resolution of conflicts from the
inter-faith and women’s perspectives. Thirdly, States
should ensure the protection of the rights of women as
victims of conflict and promote their empowerment
and participation at all levels of the decision-making
process, especially in peacebuilding efforts.
In conclusion, Indonesia wishes to further
underscore the fact that women should not be confined to
serving only as key building blocks of and instruments
for peace and security, but also have the confidence and
potential to be agents of change, skillfully reshaping
and rebuilding communities affected by conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Elbahi (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this
open debate on women and peace and security. It is one
of the most important items of the Security Council’s
agenda.
Mindful of the need to strengthen the role of women
in society, in 2007 my Government adopted a national
strategy for the empowerment of women, which focused
on six main pillars: health, the environment, education,
economic development, women’s active participation in
decision-making, conflict settlement and peacemaking,
and the protection of their rights. In order to implement
the pillars of that policy, the State drew up a detailed
action plan as part of its five-year plan for 2007-2011.
In addition, a number of administrative units have
been established to review the position of women
and improve the gender balance within the various
Government sectors and ministries at the national
and provincial levels. Those units continue to form
focial points and to guide plans and strategies for
the empowerment of women and to promote their
participation in society.
My Government has also set up a number of
economic projects for women, such as funds to promote
women’s employment in the unofficial sector and

63

S/PV.6877

their socioeconomic development, as well as smaller
women’s projects financed by mandatory alms and
earning graduates. Microcredit initiatives have also
been established to finance small family businesses
and farms. Those projects focus on the economic selfsufficiency of women in rural areas, in particular in
Darfur, Southern Kordofan and the Blue Nile.
My country has made great strides in empowering
and advancing women and in strengthening their
participation in society. For example, national
legislation has provided for equal pay for equal work
since the 1970s. A law enacted in 2003 stipulates that
men and women receive pensions at the same age. We
have also enacted a law in 2008 on increasing women’s
participation in Parliament by up to 25 per cent. Women
have been able to stand as candidates and to vote since
the 1950s and 1960s. In the most recent elections, the
list of presidential candidates included a woman.
Now, 66 per cent of Government officials are
women; 28 per cent serve in Parliament. Their
participation in the private sector is 54 per cent. They
contribute 87 per cent of the gross domestic product.
In the judicial sector, women account for 80 per cent
of the judges. There are 50 female diplomats, including
ambassadors and heads of diplomatic missions. Women
also participate in the armed forces, the police and
security forces, and have reached the rank of MajorGeneral. They also play an active and successful part in
the private and business sectors.
My country adopted the rural development plan for
women, which is an integrated project focusing on the
States of the Sudan, in particular Darfur state. The plan
covers issues and concerns of rural women and funds
microprojects to alleviate poverty, to promote training
and to further raise awareness of women’s health and
nutritation, human rights and peacebuilding. Thirty
per cent of the national budget has been earmarked for
microprojects.
My Government has also established a number
of specialized units at the national and provincial
levels to coordinate women’s activities in the areas
of peace and development and to provide guidance to
women on gender equality. In that connection, we note
that disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes give particular priority to the status of
women in close coordination with the relevant United
Nations agencies, including UN-Women. That is with

64

a view to implementing the plan of action called for in
resolution 1325 (2000).
Along with our policies of empowerment, my
Government developed a strategy to combat genderbased violence in 2005. We established a unit within the
Ministry of Justice to combat violence against women
and girls, as well as a specialized police unit within the
Ministry of the Interior. We have had a national strategy
in place since 2008 to combat female circumcision.
After the outbreak of rebellion in Darfur, the
Criminal Act of 1991 was amended to include clauses on
crimes against humanity and war crimes and to revise
article 149, on rape and adultery. The Consultative
Council for Human Rights devoted special attention to
publicity in order to raise awareness of issues related
to violence against women in the state of Darfur,
in cooperation with the United Nations Population
Fund and the human rights division of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
That publicity included announcements of medical
registration so that victims of rape could be suitably
compensated. In that connection, we note that the latest
cooperation agreement signed with the Government
of South Sudan will have a positive effect on women’s
lives and advancement in both countries.
The situation of women in armed conflict is
inextricably linked to the root causes of conflict. That
is why we call for measures to address such root causes
as poverty, lack of development and problems of climate
change.
In our view, measures taken by the Security Council
should be based on the country reports presented by
States and the accurate information contained in
the periodic reports of the Secretary-General. They
should not be based on reports from non-governmental
organizations or the mass media.
In concluding, we hope that the deliberations of
the Council on this important matter will lead to the
development of an integrated approach to addressing
the issue of women and peace and security. After all,
women constitute half of society, if not, in a certain
way, all of it.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): As this is my first
statement before the Council this month, allow me to
begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, on your

12-62149

S/PV.6877

assumption of this month’s presidency of the Council.
I would also like to welcome your focus in this debate
on the specific role played by women’s civil society
organizations in conflict prevention, resolution and
recovery. Thanks must also be extended to Ms. Bachelet
and Mr. Ladsous for the expertise they provided through
their briefings earlier today. I also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report on women and peace and security
(S/2012/732).
In the 12 years since its adoption, resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent related resolutions have been
helpful tools, not only to bring to the attention of the
international community the importance of the women
and peace and security agenda, but ALSO to strengthen
women’s participation rather than simply branding
them as victims. The Afghan Government remains
committed to the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) in Afghanistan and its promotion worldwide.
Afghanistan is designing a comprehensive plan
for implementing resolution 1325 (2000) through its
National Action Plan for Women. The Government of
Afghanistan is fully committed to implementing the
Plan, which will be a four-year plan focused on women
and peace and security. We appreciate the generous
support of the Government of Finland for help in the
drafting process.
We have established a steering committee comprised
of seven line ministries, the Commissioner for Human
Rights and members of civil society, which meets under
the chairmanship of the Minister of Foreign Affairs
to effectively coordinate the implementation of the
National Action Plan. In addition, we have established
a technical working group at the Director General level
from those line ministries and an advisory committee,
which includes the United Nations offices in Kabul and
international staff. The inclusion of United Nations
partners has been invaluable in bringing together
knowledge and expertise from post-conflict countries
in order to enable Afghanistan to move towards a
fuller implementation of the National Action Plan. We
are looking forward to the support of UN-Women in
assisting the Afghan Government in the implementation
of the National Action Plan for Women.
Cooperation on the bilateral level has also played
a significant role in ensuring that our architecture to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) is firmly in place
through the provision of technical and financial

12-62149

support, and we look forward to engaging with our
bilateral partners through the transition and beyond.
The Secretary-General expresses concern in his
report in regard to the slow global progress in women’s
participation and representation in peace talks. The
Afghan Government recognizes the vital role that women
have to play in the peaceful resolution of conflicts,
and remains committed to focusing on women’s rights
throughout the peace process. Women are playing an
important role in Afghan-led reconciliation, including
through participation in the High Peace Council.
We see a marked improvement in the position of
women through a pronounced presence of women in
political and social life. Currently, there are 69 female
members of Parliament, making up more than a quarter
of the total number of parliamentarians. There are also
encouraging signs for the future of women’s social
participation. In 2001, 5,000 girls were enrolled in
school in Afghanistan; now, according to figures from
2011, there are 2.7 million girls enrolled in schools
across the country. The continued participation of
young women in education will ensure a brighter
future not only for them but also for Afghanistan as
they become the police officers, Government officials
and leaders of the next generation.
Additionally, we have ensured that there are strong
links between women in Government and civil society
groups to coordinate activities to encourage more
involvement of women at all levels. Our civil society
has been vital in helping Afghanistan to rebuild itself
from decades of conflict.
Women’s civil society groups have been particularly
crucial in acting as a united voice for Afghan women.
An informal advisory group comprised of Afghan
Government representatives, women Parliamentarians
and civil society members meet directly with President
Karzai on a regular basis to discuss issues of women’s
security, women in leadership, women’s rights and cases
of violence against women. Civil society organizations
played a defining role in the drafting of the Elimination
of Violence Against Women Law enacted in 2009, and
offer continuing support for the National Action Plan.
Currently, a strong coalition of civil society groups has
focused on providing training on the legal and civil
rights of women and the relevance of implementing
resolution 1325 (2000) to men and women alike in
provincial districts.

65

S/PV.6877

Violent attacks against innocent Afghan women,
men, girls and boys in some parts of the country remain
a threat to the overall peace and security of Afghanistan.
Violence against women and girls in the country is
unacceptable. The Government of Afghanistan and
the international community must continue to address
ongoing violence with a view to bringing much-needed
lasting peace to Afghanistan and promoting a stable
situation in which the human rights of all Afghans can
be fully respected.

of armed conflict, together with children and the
elderly, it is important to assign them prominent roles
in peacekeeping and peacebuilding, and even more
importantly in the prevention process, to which it is
never too late to devote particular attention. Significant
headway has already been achieved to that end, such
as the appointment of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
the deployment of women protection advisers within
peacekeeping operations.

To that end, by focusing on training and equipping
the army, we have seen an encouraging growth in the
number and capacities of our security forces. Those
efforts have included women’s participation in the
Afghan National Army, in which they serve in a variety
of capacities, including highly technical roles, such as
pilots. Women also continue to join the Afghan National
Police, despite receiving threats against their lives and
discouragement, at times even from their own families.
Women’s participation in those capacities ensures that
women in the community have trusted mentors within
the Afghan National Army and the Afghan National
Police.

Debates such as today’s have also enabled us to
develop a more coherent and coordinated approach
to the protection of women in armed conflict, and
contributed in particular to a more systematic
integration of the gender perspective in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding missions and in the transition
from a reactive to a preventive culture, as manifested
by the inclusion of the protection of civilians in the
mandates of 8 peacekeeping missions. Other steps
have been taken to improve the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) at the regional level, such as
the drafting by the League of Arab States of a regional
strategy on women, peace and security.

The Government of Afghanistan looks forward
to continued cooperation with the international
community in its efforts to honour and implement
resolution 1325 (2000) in Afghanistan and worldwide.
Through resolution 1325 (2000), the international
community made a commitment to the women and
peace and security agenda that still requires our full
attention and dedication.

For its part, Tunisia has begun to establish an
action plan on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). The plan encourages, inter alia, the training of
women in peacekeeping and peacebuilding with a view
to deploying qualified personnel in United Nations
operations on the ground, and in particular to improving
predeployment training by placing particular emphasis
on special measures with a view to protecting women
from all forms of violence.

Mrs. Zarrouk Boumiza (Tunisia) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I would like to commend the
Security Council presidency for its initiative to hold
this important public debate on women and peace and
security, and to thank the Secretary-General for his
excellent report (S/2012/732).
Tunisia’s interest in the issue is based on its renewed
commitment to promoting the rights of women and on
its conviction that peace, development and democracy
will not be achieved without women acting as active
partners in the processes of preventing, mediating and
resolving conflict.
It must be recognized that there is much greater
awareness today of the multifaceted discrimination
faced by women in conflict and that significant
efforts have been made with a view to remedying that
situation. As women are among the primary victims

66

We are compelled to acknowledge that, despite the
progress achieved, much remains to be done to achieve
all the goals set out in resolution 1325 (2000). It is
critical that the Council remain seized of the issue and
take further dynamic steps to enhance the protection of
women in armed conflict.
In that respect, we believe that national ownership
of the relevant Security Council resolutions remains
the best way to achieve their effective implementation.
My delegation is also convinced that all national actors,
including civil society, should be able to contribute
actively to promoting the peace process, since a State
can lay the foundations of a lasting peace only with the
inclusion and support of all of its citizens.
As indicated in the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral, we also believe that civil society represents a

12-62149

S/PV.6877

key partner in post-conflict situations and that women’s
organizations in particular can contribute significantly
to enhancing early warning mechanisms allowing us
to preempt the escalation of violence against women
and to support awareness-raising initiatives to that end.
Women’s organizations can also play an essential role
in developing women’s capacities and enabling them to
participate actively in conflict prevention, mediation
and resolution processes. That is why it is important
to further mobilize technical support for such efforts.
In the same vein, we believe that men also play a
crucial role in the promotion of gender equality. The
initiatives of civil society organizations that are either
led by men or that focus on raising men’s awareness on
gender equality deserve particular attention, since the
struggle of women to enjoy all their rights can succeed
only with the full involvement and engagement of men.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that my country
remains at the disposal of the United Nations for any
undertaking geared towards the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and of other international
instruments aimed at strengthening women’s full and
broad participation in the decision-making process and
in establishing a culture of respect for women’s rights.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): Allow me to congratulate
India for its successful presidency during the month of
November and to thank you, Sir, for organizing today’s
open debate.
I wish to express our thanks to the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive report (S/2012/732).
We appreciate presidential statement S/PRST/2012/23,
which was adopted at the end of October. I take this
opportunity to also thank Under-Secretary-General
Bachelet and to assure her of my country’s full support
and cooperation.
Since
the
adoption
of
the
landmark
resolution 1325 (2000), thanks to the efforts of the
international community, including non-governmental
organizations and women’s organizations, progress has
been made across a broad range of issues concerning
the protection and promotion of women’s and girl’s
rights in conflict-affected situations. However, as
today’s debate has shown, many obstacles remain.
We agree with the recommendations contained
in the report of the Secretary-General, which guide
us towards particular areas requiring increased

12-62149

and improved effort. In that context, I would like to
highlight three aspects in my intervention today.
The first is the valuable role that women can play
in mediation efforts. As a co-chair of the Group of
Friends of Mediation, Turkey, together with Finland,
endeavoured to ensure that the very first United Nations
resolution on mediation (resolution 65/283), of 2011,
reflected the main elements of resolution 1325 (2000)
and subsequent resolutions on women and peace and
security.
Secondly, there is conflict-related violence against
women. As a way of tackling that problem, we believe
that the Security Council should, as appropriate, ensure
that ceasefire agreements include sexual violence in
their definitions. On this occasion, we would like to
welcome the publication of the Guidance for Effective
Mediation, which is contained in the SecretaryGeneral’s report entitled “Strengthening the role of
mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes,
conflict prevention and resolution” (A/66/811, annex
I), which addresses conflict-related sexual violence in
ceasefire and peace agreements, and we encourage its
increased utilization.
Thirdly, there is the interface between security
and development and the role women can play in that
respect. As we embark upon a process to develop a
set of sustainable development goals for post-2015, we
believe that gender equality and the empowerment of
women should be at the centre of all our solutions and
commitments. That would also help further the agenda
on women and peace and security.
Before concluding, I would like to underline the
valuable contribution of UN-Women in pursuing United
Nations gender-related efforts in a more systematic and
coordinated manner. That is evident also in the women
and peace and security agenda. In that respect, we
welcome the joint strategy on gender and mediation
launched by UN-Women and the Department of Political
Affairs. We also commend the seven-point action plan
for gender-responsive peacebuilding, spearheaded by
UN-Women and the Peacebuilding Support Office.
I wish to conclude by underlining my
country’s commitment to the full implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and the four subsequent
resolutions on women and peace and security, namely,
resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009),
and1960 (2010).

67

S/PV.6877

The President: I now give the floor to Trinidad and
Tobago.

effect to the Rome Statute, which established the Court,
and encourages others to adhere to the instrument.

Ms. Boissiere (Trinidad and Tobago): Trinidad
and Tobago welcomes yet another opportunity to
participate in the discussion on the important subject
of women and peace and security, and we commend
the Council for its organization of this forum. We also
express our appreciation to the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report on the issue (S/2012/732),
as well as to the Executive Director of UN-Women
and to the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations for their informative briefings and to the
representative of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security for her presentation this morning.

Trinidad and Tobago comes from a region that has
become a significant casualty in the diversion of small
arms and light weapons, which has led to an increase in
armed violence in our country. That places a tremendous
burden on women in our society — economically,
socially and psychologically — as they are forced to
cope with the numerous consequences. The Prime
Minister of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago has
therefore formulated a number of initiatives to address
the problem. However, since the problem involves
the entire international community, we believe that a
systematic approach is required to appropriately address
the challenges posed by the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons. The problem clearly requires a
coordinated international response. In that regard,
Trinidad and Tobago, a strong advocate for a robust
and legally binding arms trade treaty, was disappointed
by the failure of the United Nations to adopt such a
text earlier this year. Nevertheless, we remain hopeful
that Member States can reach agreement on that
fundamental instrument and that it will be successfully
adopted at the United Nations Conference on the Arms
Trade Treaty to be held in March 2013.

Trinidad and Tobago is fully committed to the
achievement of the goal of gender equality and the
empowerment of women. In that context, we are agree
strongly on the need to strengthen efforts to ensure that
women are equally represented in all spheres, including
at all levels of decision-making processes in the field of
peace and security, given the important and valuable
contributions that women have made and can continue
to make to conflict resolution and peacebuilding
initiatives.
As a State that subscribes to the rule of law in the
promotion and maintenance of peace and security,
as well as in the empowerment and advancement of
women, Trinidad and Tobago has implemented in its
domestic legal system its obligations under the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and the 1977 additional Protocols
to the Geneva Conventions, in addition to other
fundamental instruments, including the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women and the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Notwithstanding
the
importance
of
the
implementation of the provisions of important legal
instruments and agreements on peace and security,
Trinidad and Tobago is also of the view that the
prosecution of those accused of committing crimes
against women and girls during armed conflict is a
critical factor in achieving lasting peace. We believe
that any failure to prosecute the perpetrators of grave
crimes against women and girls would not only
contribute to the culture of impunity, but would be at
variance with resolution 1325 (2000). Consequently,
as a founding member of the International Criminal
Court, Trinidad and Tobago has given domestic legal

68

Trinidad and Tobago agrees that the full, equal
and effective participation of women is critical to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and related
resolutions, as well as to the implementation of the
future arms trade treaty. Their participation would
also be especially relevant, in as much as the Treaty
relates to the prevention of the transfer of conventional
weapons, which are likely to be used in the commission
of gender-based violence against women and girls.
In an effort to create greater awareness of the
important role of women in matters relating to
peace and security in general and those relating to
disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control in
particular, Trinidad and Tobago successfully hosted,
at the margins of the high-level segment of the sixtyseventh session of the General Assembly this year, a
ministerial panel discussion on women, disarmament,
non-proliferation and arms control. The event witnessed
the participation of Government ministers and other
Government officials, the High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs and representatives of civil
society. The event was also marked by the adoption
of a ministerial declaration on women, disarmament,
non-proliferation and arms control.

12-62149

S/PV.6877

Additionally, efforts have been undertaken during
this session of the General Assembly to strengthen
draft resolution A/C.1/67/L.35/Rev.1 on the subject
of women, disarmament, non-proliferation and arms
control, which was first piloted by Trinidad and Tobago
in the First Committee in 2010. The draft resolution
was again adopted by consensus during this session
of the First Committee, with a notable increase in
sponsorship. That further demonstrated that States
continue to recognize that there cannot be sustainable
peace and security without the full, effective and equal
participation of women.
Trinidad and Tobago also commends and supports
the significant role of United Nations agencies and
bodies in gender-mainstreaming initiatives and in
providing information about the ways in which women
have contributed and can continue to contribute to
peace in our societies. UN-Women, the Office for
Disarmament Affairs and the United Nations Regional
Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development
in Latin America and the Caribbean have done a
significant amount of work in that area, and we look
forward to their continued efforts in that regard.
Trinidad and Tobago remains committed to working
with other Member States, as well as its partners at
the regional, hemispheric and international levels, to
provide an environment that promotes the involvement
of women as equal partners in matters related to peace
and security, including at all levels of decision-making
processes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Bliss (Australia): Australia welcomes the
convening of this open debate on women and peace
and security. We commend Guatemala and India for
bringing the Council’s focus to the particular role
played by women’s civil society organizations. We
thank Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson, the UnderSecretary-General and Executive Director of UNWomen, Ms. Bachelet, the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Ladsous, and the
representative of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security, Ms. Diop, for their briefings to
the Council, and reiterate our support for continued
briefings on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). Australia looks forward to working with others
to move the women and peace and security agenda
forward during our term on the Council.

12-62149

We join other States in condemning the ongoing
high incidence of sexual violence in conflicts, and
support all efforts to prevent such crimes and to put an
end to impunity for perpetrators of such crimes. That
must be a priority for the Security Council and other
parts of the United Nations system.
There is a clear consensus that the early involvement
of women in conflict prevention, conflict resolution and
peacebuilding promotes lasting peace and helps in the
realization of gender equality. The fact that the Council
has increasingly recognized that reality as it discharges
its functions is to be welcomed.
As the Secretary-General’s report (S/2012/732)
makes clear, women’s organizations play an
indispensable role in enabling women to prevent
conflict and to promote and build peace. But women’s
organizations can only operate effectively in safety
and with support. In that regard, Australia strongly
supports the Secretary-General’s call for the protection
of women’s human rights defenders during conflict
situations, given their specific vulnerability.
Australia commends the increasing inclusion of
references in United Nations mission mandates to the
promotion of the rights, protection and empowerment
of women. The gender awareness and responsiveness
of United Nations personnel is critical, and Australia is
pleased to be supporting these efforts through provision
of training, a best practice toolkit for United Nations
peacekeepers on conflict-related sexual violence and,
in partnership with UN-Women, the development of a
documentary and toolkit for peacekeepers, civilians and
humanitarian personnel on women, peace and security.
In addition, such issues must not be overlooked
in mission drawdowns and during transitions from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding. Australia supports the
Secretary-General’s calls for the embedding of sectorspecific gender experts, including in post-conflict
recovery programmes, in order to ensure that the rights
of women and girls are protected.
The importance of the United Nations leading by
example in the area of gender equality is essential.
Australia is concerned at the significant decrease over
the past 12 months in the share of women holding
senior positions in United Nations peacekeeping,
political and peacebuilding missions. We support the
Secretary-General’s call for a review of this situation,
in consultation with UN-Women.

69

S/PV.6877

Women’s
participation
in
post-conflict
peacebuilding is also crucial. The international
community must work to facilitate women’s full and
equal political participation in post-conflict election
processes, including by addressing the structural
impediments that discourage women’s candidacies.
Ensuring women’s safety during electoral processes
and addressing their particular socioeconomic
disadvantages are key factors in facilitating women’s
participation in formal decision-making roles.
In our region, Australia was pleased to announce
in August our partnership with members of the Pacific
Islands Forum on a new 10-year Pacific women’s
initiative. It aims at redressing the dramatic underrepresentation of women in decision-making settings, by
bringing Governments and civil society groups together
to develop policy and to help change perceptions about
women’s and men’s roles in communities.
In March, Australia launched its National Action
Plan on Women, Peace and Security. Women’s
organizations played a pivotal role in shaping the
Plan, and we consider their ongoing role in monitoring
compliance to be central to the Plan’s success. We
encourage all States who have not implemented such
plans to do so, and to engage women’s organizations in
developing, implementing and evaluating these plans.
In recognition of the growing role of regional security
organizations to international peace and security
efforts, we urge them also to introduce strategies on
implementing resolution 1325 (2000).
Australia supports the United Nations efforts to
facilitate the sharing of best practices between States
and women’s organizations. We also recognize the
leadership of UN-Women in coordinating global efforts
to promote and implement resolution 1325 (2000).
Our actions to pursue the women, peace and
security agenda do not occur in a vacuum. Work to

70

promote the participation of women and girls in peace
and security processes needs to take place within the
broader context of work to promote gender equality
and women’s empowerment. The message is simple.
Women and girls need to be actively involved in
decision-making, not only to ensure that their human
rights are adequately protected, but to prevent the
outbreak of further conflict and to ensure that peace
endures.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on the agenda.
As this is most certainly the last open meeting
of the Council that I will be presiding as part of the
second presidency of our current tenure on the Security
Council, I would like to take this opportunity to express
the sincere appreciation of the delegation of India to the
members of the Council, especially my colleagues the
permanent representatives, the political coordinators of
each delegation and their respective staff, and to the
Secretariat for all the support that they have given to us.
To say that this has been a busy month would
be an understatement. We tried our best to achieve
convergence and consensus on several important
issues on the agenda of the Council. We could not
have done this alone or without the hard work, support
and positive contributions of every delegation and
the representatives of the Secretariat, as well as the
interpreters, translators, meeting services and sound
engineers. I want to thank each and every one of them
individually and collectively. As we end our presidency,
I know I speak on behalf of all Council members in
wishing the delegation of Morocco the very best of luck
in the month of December.
The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.

12-62149
