General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Se11eion

8

Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
relating to the quesll:ion of publicity for the work of the
United Nations in the field of decolonization;
2. Reaffirms the vital importance of urgently effecting the widest possible dissemination of information
on ,the evils and dangers of colonialism, in particular
the continuing struggle for liberation being waged by
the peoples in the colonial Territories in Africa, as well
as the efforts being made by the international community to assist in the elimination of the remaining
vestiges of colonialism in all its forms;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, having regard
to the suggestions of the Special Committee, to co1;1tinue to take concrete measures ,through all the media
at his disposal, including publications, radio and television, to give widespread and continuous publicity to
the work of the United Nations in the field of decolonization, to the situation in the colonial Territories
and to the continuing struggle for liberation being waged
by the colonial peoples and, inter alia:
(a) To intensify the activities of all information
centres, particularly those located in western Europe,
and also to establish additional information centres
where appropriate, especially in southern Africa;
(b) To maintain a close working relationship with
the Organization of African Unity by holding periodic
consultations and by systematically exchanging relevant
information with that organization;
( c) To enlist, from the non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and
Social Council and from those non-governmental organizations having a special interest in the field of decolonization, support in the dissemination of the relevant information;
(d) To publish, in consultation with the Special
Committee, the periodical Objective: Justice and the
bulletin "United Nations and Southern Africa" in other
languages besides English and French, as appropriate;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General, having
regard to the relevant provisions of the programme of
action adopted by the International Conference of Experts for the Support of Victims of Colonialism and
Apartheid in Southern Africa, 18 to establish a Unit on
Decolonization within the Department of Political AffaiTS, Trusteeship and Decolonization which will, in
consultation with the Special Committee and with the
Office of Public Information, collect, prepare and disseminate, on a continuous basis, basic material, studies
and articles relating to the problems of decolonization,
and, to that end, to make provision for the necessary
personnel and facilities;
5. Requests Member States, in particular the administering Powers, ,to co-operate full~, w:th the Secretary-General in the discharge of the tasks entrusted to
him under paragraphs 3 and 4 above;
6. Invites all States, the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
and non-governmental organizations in consultative
status with the Economic and Social Council, as well
as other non-governmental organizations having a special interest in the field of decolonization, to undertake
or intensify, in co-operation with the Secretary-General
and within their respective spheres of competence, the
large-scale dissemination of the information referred
to in paragraph 2 above;
18/bid., para. 49 (86).

7. Welcomes the decision of rthe non-governmental
organizations concerned with decolonization and apartheid to hold at Geneva, in 1974, a conference on
colonialism and apartheid in southern Africa and to
invite the participation of the United Nations organs
concerned, and requests the Secretary-General to provide conference facilities for that purpose;
8. Requests the Secretary-General ,to report to the
Special Committee on the implementation of the present resolution;
9. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek suitable means for the effective dissemination of
information on decolonization and, in particular, to hold
consultations, as appropriate, with the Organization of
African Unity and the national liberation movements
concerned, as well as with the non-governmental organizations having a special interest in the field of
decolonization;
10. Further requests the Special Committee to follow the implementation of the present resolution and
report thereon to the General Assembly at its twentyninth session.
2202nd plenary meeting
14 December 1973

3165 (XXVIII). International Conference of Experts for the Support of Victims of Colonialism ancl Apartheid in Southern Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2910 (XXVII) of 2 November 1972,
Recognizing the need for concerted international
efforts to hasten the eradication of the scourge of colonialism and apartheid, thereby promoting international peace and se·curity,
1. Again reiterates the firm intention of the United
Nations, acting in co-operation with the Organization
of African Unity, to intensify its efforts to find a solution to the present grave situation in southern Africa;
2. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General19 on the International Conference of Experts for
the Support of Victims of Colonialism and Apartheid
in Southern Africa, held at Oslo from 9 to 14 April
1973, in pursuance of resolution 2910 (XXVII);
3. Commends the proposals for a programme of
action highlighted by the Conference 17 to the attention
of United Nations organs, the organizations within the
United Nations system and the Organization of African
Unity, as well as to the attention of Governments, non-governmental organizations and the public.
2202nd plenary meeting
14 December 1973
3181 (XXVIII). Credentials of representatives to
the twenty-eighth session of the General
Assemhly 20

The General Assembly

I
Approves the credentials of the representatives of
Portugal, on the clear understanding that they represent
111 A/9061.
20 See also

"Other decisions", p. 10.
