General Aa■embI,--Tbirtieth Se■■ion

58

(b) Tamg-- the necessary steps, in co-operation
with the organizations of the United Nations system,
to provide the same kind of intersectoral presentation
on a system-wide basis;
7. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
examine the implementation of the relevant resolutions
pertaining to economic co-operation among developing countries in order to improve the co-ordination of
efforts by the United Nations system and with a view
to making such examination coincide with the review
and appraisal of the International Development Strategy
for the Second United Nations Development Decade;
8. Further requests the Secretary-General to report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-first session on the implementation of the present resolution.
2432niplenary meeting
9 December 1975

3459 (XXX). Report of th.e Trade and
Development Board49
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1995 (XIX) of 30 December 1964,

•"

Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New lnternational Economic Order, and 3281 (XXIX)
of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
Recalling also Trade and Development Board decision 113 (XIV) of 13 September 1974, by which it
decided to convene the fourth session of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development at Nairobi,110
Recalling further its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of
16 September 197 5 on developmemt and international
economic co-operation, in which Member States agreed
that an important aim of the fo111rth session of the
, United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
in addition to work in progress elsewhere, should be to
reach decisions on specific issues, in particular on the
improvement of market structures in the field of raw
materials and commodities of export interest to the developing countties,
Afjirming the importance of the fourth session of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development in the negotiation and the implementation of
concrete proposals, particularly on the questions relating to trade in commodities and manufactures, monetary and financial issues and the transfer of technology
emerging from the sixth and seventh special sessions
of the General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3216 (XXIX) of 6 November 1974, whereby it accepted with appreciation the
invitation of the Government of Kenya to hold the
fourth session of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development at Nairobi from 3 to 28 May
1976,
l. Takes note with appreciation of the reports of
the Trade and Development Board on its sixth special
session, on the second part of its fourteenth session
and on its fifteenth session;51
G See also p. 142, ítem 55.

110 See Offecial Records of the General .Assembly, Twenty-

ninth Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/9615/Rev.1), annex l.
111 Jbid., Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/10015/
Rev.1).

2. Endorses the consensus of the Trade and Development Board on the provisional agenda for the fourth
session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, 112 as well as the arrangements for the
organization of the work of the session;
3. Decides, in addition to the arrangements mentioned in paragraph 2 above, that the languages of the
fourth session of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development shall be those used in the
General Assembly and its Main Committees;
4. Urges ali Member States to take appropriate
steps with a view to ensuring satisfactory results from
the fourth session of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development through adequate preparation at the national, regional and interregional levels
and through the full utilization of the permanent machinery of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, which should facilitate negotiations
on the agenda items of the fourth session;
.
5. Urges ali Member States to ensure that such negotiations are action-oriented, so that the decisions
arrived at by the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development at its fourth session can be promptly
and effectively implemented.
2436th plenary meeting
11 December 1975
1

3460 (XXX). United Nations Speclal Fund
The General Assembly,
Recalling section X of its resolution 3202 (S-VI)
of 1 May 1974 containing the Programme of Action
on the Establishment of a New International Economic
Order,
Recognizing that the present economic situation of
a large number of developing countries, in particular
the most seriously affected among them, requires even
greater efforts on the part of the international community to help them overcome the effects of the economic crisis that had called for the establishment of
the United Nations Special Fund,
Recalling its resolution 3356 (XXIX) of 18 December 1974, in particular paragraph 1, article I, thereof,
Bearing in mind that a number of countries have
expressed their willingness to contribute to 'the United
Nations Special Fund provided that it generates adequate funding,
Considering that, with the agreement reached unanimously at its seventh special session whereby developed
countries, and developing countries in a position to do
so, were urged to make adequate contributions to the
United Nations Special Fund with a view to an early
implementation of a programme of lending, preferably
in 1976, the prospects for the beginning of the operations of the Fund have been significantly improved,
1. Takes note of the report of the Board of Governors of the United Nations Special Fund on the work
of its :first session ;118
2. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
President of the Board of Governors114 on his contacts
with various potential contributors to the United Nations
Special Fund and with economic groupings and requests
him to continue these efforts;
112 Jbid., part four, annex 11.

118Jbid., Supplement No. 21 (A/10021).
Thirtieth Session, Second Committee, 1665th meeting, paras. 1-8.
54 lbid.,

Resolutiom adopted on the reporta of the Second Committee

3. Authorizes the Board of Governors to convene a
pledging conference on the United Nations Special
Fund in 1976;
4. Requests the Board of Governors to examine at
its second session the establishment of a target figure
of $1 billion far the United Nations Special Fund;
5. Decides that, far the time being, the administrative expenses of the United Nations Special Fund should
be borne by the regular budget;
6. Agrees to the arrangements for the transfer of
monitoring operations, envisaged in section X of General Assembly resolution 3202 (S-VI), made betweeo
the Secretary-General and the President of the Board
of Govemors, in pursuance of the decision taken by the
Board at its firsit session. 55
2436th plenary meeting
11 December 1975
3461 (XXX). Technical co-operation among
developing countries

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and
3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment
of a New International Economic Order, and resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development and intemational economic co-operation,
Reaffirming its resolution 3251 (XXIX) of 4 December 1974 on technical co-operation among developing countries,
Recalling the consensus of 1970 adopted by the Goveming Council of the United Nations Development
Programme at its tenth session56 and the decision taken
by the Goveming Council at its twentieth session conoeming new dimensions in technical co-operation, 57
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution 1963 (LIX) of 30 July 1975,
Noting with satisfaction the decisions taken at the
eighteenth and twentieth sessions of the Governing
Council of the United Nations Development Programme
concerning technical co-operation among developing
countries,58
RecogniiJng that technical co-operation among developing countries should be seen as an integral part
of over-all co-operation for development as highlighted
by the Working Group on Technical Co-operation
among Developing Countries in its final report, 59
Conscious that technical co-operation among developing countries constitutes one of the most effective
channels far promoting economic co-operation among
developing countries, to enable them to achieve collective self-reliance,
Noting with satisfaction the statement made on behalf of the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme at the 1666th meeting of the
Second Committee60 in the introduction of the item,
1111 Ibid., Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 21 (A/10021),
annex l.
116 Resolution 2688 (XXV), annex.
li7 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council Fiftyninth Session, Supplement No. 2A (E/5703/Rev.l),
S4.
118 Ibid., Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 2A (E/SS43/
Rev.1), para. 224; and ibid., Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement
No. 2A (E/5703/Rev.1), para. 332.
r. 9 DP/69.
60 O/ficial Records of the General Assembly Thirtieth Session, Second Committee, 1666th meeting, para;, S-16.

para.

59

l. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme, in view of the importance
of technical co-operation activities among developing
countries, to integrate those activities through the work
of the Special Unit far Technical .Co-operation among
Developing Countries into the regular framework of
the Programme, including the activities and projects
carried out by the organizations of the United Nations
development system financed by the Programme, and
to give them due priority;

2. Emphasizes the need far the speedy implementation of the recommendations contained in the final report. of the Working Group on Technical Co-operation
among Developing Countries by all Governments, by
the United Nations Development Programme and by
the participating and executing agencies as the prerequisite far the review of those recommendations envisaged by the Governing Council of the Programme
~n the ligh! of the experience gained in the process of
1mplementmg the final report of the Working Group;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, together with
the Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme, to prepare a study on the existing rules,
reg~lations, procedures and practices fallowed by the
Umted Nattons development system in recruiting
experts, subcontracting, procuring equipment and providing fellowships, which would include the consequences far the Programme of giving preferential
treatment to the developing countries in the abovementioned areas, in arder to promote self-reliance in the
developin~ countries through the support of technical
co-operatton among developing countries in a manner
consistent with the maximum effectivene~s of the Programme, and_ to submit _that study, together with concrete suggesttons and recommendations far their improvement, to the Governing Council of the Programme
at its twenty-third session;
4. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations
Development P~og~amme, far t!ie purpose of achieving
a pract1~al apphca!1on of t~chmcal ~o-oper~tion among
developmg countnes, to g_1ve special cons1deration to
the recruitment of experts, consultants and subcontractors from developing countries and to purchase
suitable and competitive equipment and material that
can be supplied by developing countries;
5. Requests the United'Nations Development Pro~ram~e and _the participating and executing agencies to
mtens1fy th'!;r efforts to achieve full utilization of na!ional institutions in developing countries and the buildmg-~p of new caJ?acities in those countries, in the promot10~ of techmcal co-operation among developing
countnes;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
necessary funds under the regular budget of the United
Nations to cover the cost of providing conference servicing facilities far the four intergovemmental regional
~eetings and far the_ conferenc~ on technical co-operatton among developmg count~es to be organized and
conducted by the United Nations Development Programme;
1. Invites the Govemments of the developing countries o~ each region, in view. of the preparatory nature
of the mtergovemmental regional meetings for the conference, to participate in those meetings along the lines
suggested by the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme at the twentieth session of the
