S/2005/463

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: Limited
18 July 2005
Original: English

Letter dated 15 July 2005 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the Accra III Agreement on Côte d’Ivoire
concluded on 30 July 2004 in Accra, to the statement by the President of the
Security Council of 5 August 2004 (S/PRST/2004/29) and to my previous letters
transmitting to the President of the Security Council the reports of the Tripartite
Monitoring Group established under the Accra III Agreement.
Please find attached the fifteenth report of the Tripartite Monitoring Group,
covering the period from 1 to 30 June 2005 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring this letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

05-42731 (E)

220705

*0542731*

S/2005/463

Annex
Implementation of the Accra III Agreement
(now extended to cover the Pretoria Accords)

Fifteenth report of the Tripartite Monitoring Group
Covering the period from 1 to 30 June 2005

I.

Introduction

1. The present report is prepared pursuant to the Accra III Agreement of 30 July
2004, which established the Tripartite Monitoring Group and requested it to submit
regular reports on the situation in Côte d’Ivoire and on the progress made towards the
implementation of the Accra III Agreement, now extended into the recent Pretoria
Accords. This fifteenth report covers major developments from 1 to 30 June 2005.
II. Overview
2.
In the period covered, reports have been received of inter-communal
violence in the West, particularly in and around Duékoué. Further reports of intercommunal violence have also been received from Abengourou in the East,
although Abidjan has remained calm despite a general malaise about insecurity
due to the rising level of criminality in and around the city.
3.
Although the Pretoria Agreement in April 2005 emphasized to all sides of
the political spectrum the critical importance of implementing the agreement in
good faith particularly with regard to the adopting of the laws stemming from the
Linas – Marcoussis Agreement, the disarmament process leading to the
reunification of the country, and the creation of conditions conducive to the
holding of elections in October 2005, the outbreak of pockets of inter-communal
violence and clashes and the incessant bickering of the political class has brought
the peace process to a stand still. Aside from the invocation by President Gbagbo
of the exceptional powers contained in Article 48 to authorise the candidacy of
Alassane Ouattara, and the signing of decrees restoring the Ivorian Radio and
Television, RTI, to its pre-November 2004 status, no further progress has been
recorded in the implementation of the legislative components of the Pretoria
Agreement. Following the incidents of communal violence, the FPI
parliamentarians in the National Assembly have declared their disinclination to
2

05-42731

S/2005/463

consider and adopt any further laws stemming from Linas-Marcoussis until and as
such time that Prime Minister Seydou Elimane Diarra would have appeared before
them to give an account of his stewardship. The opposition parties gathered under
the banner of the Houphouetiste Alliance being the PDCI, RDR, MFA and UDPCI
for their part have continued to challenge President Gbagbo’s use of the
exceptional powers of Article 48 to have the National Institute for Statistics (INS)
review and update the electoral registers, as he ordered in his 26 April address.
4.
The Forces Nouvelles Ministers for their part have not returned to their
duties as Ministers citing security concerns, which concerns are being addressed
by the Impartial Forces. Their engagement in the DDR process has also been
stalled as the Forces Nouvelles announced that they would not commence the
disarmament phase of the DDR on 27 June, as previously programmed, without
the prior political and legislative reforms being adopted as they had demanded.
The Forces Nouvelles have further conditioned their participation in the
disarmament phase of the DDR to the prior disarmament of pro-government
militia. A committee made up the Impartial Forces, the Forces de Defence et de
Sécurité (FDS) and the Forces Armée des Forces Nouvelles has been set up to
resolve differences, and the outcome of their meetings is expected shortly.
5.
President Gbagbo, following the incidents of Duékoué and Abengourou,
ordered military patrols in these affected areas within the government-controlled
zone, and within the city of Abidjan to combat the rising tide of criminality, and
has authorised the appointment of a senior FDS officer in charge security.
Meanwhile, the Security Council has adopted resolution 1609 (2005), extending
the mandate of UNOCI for a further 9 months.
6.
In compliance with the Pretoria Accord, President Gbagbo made use of the
exceptional powers conferred on him by Article 48 of the Constitution to enable
the candidacy of Mr Alassane Ouattara for the October 2005 elections, a key
demand of the Forces Nouvelles. The President, invoking the use of the
exceptional powers of Article 48 of the Constitution until the crisis was resolved,
designated the National Institute of Statistics as the ‘sole agency” to compile the
electoral lists for the elections of 2005 and to issue voters’ cards and ordered the
Independent Electoral Commission (IEC), constitutionally in charge of the
organization of the elections, to take all the necessary measures to allow all
political parties to verify the validity of the electoral lists at their convenience.

05-42731

3

S/2005/463

7.
Opposition to the wider use by the President of the powers of Article 48 has
arisen from the new opposition alliance of the PDCI, RDR, UDPCI and MFA, the
Houphouetiste Alliance, who continue to question the neutrality of an institution
whose head was known to have close political ties with the President. They also
contend that Article 48 was, according to the Mediator’s letter, solely to be
invoked in order to give a legal basis to the eligibility of candidates for the
October 2005 elections and, that all the other measures taken by the President
were designed “to allow him to control the electoral process and remain in
power”.
8. This political debate was put in abeyance after 1 June when it was reported
that inter-communal violence had erupted in Duékoué in the west resulting in
some 100 people dead. Reports were also received of more inter-communal
violence in the Abengourou area in the east. Although calls have been made for an
enquiry into the incidents, and the members of the Tri-partite Committee visited
Duékoué on 9 June 2005, the immediate effects of the incident were observed in
the National Assembly where the pro-government FPI parliamentarians declared
that they would cease sitting in Parliament until such time as the Assembly
received an account of the stewardship of the Government of National
Reconciliation. This position has resulted in a deadlock as to the passing of the
substantive laws required to be amended by the Pretoria Agreement, to bring them
into consonance with the letter and spirit of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement.
III. Developments in the peace process
The Mbeki Facilitation Mission
9. The Mbeki peace process having therefore stalled, President Mbeki convened
another meeting of the signatories to the Pretoria Agreement in order to take stock
of the progress in the implementation of the agreement. The signatories of the
Pretoria Agreement met in Pretoria on 28-29 June 2005. After intensive
discussions, the parties issued a “Declaration on the Implementation of the
Pretoria Agreement on the peace process in Côte d’Ivoire”. Overally, the Ivorian
public opinion was positive although, in some quarters understandably, hedged in
some cautious optimism. There was general agreement that given the race against
time towards the October elections, this would be the last chance for such a
meeting to advance the process.

4

05-42731

S/2005/463

10. It is worth noting those elements in the declaration, which gave immediate
cause for hope. These relate to the following issues:
• the disarmament and dismantling of the militia;
• the DDR;
• the Security of the members of Government from the FN and the
Presidential Candidates;
• the Independent Electoral Commission (CEI); and
• the re-tabling of laws.
In the light of the track record of the implementation of previous undertakings by
the signatories, it is significant to note the tenor of paragraph 11, which provides
for sanctions against “…those parties who fail to implement the Pretoria
agreements and block the peace process”. This firm message has not been lost on
the signatories, the political actors and the general public. The time-frames for the
dismantling of the militias, DDR, the re-tabling of the laws, including that on the
CEI, have rekindled hope in the feasibility of holding elections as constitutionally
stipulated in October 2005.
Disarmament and Dismantling of Militias
11. In the Pretoria Agreement, responsibility for the disarming and dismantling of
all militias throughout the national territory was placed under the Prime Minister
of the Government of National Reconciliation. Work on this exercise has been
proceeding at various levels. The Mouvement pour la Liberation du Grand Ouest
(MLGO) indicated their willingness to engage in disarmament provided that the
Forces Nouvelles also agreed to disarm. Under the Troika Mechanism established
by the Prime Minister, a task force composed of Impartial Forces and FDS are
meeting to draw up a draft operative plan for this exercise. The new Pretoria
Declaration should give impetus to this preparatory work to move to a
commencement.
Disarmament, Demobilisation and Reintegration Process
12. The DDR, a key issue and focus of activity in the peace process, has stalled
over the objections of the FN. Although the two military protagonists FDS and
FAFN had signed an agreement at Yamoussoukro on 14 May 2005 that

05-42731

5

S/2005/463

disarmament would commence on 27 June, the announcement by the ex-rebellion
that they would not commence disarmament as expected has brought the process
to a halt.
(i)

Security of the Forces Nouvelles Members of the Government of
National Reconciliation
The close protection guards underwent training in South Africa in
May and June 2005. They returned to Côte d’Ivoire in mid-June and
are ready for deployment. This should hasten the return to
government of all FN ministers. Following the new Pretoria
Declaration, arrangements will be finalized and agreed for the close
protection of Presidential candidates and the FN Secretary General.

(ii)

Security of Areas under control of the Forces Nouvelles during the
DDR process
This issue hinges on the training of some 600 security auxiliaries
drawn from the FN. The programme including identification of
trainees and the mode of training is being carried out under the
auspices of Mediation and UNOCI.

(iii) Meeting with the Forces Nouvelles in Bouake
On 15 June 2005, the Monitoring Committee went to Bouake to meet
leaders of the Forces Nouvelles. The purpose was to exchange views
on the DDR and several other issues in the peace process. At the
meeting, the FN repeated their reservations over the commencement
of the DDR. The Committee admonished them to demonstrate greater
cooperation to enable a jump-start to the DDR process.
Following the meeting, the members of the Monitoring Committee
proceeded to see one of the DDR sites in Bouake, which was yet to be
rehabilitated. The Committee then visited another DDR site in
Bondoukou, in the government controlled area, where they saw the
state of a rehabilitated site. It was evident to the members of the

6

05-42731

S/2005/463

Committee that serious obstacles would have to be overcome to
secure the political will of the FN to start the DDR process.
Electoral process
13. The official political parties have continued to mobilize their support base and
constituents for the upcoming elections with campaign rallies being held in and
around Abidjan and other areas within government-controlled territory. However,
despite the invitation to the United Nations to participate in the work of the
Independent Electoral Commission and the Constitutional Council, the
determination of the extent of United Nations involvement in the work of these
institutions is still to be defined. In the cluster of some twelve recommendations
in the report of the Electoral Assessment Mission sent to Côte d’Ivoire, the
Mission marshalled those conditions which should be fulfilled within the
constraints of time before elections could be held. The new Pretoria Declaration,
which reflects many of these conditions, should remove some of these obstacles.
Review of selected legislative texts by the National Assembly
14. Two texts of legislation relating to the composition of the Independent
Electoral Commission and the public funding of political parties were tabled and
passed by the National Assembly before the recent impasse consequent to the
Douékoué incident, the effective boycott of parliament by the FPI
parliamentarians and the refusal of the Forces Nouvelles to engage in
disarmament. Together with the two decrees relating to the restructuring of the
National Radio and Television (RTI), these are the only legislative texts adopted
since the signing of the Pretoria Agreement. The deadlock at the Council of
Ministers concerning the remaining five legislative texts to be reviewed by the
National Assembly was due to divergent views within the Council as to the mode
of reviewing these laws. This was referred to the Mediator, whose determination
may be seen as reflected in paragraph 8 of the Pretoria Declaration, the relevant
portion thereof reading as follows:
“…In that regard, the national Assembly should adopt, by 15 July 2005, all the
amendments to the seven laws proposed by the Mediation, failing which the
Mediator is authorised to make a determination about exceptional measures, inter

05-42731

7

S/2005/463

alia, ordinances and decrees, to be taken by the President to ensure the passage of
the amendments.”
Human Rights
15. The human rights situation in Côte d’Ivoire remains a cause of concern amid
continued reports of violations of human rights both in government-controlled
areas and in Forces Nouvelles areas. On 9 June 2005, UNOCI published its
second report on the state of human rights in Côte d’Ivoire, which underscores the
need for urgent improvement.
Humanitarian Assistance, Economic Recovery and Reconstruction
The tragic incidents in Duékoué brought into sharp relief the constraints in the
scope of humanitarian assistance required at such critical times of tribulation an
suffering by the population in conflict situations. All observers, government,
official and private have highly commended the quick response of the United
Nations country team agencies such as UNHCR, OCHA, UNICEF, UNFPA,
WHO, WFP, as well as other humanitarian agencies such as ICRC, Médecins Sans
Frontières, and Catholic Relief.
The scale of the funding required by these agencies has revived the debate over
the pledges made to the annual United Nations Consolidated Appeal Programme
(CAP).
IV. Conclusion
The situation in Côte d’Ivoire remains critical and volatile, with the elections less
than four months away. It is now generally expected that the convening by the
Mediator of another meeting of the main political actors in the Ivorian crisis and
the resultant Declaration of 29 June 2005 have provided the catalyst needed by the
country to propel it towards a peaceful and durable resolution of the conflict.
The quality of life for the population remains a cause for concern, as the economy
continues its downward spiral and basic infrastructure and necessities continue to
suffer degradation, with conceivably explosive social consequences. In this
critical phase of the peace process, it is more important than ever before that the

8

05-42731

S/2005/463

peace brokers continue to actively urge the main political actors in Côte d’Ivoire
to play their part, in the crucial interest of their beleaguered nation, and
implement the concessions that they have agreed to, if the country is to meet the
constitutional deadline for the holding of the critical Presidential elections in
October 2005 and legislative elections thereafter.
In this regard, the International Community has been given a significantly stronger
hand to enforce implementation within the established time frame, by the Pretoria
Declaration, where all the signatories have accepted the application of sanctions against
defaulters.
Signed on behalf of the Group
Ambassador Raph Uwechue
Chairman
30 June 2005

05-42731

9
