United Nations

S/PV.5601

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-first year

5601st meeting
Wednesday, 20 December 2006, 12.15 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Al-Nasser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Qatar)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Congo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayoral
Mr. Li Kexin
Mr. Ikouebe
Ms. Løj
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Christian
Mr. Vassilakis
Mr. Oshima
Mr. Chávez
Mr. Knyazev
Mr. Mlynár
Mr. Johnston
Mr. Manongi
Ms. Wilcox

Agenda
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

06-67222 (E)

*0667222*

S/PV.5601

The meeting was called to order at 12.15 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.
I wish to draw the attention of members to
document S/2006/972, containing the text of a letter
dated 12 December 2006 from the Chairman of the
Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations addressed to the President of the Security
Council.
At this meeting, we will hear briefings by
Ambassador César Mayoral, Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 918
(1994) concerning Rwanda, and of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning
Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals and
entities; Ambassador Ellen Margrethe Løj, Chairman of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism, and
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1521
(2003) concerning Liberia; Ambassador Adamantios
Vassilakis, Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004) concerning
Côte d’Ivoire, and of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan, as well
as of the Security Council Informal Working Group on
General Issues of Sanctions; Ambassador Kenzo Oshima,
Chairman of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1636 (2005), and of the Security
Council Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions, as well as of the Security
Council Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations; and
Ambassador Tuvako Manongi, speaking on behalf of the
Chairman of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1132 (1997) concerning Sierra
Leone.
I now give the floor to Ambassador César
Mayoral, Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 918 (1994)
concerning Rwanda, and of the Committee established

2

pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning
Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals
and entities.
Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like at the outset to refer to the Sanctions
Committee on Rwanda. During 2006, I had the honour
of chairing the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 918 (1994) concerning Rwanda.
As the Council is aware, the restrictions imposed
by paragraph 13 of resolution 918 (1994) on the sale or
supply to the Government of Rwanda of arms and
related matériel were lifted on 1 September 1996, in
accordance with paragraph 8 of resolution 1011 (1995).
However, all States remain under the obligation of
abiding by restrictions on the sale or supply of arms
and related matériel to non-governmental forces for use
in Rwanda. During my chairmanship, the Committee
did not receive any information as to violations of the
sanctions in place. That does not mean that there have
not been any violations, but they have not been proven.
That is why I would like to stress that we must be
informed of any arms transaction, particularly since
there is no specific monitoring mechanism that can
ensure the effective implementation of the arms
embargo. Therefore,
the
Committee
depends
exclusively on cooperation from States and from
organizations that are in a position to communicate any
violations of the arms embargo.
I would like to inform you, Mr. President, that
during 2006 the Committee held various informal
consultations and during some of these — on 25 April,
on 10 August and 3 November 2006 — the Committee
considered a letter dated 10 March 2006 from the
President of the Security Council Committee relating
to resolution 1533 (2004) on the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, addressed to me as Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 918 (1994) dealing with Rwanda. In that
letter, the Chairman of the Sanctions Committee
dealing with the Democratic Republic of the Congo
had stressed the existence of imports and exports of
arms to the Government of Rwanda. The report of the
group of experts for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo had pointed out that those transactions could be
included under paragraph 11 of resolution 1011 (1995).
That resolution required States to notify the Sanctions
Committee on Rwanda of any transfer of arms to the
Government of Rwanda.

06-67222

S/PV.5601

On 10 November of this year, I submitted on
behalf of the Sanctions Committee on Rwanda a letter
responding to the Chairman of the Sanctions
Committee on the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
stating that on 11 September 1996 the Sanctions
Committee on Rwanda had issued a press release in
which it said that States no longer had the duty to
notify arms exports and related materiel from their
territories to the Government of Rwanda and that the
Government of Rwanda did not have the obligation to
inform on the import of arms and related materiel. That
understanding was then reiterated and put in writing in
the report of the Sanctions Committee on Rwanda,
which was prepared for the Security Council for the
year 1996 and which is contained in document
S/1997/15.
I would like to stress that the States referred to in
the report of the panel of experts for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo therefore acted on the same
understanding that the Sanctions Committee on
Rwanda had had when they did not inform the
Committee of the transfers of arms to the Government
of Rwanda. That is difficult to understand, so I will
repeat it. I would like to stress that the States referred
to in the report of the expert group for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo had acted on the same
understanding that the Sanctions Committee on
Rwanda had had when they did not notify the
Committee of the transfer of arms to the Government
of Rwanda.
I would like to conclude by pointing out that the
Committee is currently revising the requirements for
the notification procedure for future arms transfers to
the Government of Rwanda, in accordance with
paragraph 11 of resolution 1011 (1995). Based on my
experience and having followed discussions in the
Committee in 2006, and, in particular, based on
informal consultations that we have held, I would like
to inform the Security Council that the Committee has
still not been able to arrive at a consensus on the status
of the requirement for notification for transfers of arms
and related materiel to the Government of Rwanda. In
this regard, I would like to draw the attention of the
Security Council to the ambiguity with regard to the
duration of the requirements for notification
established by paragraph 11 of resolution 1011 (1995).
In my capacity as Chairman of the Sanctions
Committee on Rwanda, I would like to request the
Security Council to take a decision on the future status

06-67222

of this requirement. I suggest that we take into account,
on the one hand, the current peace and stability
situation that Rwanda is experiencing, but also, on the
other hand, we should take into account the
implications that the transfer of arms has for the Great
Lakes region.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to Ambassador Ellen Margrethe Løj, Chairman of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counterterrorism, and of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1521 (2003) concerning Liberia.
Ms. Løj (Denmark): I would like to brief the
Council as outgoing Chairman of the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC) as well as of the
Sanctions Committee on Liberia.
I took over as Chairman of the CTC at a time
when the Committee was just waiting for its new
support structure, its Executive Directorate (CTED), to
be staffed and to become operational. These new
resources gave the Committee enhanced opportunities
to achieve more results through the fulfilment of its
mandate to monitor and promote implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). The measuring stick for
evaluating effectiveness has been the degree to which
Member States implement the resolution.
One of the biggest challenges was to get away
from the seemingly endless reporting and towards a
stronger focus on implementation. The reality was that
Member States felt less inclined to work with the
Committee because it was not clear how the
information they provided was used. It appeared as if
providing information led only to requests for more
information. The Committee has now taken significant
steps away from requesting more reports from States.
Instead of always asking States to report, the
Committee will share with the concerned State its
analysis of how far each State has come in its
implementation.
It is up to States to keep the Committee informed
about any new developments. Whatever gaps are
identified will be regarded as shortcomings in the
implementation until the State has provided
documentation to the Committee on how it has taken
steps to ensure that gaps are filled.
The Committee has also worked a lot on how to
enhance its role as facilitator of technical assistance.

3

S/PV.5601

That is an area regarding which the Committee is
aware that more can and should be done. Personally, I
am not pleased that requests from Member States for
assistance remain unanswered and that there are so few
concrete results to report, as Council members will see
in the report of the CTC published today as document
S/2006/989.
Visits to States have become a regular tool for the
Committee. I would like to thank the States that have
hosted such visits. I encourage States, in cooperation
with CTED, to ensure that visits lead to enhanced
implementation, including through setting priorities
and ensuring thorough follow-up.
Finally, we have expanded work with more
regional organizations, developed best practices, and
provided an overview of States’ implementation of
resolution 1624 (2005). Also, it has now become
routine to include human rights aspects of States’
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) in the work
of the Committee.
In conclusion, the CTC, with the support of
CTED, has great potential to become a key partner of
States in their implementation of resolution 1373
(2001). That will require appropriate guidance to
CTED from the Committee, a proactive approach from
CTED, as well as due respect for the Committees and,
thereby, for CTED’s mandate.
Let me now make a couple of observations
regarding the Liberia Sanctions Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1521 (2003).
My time as Chairman of the Liberia Committee
has been marked by an improvement of the situation in
Liberia after the democratically elected Government
took office in January 2006. The Council can, through
the use of targeted sanctions, create a strong incentive
for concerned parties to change their course of action
in the interests of peace. The Liberia sanctions regime,
which is part of a comprehensive policy, is a pertinent
example of such a positive effect.
Two months ago, the Council decided not to
reinstate the timber sanctions, since Liberia had
adopted the necessary legislation to ensure that
revenues from the timber will not again fuel conflict,
but benefit the Liberians. The work in the Committee
on monitoring the conditions set for the lifting of
sanctions, and the specific wording in resolution 1689
(2006) in particular, have, I believe, been instrumental

4

in ensuring the swift adoption of effective legislation,
illustrating how the Council’s decisions can have a
direct effect on the ground.
Unfortunately, the Council will have to extend
the diamond sanctions, but I feel confident that the
extension will continue to act as a vehicle for reform so
that Liberia can become Kimberley-compliant and the
embargo can be lifted within the next six months.
The value of the Panel of Experts — the
Committee’s daily eyes and ears on the ground —
cannot be underestimated. The current Liberia Panel
has accrued an in-depth knowledge of the history of
the sanctions, benefiting the Committee as well as the
Government, which has also profited from the experts’
advice. That is why the Council will, I hope, extend the
current Panel this afternoon. In that context, I appeal
for a constructive look at the administrative procedures
for appointing panels of experts so as to ensure that
those procedures serve the subject matter and enhance
institutional memory.
As Chairman of the Committee, it was my goal to
ensure that positive developments in Liberia also
resulted in adjustments to the individual sanctions. I
have discussed that several times with President
Johnson-Sirleaf, including during my visit in April.
One individual was delisted last week — the first since
the list was established. That sends a key message to
Liberia and the international community that the
Committee is willing to revise its list in light of new
developments. I hope that more delistings will also
follow after I leave the Committee.
In that connection, let me stress my delegation’s
consistent position that improved delisting procedures
that live up to the principles of due process would
greatly enhance the credibility and effectiveness of any
sanctions regime. Resolution 1730 (2006), adopted
yesterday, is a step in the right direction. Had I
continued as a sanctions chairman, I would have
suggested new guidelines based on that resolution, but
also building on the established practice in the Liberia
Committee of giving individuals direct access in
exceptional cases.
Finally, let me remind all Member States of their
obligation to implement sanctions adopted by the
Security Council. In the case of Liberia, far more needs
to be done, especially in the subregion, to prevent
flagrant violations of the travel ban and to implement

06-67222

S/PV.5601

the assets freeze. At the same time, however, and on a
more general note, it is essential that the decisions of
the Council be made and communicated in such a way
that they can actually be implemented by all States
Members of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Ambassador Løj for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Mayoral,
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities.
Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to share some reflections, in my personal
capacity, with members of the Security Council before
concluding my mandate as Chairman of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities. These have been two
important years for me, for the Committee and for
Argentina. It has also been a professional privilege for
me and a challenge to preside over it.
According to the sixth and last report of the
Monitoring Team, the Al-Qaida threat has decreased in
certain places, such as Iraq; unfortunately, for
fundamentally political reasons, in other areas it has
stayed at the same level or increased. At the same time,
Al-Qaida appears to be working with more complex
methods, as is the case in North Africa, in Asia and in
the bosom of Western civilizations.
We are aware in this Council, and as participants
in the Council’s mission can bear witness, of the
increasingly grave situation in Afghanistan, where the
Taliban insurgence is regaining intensity and growing
in numbers. It is allied with drug trafficking, which
activates a vicious circle of terrorism, violence and
corruption. We personally believe that the sanctions
regime could better be utilized, with a greater number
of requests to include Al-Qaida members on the list or
to adequately reflect the Taliban structure in
Afghanistan. A more marked separation in the
treatment of both lists could contribute to a better focus
on listing and delisting of the Taliban and to more
effective influence on the complex political and
military processes in that country. I would point out
that this is a personal opinion and not that of the
Committee.

06-67222

We believe that if we are going to be effective,
we must act in unison in the fight against terrorism. We
must also fully respect human rights. I believe that to
be a moral imperative, reaffirmed in the Outcome
document of the 2005 Summit and in the United
Nations Global Strategy against Terrorism. Argentina
has presided over the Committee for the past two years
with that balance as it goal. We have made every effort
to be impartial, while accommodating all the positions
of the Committee members, and have always modified
our own position to accommodate consensus.
I would like to emphasize that, in addition to
incorporating into the Consolidated List the names of
new individuals and entities, we have made great
progress in improving the quality of the List by adding
more identifying elements. The Monitoring Team has
continued to do meaningful work in that respect,
especially as regards Afghanistan.
The process of renegotiation and improvement of
the Committee’s guidelines has been arduous and
complex. It was just a few days ago that we were able
to reach consensus on the new chapter 6, concerning
listing. I believe that has to be considered important
progress.
Henceforth, States are urged to consult with the
State of residence or nationality of the potential person
or entity to be listed in order to seek out additional
information. Inclusion in the List must be based on a
statement of the case, along with a series of elements
of reasonability or proof. New rules have also been
included in the guidelines to improve transparency and
publicity, such as the use of a cover page and a revision
clause.
Yesterday, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1730 (2006), which originated in a proposal
by some members of the Council to set up a focal point
in the Secretariat where those included in the List can
request and justify delisting. I once again would like to
acknowledge the active participation of all members of
the Committee in those difficult negotiations.
Several countries, including Argentina, would
have liked greater progress as regards an independent
revision mechanism, for example. However, we must
be realistic and understand that this is an evolving
regime in which changes occur to improve the
situation. I believe that the implementation of the

5

S/PV.5601

revised directives and the new focal point system will
allow us to see an improvement in the way the system
functions with these new rules. It is to be expected that
the sanctions regime will continue to be improved in
the future. The Council and the Committee must be
transparent and open to the necessary adjustments
demanded by the international community in order to
act expeditiously.
Consensus often slows us down, but we must not
waver. The list of issues on hold should therefore be
reduced. Let us not forget that, while the individuals
who are on the List are in a certain way stigmatized
and isolated — and in many cases accused of crimes —
the main problem is that individuals who will, or are
about to, commit terrorist acts are not yet on the List,
and we do not even know who they are. In that regard
States should, and often can, identify those individuals
and entities so that they may be incorporated into the
List.
Visits to various countries and international
organizations were an important aspect of our
presidency. Members of the Committee, the Monitoring
Team and the Secretariat visited Germany, European
institutions in Brussels, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime in Vienna, as well as Chad,
Nigeria, Syria, Japan, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Yemen,
Qatar and Indonesia. In addition, I participated in
regional meetings of heads of intelligence and security
of Middle Eastern and North African countries. I
believe that those meetings are very important and
should be continued in the future, given that
anti-terrorism officials meeting in the field to exchange
specific information and express their perceptions and
concerns provide input for the Committee. Those
meetings, which provide us a first-hand global
perspective, are a key element to success in the fight
against Al-Qaida and the Taliban.
I am also pleased to highlight the signing and
effective functioning of the agreement with Interpol,
which is a key multilateral body in the fight against
crime and terrorism. The positive experience in the
cooperation carried out through the Committee and the
Monitoring Team led to the adoption of resolution
1699 (2006). That resolution will also expand
cooperation to other sanctions committees.
The complex negotiations on the revision of the
directives on listing and delisting did not make it

6

possible for us to address the issue of the criminal use
of the Internet by Al-Qaida this year with the rigor and
time we would have liked — and which the issue
deserves — in line with the various positions of the
members of the Council. I should like to point out that
there are about 5,000 websites that daily distribute the
propaganda of international terrorism. Those websites
also serve to coordinate networks, recruit new
members and raise funds.
The harnessing of information and modern
technology by the Al-Qaida terrorist organization is
one of the most pressing and sensitive issues for
intelligence and security officials in many countries
affected by terrorism, especially in the Middle East.
We believe that the Committee and the Security
Council must address that issue, which encompasses
various aspects — from expanding the sanctions
regime to making suggested recommendations to
Governments. Moreover, new technologies could also
be used to stop the spread of terrorism and its
propaganda.
We have attempted to maintain an active and
regular dialogue with the full membership of the
United Nations. To that end, we held open meetings
and invited all countries that wanted to come before the
Committee. We believe that non-members of the
Committee that are responsible for implementing
sanctions and that suffer from the terrorism perpetrated
by Al-Qaida and the Taliban should take greater
advantage of such opportunities in the future.
I wish to emphasize before the Council that the
President’s efforts and the Committee’s proper
functioning would not have had the same results
without the constant support of the Monitoring Team. I
should therefore like to extend my gratitude to
Mr. Richard Barrett and his entire team for their high
degree of professionalism, judgment and steadfast
support. My work, as well as that of Counsellor
Malpede and Secretary Kendall, who also presided
over the Committee, enjoyed the daily support of the
Secretariat team. My delegation believes that the
members of the Organization and the Council should
continue to provide the adequate financial, human and
technical resources to the Monitoring Team and the
Secretariat in order that they may continue to ensure
the efficient functioning of the Committee and the
implementation of the resolutions of the Security
Council.

06-67222

S/PV.5601

Sanctions are an important weapon in the fight
against Al-Qaida. The important work of the 1267
Committee will not be sufficient if the political, social
and economic causes from which the Al-Qaida
terrorism also stems are not addressed. Therefore, if
they wish to prevail — and I think we all wish to
prevail— the Security Council and the international
community should redouble their efforts to achieve a
just peace in the Middle East and the social and
economic development of the region, as well as, and in
particular, of Afghanistan.
International terrorism is now one of the greatest
new threats to humanity. If we have reached the
twenty-first century with great progress in several
areas, including science and technology and, in
particular, the economy, that progress has been through
the efforts of everyone. It is difficult to understand how
some individuals manifest their frustrations and try to
achieve their objectives through barbaric means
including by killing civilians, destroying countries and
sowing discord and distrust among States.
The United Nations, our Organization, has played
a very important role over the past 60 years and now
has the task of confronting and preventing international
terrorism. That is why I feel honoured and proud
that — even if for a limited time — I was part of that
effort.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Ambassador Mayoral for his important briefing, and
for his efforts during his chairmanship of the
Committees.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Adamantios
Vassilakis, Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1572
(2004) concerning Côte d’Ivoire and of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan, as well as of the
Security Council Informal Working Group on General
Issues of Sanctions to brief the Council on the work of
those three bodies.
Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): I take this opportunity
to share with you some personal observations
concerning the two Sanctions Committees that I have
had the honour to chair for the past two years, namely,
the Côte d’Ivoire Sanctions Committee and the Sudan
Sanctions Committee. As Chair of the Informal
Working Group on General Issues of Sanctions during
the past year, I would also like to brief the Council on

06-67222

the work of that Working Group during that period, in
which it accomplished the successful fulfilment of its
current mandate.
Let me begin with the Sanctions Committee on
Côte d’Ivoire established pursuant to paragraph 14 of
resolution 1572 (2004). The ongoing conflict in Côte
d’Ivoire has been at the heart of the Council’s attention
for the past two years. The Council has adopted a
series of resolutions regarding the conflict, and has
used sanctions as a tool in support of the peace process
as well as of the important regional initiatives,
particularly those of the African Union, which aim at
bringing peace and national reconciliation to the
country.
The targeted measures imposed through the
relevant Security Council resolutions consist of an
arms embargo, travel restrictions and an assets freeze
on designated individuals and entities whose actions
seriously jeopardize the peace process or violate
human rights or incite hatred through the media. Those
measures were subsequently reinforced by new
Security Council resolutions, in particular resolution
1643 (2005), which, inter alia, imposed an embargo on
the import of all rough diamonds from Cote d’Ivoire.
That resolution also stated that any obstacle to the
freedom of movement of the United Nations Operation
in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) and the French forces, as
well as any attack against UNOCI, the French forces,
the High Representative for the elections or the
International Working Group, constituted a threat to the
peace and national reconciliation process. A Group of
experts was also set up to monitor the implementation
of those targeted measures.
As I stated earlier, the major concern of the
Council in relation to targeted sanctions in Côte
d’Ivoire has been their impact on the peace process.
Although the measures were imposed by resolution
1572 (2004), the Committee did not designate any
individuals subject to the measures until February
2006, following the request of the African Union and
the mediator to withhold any action that would have a
negative effect on the peace process.
However, on 7 February 2006 the Committee
designated, on the basis of consensus, three individuals
on its list of targeted sanctions, following the outbreak
of violence against United Nations personnel in
September 2005. The aim of such action was to help
restore peace and stability in the country, which had

7

S/PV.5601

been seriously jeopardized by the above events, and to
avert similar disturbing events in the future.
It should be stressed that this decision came only
after the Council had issued several warnings to all the
parties to the conflict that it would not tolerate acts
which put the peace process at risk; there was also a
shift in the aforementioned position of the African
Union concerning the need for and timing of the
imposition of sanctions.
In addition, I myself, in October 2005, made a visit to
Côte d’Ivoire, previously endorsed by the Security Council,
with the aim of putting pressure on the Ivorian parties to
implement their obligations under the relevant peace
agreements and Security Council resolutions. I met with all
of the signatories to the agreements as well as with State
officials, representatives of State organizations and
non-governmental organizations. During those meetings, I
explained the real purpose of targeted sanctions and the
concern of the Council about the political developments
concerning the holding of elections. I made it clear that the
Committee was ready to apply such measures, without
further delay and in a non-discriminatory manner, against
all those who did not implement the agreements and who
incited hatred or violence and committed human rights
violations and abuses.
However, despite the calming effect that the
targeting of the aforementioned individuals had on the
situation on the ground for a short period of time,
violence resumed in the country, and the political
situation, in spite of the many efforts by the African
Union, has reached a new stalemate. That is also
confirmed by various reports on Côte d’Ivoire, such as
the reports of the Secretary-General, as well as the
monthly reports of the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire on the monitoring of the arms embargo
and the monitoring of public incitement of hatred and
violence through the media; these have identified
individuals responsible for the situation who could be
subject to targeted measures.
The Sanctions Committee members, however, did
not demonstrate the unity of purpose and political will
necessary to take a decision and designate new
individuals on its list.
With respect to the arms and diamond embargoes,
the reports issued by the Group of Experts established
by resolution 1643 (2005), are well drafted and
substantiated, and I commend the Group of Experts for
its professional approach to its work. The final report

8

of the Group (S/2006/735) found no evidence of gross
violations of arms embargoes, but listed a number of
problems that it believed could be used to violate the
sanctions.
It is important to note also that the Group
investigated the importation of small arms and
ammunition into Côte d’Ivoire by a criminal network
using international courier firms. It also found
continued evidence of diamond production in Côte
d’Ivoire and illicit export, especially to Ghana and
Mali. As regards the three Ivorian individuals
designated for targeted sanctions in February 2006, the
Group found that neighbouring States had not
disseminated information about the targeted Ivorians to
their local authorities at border posts at the time of the
Group’s inspection.
Finally, the Group recommended that the UNOCI
arms embargo inspection process should be reviewed
and improvements should be made to its methodology.
UNOCI has confirmed that it has taken steps towards
improving its inspection processes. In that respect I
wish to state that the members of the Sanctions
Committee — whom I thank wholeheartedly for their
work, cooperation and support — were, on the whole,
united in agreeing on the group’s recommendations.
The Committee has decided to follow up on the actions
it agreed to take with regard to the Group’s
observations and recommendations.
The conflict in Côte d’Ivoire has now entered a
new and more critical phase. In this final, transitional
period it is important that all the parties demonstrate
the necessary political will to implement the road map
and lead the country to fair elections by October 2007.
That is the only way to guarantee durable peace and
stability. Ivoirian parties must refrain from all actions
that jeopardize the road to peace and stability, reject
violence and intimidation and concentrate on taking
concrete steps to implement the road map without
further delay. Sanctions, if properly used and backed
by all the States of the region, would be a useful tool
and could help Côte d’Ivoire emerge from the current
crisis.
In addition, the political will of the members of
the Security Council is indispensable in respect of the
implementation of the Council’s own resolutions. That
has to do both with their determination to support the
maintenance of international peace and security and the
credibility of the Security Council itself.

06-67222

S/PV.5601

I shall now turn to the Sanctions Committee on
Sudan, established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005),
which imposed targeted sanctions against those who
violate the arms embargo, impede the peace process,
violate international humanitarian law or are
responsible for offensive military overflights.
In my view, the question of implementation of
resolution 1591 (2005) cannot be seen in isolation from
the overall problem of Darfur and the complexity of
that crisis. The Sanctions Committee has thoroughly
discussed the three reports of its panel of experts
regarding the situation in Darfur and has adopted only
a few of its recommendations.
The Committee has been actively engaged in an
interactive discussion during informal consultations
with its panel of experts concerning their reports to the
Security Council. The latest report contained
information about the deteriorating humanitarian crisis
and the continuing attacks against civilians and
humanitarian personnel. The report also provided
information about gross violation of the arms embargo
by all the parties to the conflict.
Weapons and military supplies are transferred to
Darfur without the formal approval of the Sanctions
Committee as called for in the resolution. In addition,
weapons are delivered from neighbouring Chad into
North and West Darfur, given the inadequate bordercontrol situation in Sudan, posing a significant threat to
peace and security in Darfur and the region. The Darfur
Peace Agreement (DPA) is not being implemented, as
not all of the rebel groups have signed it, and the
Janjaweed and other rebel groups and militias have not
been disarmed, in flagrant violation of the Agreement.
There is also expressed fear that the signatories of the
DPA will attempt to implement the Agreement through
force, with severe consequences on the lives of
innocent civilians.
Based on its own information and on information
provided by the African Union Mission in Sudan
(AMIS), the United Nations Mission in Sudan and
non-governmental organizations, the panel has, as in
the past, provided the Sanctions Committee with
findings concerning specific individuals whom the
Committee may wish to consider for designation for
targeted sanctions. According to the panel, those
individuals have allegedly violated arms embargoes,
impeded the peace process, violated international
humanitarian law and committed offensive military

06-67222

overflights. Their names have been included in a
confidential annex to the panel’ s third report. This has
raised the concern of some members of the Committee,
who emphasized that the panel should take political
sensitivities into account and be more attuned to the
ongoing diplomatic initiatives to address the situation
in Darfur. However, other members considered that the
panel has produced a high-quality report despite the
volatile environment in which it has conducted its
work.
At the same time Security Council resolution
1713 (2006) extended the mandate of the panel by one
year and requested that a fifth expert be appointed. The
divergence of views among Committee members
concerning the recommendations of the panel of
experts also exists with regard to the question of the
identification of individuals to be designated for
targeted sanctions. So far the members of the Sanctions
Committee have not been able to designate any
individual on its lists, due to lack of the unity of
purpose and political will necessary to take a decision
and to designate individuals on its lists.
The four individuals that have been designated
for targeted sanctions — travel ban and assets
freeze — have been identified not by the Sanctions
Committee but by the Security Council through
resolution 1672 (2006), adopted on 25 April 2006.
However, this resolution did not include sufficient
identifying elements on the designated persons, despite
the relevant provisions of its guidelines. There are
expressed fears that this might create problems of
implementation of the targeted measures by Member
States. In an effort to address these concerns, the
Committee subsequently posted the customary
sanctions list on its website, which included the
additional relevant information on the four individuals
that the Committee had in its possession.
I would also like to underline the importance of
continued cooperation of the Committee and its panel
with the African Union (AU) and AMIS. In this
respect, I recall that there have been written and faceto-face exchanges between the Chairman of the
Committee, the panel and the AU.
The situation for thousands of refugees and
displaced persons in Darfur has considerably
deteriorated. The DPA and other ceasefire agreements
continue to be violated. The humanitarian crisis can be
resolved only through a series of robust measures,

9

S/PV.5601

some of which, such as the reinforcement of AMIS,
have already started to be implemented.
Sanctions must be one part of an overall solution.
They can be effective only if they have the full
political support of the members of the Security
Council. The Council should be in a position to
implement its own decisions and should try to avert a
more serious humanitarian crisis with spill-over effects
in the region. Sanctions can be a powerful weapon in
this respect, but only as a result of consensus among
the members of the Council.
In my view, the Committee Chairmen should visit
the countries involved more frequently. They will
surely have more influence by the mere fact of their
presence. Sitting in New York and making decisions is
one way of acting, but is, in my view, less effective.
I shall now brief the Council on the work of the
Informal Working Group on the General Issues of
Sanctions. I assumed the chairmanship of that Working
Group for the year 2006. After a year of hard work on
the part of its members, pursuant to its mandate to
develop general recommendations on how to improve
the effectiveness of United Nations sanctions
(S/2000/319), the Working Group fulfilled its current
mandate and approved some extremely important best
practices with respect to all aspects of sanctions.
These results are reflected in the report of the
Working Group that has become a document of the
Council. It sets out the best practices adopted by the
Informal Working Group with respect to sanctions
design, implementation, evaluation and follow-up,
Committee working methods, monitoring and
enforcement, and methodological standards and
reporting formats for expert groups. I am pleased to
note that this report will also be endorsed by the
Council when it adopts the draft resolution that has
been tabled this morning. I consider these
developments to be of major importance, as they
demonstrate the determination and the will of the
Council to improve its sanctions regimes and maximize
their effectiveness.
Lately the Council has very frequently used the
instrument of sanctions in carrying out its
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Targeted sanctions are a
non-military means that the Council uses today to
address situations that threaten international peace and
security, such as terrorism, or to support the

10

implementation of peace agreements. They are directed
against political leaders and other non-State actors
whose actions constitute a threat to international peace
and security to apply pressure and change behaviour in
general. Such measures, if applied effectively, are
preferable to the general economic or trade sanctions
that the Council has imposed in the past, as they
directly affect decision-makers and have minimal
humanitarian impact. They can also deter the
continuation of such threats to peace and security.
For that reason, it is important that targeted
sanctions comply with certain principles and criteria
that should be implemented by the Security Council
when deciding to impose sanctions, by its Sanctions
Committees and by the panels of experts that assist the
latter in monitoring the implementation of targeted
measures. These include, for example, accuracy in
identifying information concerning individuals and
entities to be targeted, fair and clear procedures
concerning their listing and delisting, the use of the
highest evidentiary standards to substantiate findings
by the panels of experts when drafting their reports,
et cetera.
In addition, it is important for the Council to
ascertain, before imposing sanctions, whether or not
that instrument is the appropriate one to be applied in
view of the specific circumstances at hand. The
possible humanitarian consequences of the targeted
sanctions should also be evaluated.
The implementation of targeted sanctions is also
an important factor for the effectiveness of these
measures. The more implementable the sanctions, the
more impact they will have on the target. At the same
time it is important that Member States, which have
that primary responsibility to implement sanctions,
particularly neighbouring States, take the appropriate
measures for such implementation.
Finally, I believe that the greater the international
and regional consensus regarding the targeted
sanctions, the more likely it is that such measures will
be complied with by the target. We have seen lately
that targeted measures that are not supported by
Security Council members have not been implemented
by the State or non-State targeted actors.
The best practices adopted by the Informal
Working Group, which will be endorsed by the
Council, constitute an important step forward towards
more transparent, fair and effective implementation of

06-67222

S/PV.5601

the sanctions regimes. The adoption of these best
practices by the Council and their consistent and
uniform implementation by the Sanctions Committees
and the panels of experts will improve the
effectiveness of sanctions and will enhance the
legitimacy of the Security Council and its subsidiary
bodies.
I would like to mention one of the points agreed
upon by the Working Group: the need to ensure that, as
the Council increasingly imposes sanctions regimes
and establishes committees and expert groups, the
Secretariat has the necessary resources to do its work
effectively.
Finally, I would like to thank all the members of
the Working Group and of my own team for their
commitment, dedication and collaboration in bringing
this important work to fruition. We would like also to
thank the members of the Secretariat for their support
and advice during our tenure, in particular Ms. Loraine
Rickard-Martin, Mr. James Sutterlin, Ms. Tatiana
Cosio and all the other colleagues who work with
them.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Ambassador Vassilakis for his comprehensive briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Kenzo
Oshima, Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1636 (2005), of the
Security Council Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions, and of
the Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations.
Mr. Oshima (Japan): It is my pleasure to brief
members of the Council, as outgoing Chairman, on the
work of two of the Security Council’s subsidiary
bodies of which I have had the honour to serve as
Chair during Japan’s current term on the Security
Council.
First, I should like to deal with the Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations. The Working
Group was established in 2001 in the context of the
Council’s desire to strengthen cooperation with troopcontributing countries. At the time the Working Group
started its work in 2001, United Nations peacekeeping
operations had already reached quite a substantial
level. The number of peacekeeping missions was 15,
with 39,000 military and police personnel deployed
and with a budget of $2.6 billion. However, the recent

06-67222

surge in United Nations peacekeeping operations has
gone far beyond expectations in terms of both the
number of personnel and the budget. As of the end of
October 2006, the number of missions supported by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations had reached
18, with over 80,000 troops and police and with a
budget of more than $5 billion — which is nearly three
times the size of the regular budget of the United
Nations, and which appears to be growing even further.
Recently, Secretary-General Kofi Annan, in public
remarks, indicated that the number of peacekeepers
might increase to between 120,000 and 140,000 in the
near future.
Operations of that magnitude cannot be sustained
without the strong commitment of Member States in
terms of both personnel and financial contributions,
and in political terms. To secure the cooperation and
support of a wide range of Member States, it is
necessary that the transparency of the process and the
involvement of key stakeholders be ensured as much as
possible so that there is a proper understanding of the
activities of the Security Council in the field of
peacekeeping, in particular when a new operation is
created or when the mandate of an existing mission is
changed.
It is with that in mind that we felt the need to
revitalize the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations, which can serve as an effective forum for
the promotion of better interaction between Council
members and other interested Member States by
providing the opportunity to engage in close,
interactive dialogue with troop-contributing countries,
financial contributors and other major stakeholders,
and with the Secretariat.
The report of the Working Group before the
Council in document S/2006/972 describes activities
carried out by the Working Group over the past two
years. Meetings were held at the time of the creation of
a new mission, for example in the case of the setting up
of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS)
in February 2005, and when a mission’s mandate was
modified and its structure changed, for example in the
case of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and
Eritrea (UNMEE) earlier this year. There were
meetings to discuss operational issues that affected a
mission’s capabilities and the safety and security of its
personnel, such as when restrictions on movement
were imposed on UNMEE by Eritrea. The Working

11

S/PV.5601

Group also met to consider certain specific issues that
needed member States’ special attention, such as the
problem of sexual exploitation and abuse, focusing on
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), and the
issue of inter-mission cooperation and harmonization,
focusing on the three missions deployed in West
Africa: in Sierra Leone, Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire.
The report then makes a number of
recommendations for making the work of the Working
Group more meaningful and effective. Let me highlight
a few elements that I consider most important.
One of the recommendations in the report is to
encourage the Working Group to hold a meeting at the
time of the creation of a new mission or of a renewal
involving substantial changes in the mandate, structure
or size of a mission, inviting troop-contributing
countries and other major stakeholders to attend. I
cannot stress too much the importance of having
exchanges of views with major stakeholders when the
Council establishes a new mission or changes the
mandate of an existing mission. The dialogue with
major stakeholders becomes crucial if the Council is to
ensure their willing and full cooperation as the size, the
nature and the budget of peacekeeping operations
continue to expand.
Secondly, the Working Group should be flexible
in taking up issues that affect the operation of a
mission. The report recommends that the Working
Group hold meetings with troop-contributing countries
and other major stakeholders at times of crisis affecting
the safety and security of mission personnel and the
transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding, and
also in order to address issues that have broader
ramifications beyond a particular mission.

the context of a specific mission or missions rather
than in a general policy manner, which falls within the
realm of the General Assembly’s Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations; such a focus of attention
could lend itself to the solution of the specific problem
under consideration.
Sixth and finally, the Security Council and the
General Assembly should maintain an appropriate level
of interaction, respecting one another’s authority and
mandate. That is why we believe it important that the
Working Group put itself in contact periodically with
the Bureau of the General Assembly’s Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.
In conclusion, I wish to stress once again that the
Working Group’s main objective is to promote mutual
understanding among the members of the Security
Council, troop-contributing countries and other major
stakeholders, and the Secretariat.
From this viewpoint, allow me to speak in my
national capacity. Japan intends to continue to
cooperate with the Working Group after we leave the
Council at the end of this year. I hope that we, as one
of the major stakeholders, and other stakeholders will
continue to be given opportunities to express our views
when the Council makes important decisions on
peacekeeping.
I should like now to address the issue of working
methods in my capacity as Chairman of the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and other
Procedural Questions.

Fourthly, in discussing the transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding in a given country
situation, the Working Group should bear in mind that
the discussion may be of assistance in the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission if the Commission decides
to deal with the country in question.

At the beginning of this year, the Council agreed
to revitalize its Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions in the belief that there was
a need to further improve Security Council working
methods and procedures. This also matched the larger
membership’s concern at, and strong interest in, this
issue, as reflected in paragraph 154 of the 2005
Summit Outcome Document. In the Outcome
Document, our leaders stated that the Security Council
should continue to adapt its working methods so as to
increase the involvement of States not members of the
Council in its work in order to enhance its
accountability to the membership and increase the
transparency of its work.

Fifthly, it is felt advisable that when the Working
Group tackles specific issues, such as that of sexual
exploitation and abuse, these should be dealt with in

It was agreed earlier this year that part of the
revitalization effort should begin with a change in the
way in which the chairmanship of this Working Group

Thirdly, the modalities of Working Group
meetings should be as flexible as possible, and when
necessary there should be meetings at the expert level.

12

06-67222

S/PV.5601

functioned. In lieu of the old practice, whereby the
chairmanship rotated with the monthly presidency, the
Council decided to appoint a Chair with a term of
office lasting several months. That change had the
advantage of making it easier for the Working Group to
function in a more focused and consistent manner.
Japan was appointed as Chair until the end of June, an
appointment that was eventually extended through
December this year.
Between March and July 2006, the Working
Group met 11 times and examined various proposals on
two categories of issues. The first group of issues
relates to the Council’s own internal work, with a view
to increasing its efficiency.
The second group of issues relates to the
Council’s relationship with non-members. As a result
of the discussions, the Working Group produced a set
of recommendations to be presented to the Council for
its approval. Those recommendations included, for
ease of reference, the agreements on working methods
that already are in place, some of which go as far back
as 1993, as well as newly agreed or updated measures
for improvement. The Council eventually approved the
recommendations of the Working Group, which are
contained in a note by the President of the Security
Council (S/2006/507).
In the latter half of the year, the Working Group
continued its discussions, mainly on two issues: first,
the procedure for conducting Arria-formula meetings,
and, secondly, ways of promoting the implementation
of the recommendations contained in the note by the
President.
With regard to holding Arria-formula meetings,
which had been the practice for some years, members
of the Council requested the Working Group in
September 2006 to discuss the appropriate way to
conduct the meetings, believing that there was a need
for some clarity on this aspect. In response to that
request, the Working Group met twice and reached a
common understanding on the conduct of Arriaformula meetings, which I shall now present orally.
There are four points.
First, the members of the Security Council are
encouraged to plan Arria-formula meetings, in
accordance with paragraph 54 of the note by the
President of the Security Council in document
S/2006/507, and to take part in such meetings.

06-67222

Secondly, the content of the background note on
Arria-formula meetings prepared by the Secretariat in
2002 provides a useful description of current and past
practices relating to Arria-formula meetings, and the
members are encouraged to utilize the background note
as a guideline, without undermining the flexibility of
Arria-formula meetings.
Thirdly, any member of the Security Council
convening an Arria-formula meeting is encouraged to
carefully organize the meeting so as to maintain its
informal character.
Fourthly, any member of the Security Council
convening an Arria-formula meeting should inform all
participating Security Council members about the
planned procedures for and participation in the
meeting, and is encouraged to do so well in advance.
Those are the four points on Arria-formula
meetings.
With regard to promoting the implementation of
the recommendations contained in the note, the Chair
felt it useful to prepare a non-paper in which various
agreed recommendations are reconfigured so as to
allow prospective users, such as the President of the
Security Council and members of subsidiary bodies,
some ease of reference. The non-paper has already
been distributed to the members of the Council and
will be included in the briefing materials prepared by
the Secretariat for the benefit of new members of the
Council in future.
In addition, Japan is preparing a handbook on the
working methods of the Security Council which
contains official documents relating to the working
methods of the Council, including the note by the
President and the provisional rules of procedure, in
handbook format. That publication itself is not an
official document, and it will be produced and
distributed to anyone interested under the sole
responsibility of the Permanent Mission of Japan and
as a temporary measure, pending such a handbook
being found useful and the Council deciding to issue it,
or something like it, as a Secretariat publication later
on.
That concludes my report on the work of the
Working Group on documentation.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Ambassador Oshima for his comprehensive briefing.

13

S/PV.5601

I now give the floor to Ambassador Tuvako
Manongi, speaking on behalf of the Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1132 (1997) concerning Sierra Leone.
Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania): I
am addressing the Council with respect to the work of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1132
(1997) concerning Sierra Leone on behalf of its
Chairman, Ambassador Mahiga.
Council members will recall that since the
expiration of the diamond sanctions in June 2003, the
mandate of the Committee has been wholly contained
in resolution 1171 (1998), which refers to the
requirement of notifications to the Security Council for
the export and import of arms and related matériel, and
to the tasks of the Committee in relation to the arms
embargo and the travel ban, both of which are still in
force.
As of today, the travel ban list includes the names
of 30 individuals designated as leading members of the
former military junta in Sierra Leone, the Armed
Forces Revolutionary Council (AFRC), or as leading
members of the Revolutionary United Front (RUF).
During 2006, the Committee considered two
notifications submitted by States with respect to the
arms embargo. Also during 2006, no violations or
alleged violations of the sanctions regime were brought
to the attention of the Sanctions Committee.
Following consultations in July 2006, the
Chairman, Ambassador Mahiga, wrote, on behalf of the
Committee, to the Permanent Representative of Sierra
Leone to inform him that the members of the
Committee had agreed that the time might be ripe to
review the travel ban list to ensure that it accurately
reflected the changing security situation in Sierra
Leone and the ongoing judicial process in the Special
Court, and that the Committee would welcome

14

receiving the views of the Government in that
connection.
In the light of Sierra Leone’s continued progress
in its peacebuilding efforts, I would encourage
members of the Committee and the Security Council to
continue consultations to determine the appropriate
time to streamline the legal basis for sanctions in Sierra
Leone. While recognizing that any revision of the
sanctions measures would fall under the purview of the
Security Council, I would note that one contribution
that the Committee could make towards having an
up-to-date sanctions regime is to ensure that the travel
ban list reflects as closely as possible the current
situation in Sierra Leone. In this connection, the
Committee awaits the views of the Government of
Sierra Leone.
As we conclude our mandate, we are pleased to
note that the transition in Sierra Leone is progressing
well. Having been designated as one of the countries
on the Peacebuilding Commission, Sierra Leone stands
to benefit from its work. In addition, the opening of the
integrated office in Sierra Leone will provide a good
basis for that country’s smooth graduation from
conflict to the consolidation of peace and development.
It is the Chair’s hope that as Sierra Leone makes
progress in its transition, the Sanctions Committee on
Sierra Leone will become unnecessary sooner rather
than later.
Finally, the Chair wishes to thank the members of
the Secretariat for their support to the Committee,
especially the leadership provided by James Sutterlin
in that regard.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.

06-67222
