Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

47

2. The appropriations voted by paragraph 1 above shall be financed by contributions from M_e1:1ber States
after adjustment as provided by the Financial Regulations of the United Nations, sub_ject to the prov1s1~:m of pa_ragraph 1 of General Assembly resolution 1232 (XII) of 14 December 1957 relating to the Working Capital
Fund; for this purpose, miscellaneous income for the financial year 1958 is estimated at $US3,250,000;
3. With the prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,
the Secretary-General may transfer credits between sections of the budget;
4. In addition to the appropriations voted by paragraph 1 above, an amount of $US13,000 is hereby ~ppropriated from the income of the Library Endowment Fund for the purchase of books, periodicals, maps and library
equipment and for such other expenses as are in accordance with the objects and provisions of the endowment;
5. The Secretary-General is authorized, in accordance with the Financial Regulations, to charge against the
income derived from the United Nations Postal Administration, the Visitors' Service, the sale of publications, the
catering and related services, and the Gift Centre, the direct expenses of those activities; income in excess of
those expenses shall be treated as miscellaneous income under the terms of financial regulation 7, and of paragraph 2 above.
731st plenary meeting,
14 December 1957.

1231 (XII). Unforeseen and extraordinary expenses for the financial year 1958
The General Assembly
Resolves that, for the financial year 1958:
1. The Secretary-General, with the prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions and subject to the Financial
Regulations of the United Nations, is authorized to
enter into commitments to meet unforeseen and extraordinary expenses, provided that the concurrence of
the Advisory Committee shall not be necessary for:
(a) Such commitments, not exceeding a total of
$US 2 million, as the Secretary-General certifies relate
to the maintenance of peace and security or to urgent
economic rehabilitations;
( b) Such commitments as the President of the
International Court of Justice certifies relate to expenses occasioned by :
(i) The designation of ad hoe judges (Statute,
Article 31), not exceeding a total of $24,000;
(ii) The appointment of assessors ( Statute, Article
30), or the calling of witnesses and the appointment of experts ( Statute, Article SO), not exceeding a total of $25,000;
(iii) The maintenance in office of judges who have
not been re-elected ( Statute, Article 13, paragraph 3), not exceeding a total of $40,000;
(iv) The holding of sessions of the Court away from
The Hague ( Statute, Article 22), not exceeding a total of $75,000;
(v) The payment of pensions and travel and removal expenses of judges not re-elected, and
travel and removal expenses of new members
of the Court, not exceeding a total of $31,000;
( c) Such commitments not exceeding a total of
$25,000 as may be authorized by the Secretary-General
in accordance with paragraph 4 of General Assembly
resolution 1202 (XII) of 13 December 1957 relating
to the pattern of conferences;
2. The Secretary-General shall report to the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions and to the General Assembly, at its thirteenth
session, all commitments made under the provisions
of the present resolution, together with the circumstances relating thereto, and shall submit supplementary
estimates to the General Assembly in respect of such
commitments.
731st plenary meeting,
14 December 1957.

1232 (XII). Working Capital Fund for the
financial year 1958
The General Assembly
Resolves that:
1. The Working Capital Fund shall be established
for the year ending 31 December 1958 at an amount of
$US 22 million to be derived from cash advances by
Members in accordance with the provisions of paragraphs 2 and 3 of the present resolution;
2. Members shall make cash advances to the Working Capital Fund as required under paragraph 1 above
in accordance with the scale adopted by the General
Assembly for contributions of Members to the thirteenth annual budget ;
3. There shall be set off against this new allocation
of advances the amounts paid by Members to the
Working Capital Fund for the financial year 1957,
under General Assembly resolution 1085 (XI) of 21
December 1956, provided that, should such advance
paid by any Member to the Working Capital Fund for
the financial year 1957 exceed the amount of that
Member's advance under the provision of paragraph 2
above, the excess shall be set off against the amount of
contributions payable by that Member in respect of
the thirteenth annual budget, or any previous budget;
4. The Secretary-General is authorized to advance
from the Working Capital Fund:
(a) Such sums as may be necessary to finance budgetary appropriations pending receipt of contributions;
sums so advanced shall be reimbursed as soon as receipts from contributions are available for the purpose;
( b) Such sums as may be necessary to finance commitments which may be duly authorized under the
provisions of General Assembly resolution 1231 (XII)
of 14 December 1957, relating to unforeseen and extraordinary expenses; the Secretary-General shall make
provision in the budget estimates for reimbursing the
Working Capital Fund;
( c) Such sums as, together with net sums outstanding for the same purposes, do not exceed $125,000, to
continue the revolving fund to finance miscellaneous
self-liquidating purchases and activities; advances in
excess of the total of $125,000 may be made with the
prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions; the SecretaryGeneral shall submit, with the annual accounts, an
explanation of the outstanding balance of the revolving
fund at the end of each year;

General Assembly-Twelfth Session

48

( d) Loans to specialized agencies and preparatory
commissions of agencies to be established by inter-governmental agreement under the auspices of the United
Nations to finance their work, pending receipt by the
agencies concerned of sufficient contributions under
their own budgets; in making such loans, which shall
normally be repayable within two years, the SecretaryGeneral shall have regard to the proposed financial resources of the agency concerned, and shall obtain the
prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions for any cash
issues which would increase the aggregate balance outstanding ( including amounts previously advanced and
outstanding) at any one time to an amount in excess of
$1,500,000 and for any issue which would increase the
balance outstanding ( including amounts previously advanced and outstanding) in respect of any one agency
to an amount in excess of $500,000;

(e) Such sums not exceeding $35,000 as may be required to finance payments of advance insurance premiums where the period of insurance extends beyond
the end of the financial year in which payment is made ;
this amount may be increased with the prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions; the Secretary-General shall make
provision in the budget estimates of each year, during
the life of the related policies, to cover the charges
applicable to each such year ;
(f) Such sums as may be necessary to enable the
Tax Equalization Fund to meet current commitments
pending accumulation of credits; such advances shall
be repaid as soon as credits are available in the Tax
Equalization Fund.

731st plenary meeting,
14 December 1957.
1233 (XII). Change in the date of repayment of
the Headquarters loan

The General Assembly,
Having considered the need for financing budgetary
appropriations pending the receipt of contributions, and
taking into account the pattern of payments of contributions,
Believing that the financial situation in this respect
would be alleviated by changing the date of the annual
repayment inade to the United States of America under
the Headquarters Loan Agreement of 23 March 1948
between the United States and the United Nations, 35
Authorizes the Secretary-General to conclude an
agreement with the United States of America modifying
paragraph 4 of the above-mentioned Agreement so that
the date of 1 September is substituted for 1 July for
the years 1958 to 1982 inclusive.
731st plenary meeting,
14 December 1957.
""Ibid., Third Session, Part I, Plenary Meetings, Annexes,
document A/6'2J, annex.

1234 (XII). Emoluments of Under-Secretaries:
amendments to the Staff Regulations of the
United Nations

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the organization of the Secretariat at the senior
level3 6 and the comments thereon of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,87
Resolves that the Staff Regulations of the United
Nations shall be modified by the amendments annexed
to the present resolution, with effect from 1 January
1958.
731st plenary meeting,
14 December 1957.
ANNEX
Annex I, paragraph 1
Replace the present text by the following :
"An Under-Secretary shall receive a salary of $US23,000
(subject to the Staff Assessment Plan provided in staff
regulation 3.3 and to post adjustments wherever applied) and,
if otherwise eligible, shall receive the allowances which are
available to staff members generally."

Annex I, paragraph 2

In the first sentence delete the words "and officials of equivalent rank at Headquarters".
Annex I, paragraph 9 (Post 11djustments)

In the first •sentence replace the words "may adjust the basic
salaries set forth in paragraph 3 and 4 of this annex" by the
words "may adjust the basic salaries set forth in paragraphs 1,
3 and 4 of this annex".
Regulation 3.4 (Dependency benefits)

In paragraph (a) amend the beginning of the first sentence
to read: "Under-Secretaries and staff members in the Principal
Officer and Director category".
Regulations 1.10 and 4.5 (a)
Delete the references to "officials of equivalent rank".

1235 (XII). Secretariat of the Military Staff
Committee

The General Assembly
Requests the Secretary-General, subject to any objection which may be received from the Security Council, to take appropriate steps to effect the integration
of the civilian staff of the Military Staff Committee with
the Secretariat of the United Nations.
731st plenary meeting,
14 December 1957.
80
Ibid., Twelfth Session, Annexes, agenda item 41, document
A/C.5/728.
., Ibid., document A/3762.
