Resolutions adopted on the report of the ..4d Boe Committee

hensive manner and ensuring equally the interests
of all countries. It must have an even greater role
in the establishment of a new international economic
order. The Charter of Economic Rights and Duties
of States, for the preparation of which the present
Declaration will provide an additional sou_rce . of
inspiration, will constitute a significant contribu~on
in this respect. All the States Members of the (!ruted
Nations are therefore called upon to exert maximum
efforts with a ·view to securing the implementation
of the present Declaration, which is one of the
principal guarantees for the creation of better conditions for all peoples to reach a life worthy of
human dignity.
7. The present Declaration on the Establishment
of a New International Economic Order shall be
one of the most important bases of economic relations between all peoples and all nations.
2229th plenary meeting
1 May 1974
3202 (S-VI). Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic
Order

The General Assembly
.
Adopts the following Programme of Action:

PROGRAMME OF ACTION ON THE ESTABLISH_MENT OF A NEW INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORDER
CONTENTS
Poq,

Seel.,,,.

Introduction

............. .

I. Fundamental problems of raw materials and
primary commodities as related to trade and development
JI. International mone1ary system and financing of
the development of developing countries .
III. Industrialization
IV. Transfer of technology
v. Regulation and control over the activities of
transnational corporations
VI. Charter of Economic .Rights and Duties of States
VII. Promotion of co-operation among developing
countries
VIII. Assistance in the exercise of permanent sovereignty of States over natural resources ....... .
IX. Strengthening the role of the United Nations system in the field of international economic cooperation
X. Special Programme

5

5
7
8
8
8

8
9

9

9

10

INTRODUCTION

1. In view of the continuing severe economic imbalance in the relations between developed and developing countries, and in the context of the constant and
continuing aggravation of the imbalance of the economies of the developing countries and the consequent
need for the mitigation of their current economic difficulties, urgent and effective measures need to be taken
by the international community to assist the developing countries, while devoting particular attention to
the least developed, land-locked and island developing
countries and those developh.g countries most seriously

s

affected by economic crises and natural calamities
leading to serious retardation of development processes.
2. With a view to ensuring the application of the
Declaration on the Establishment of a New Intema-.
tional Economic Order,6 it will be necessary to adopt
and implement within a specified period a programme
of action of unprecedented scope and to bring about
maximum economic co-operation and understanding
among all States, particularly between developed and
developing countries, based on the principles of dignity and sovereign equality.
I.

FuNDAMENTAL PROBLEMS OF RAW MATERIALS AND
PRIMARY COMMODITIES AS RELATED TO TRADE AND
DEVELOPMENT

l. Raw materials
All efforts should be made:
(a) To put an end to all forms of foreign occupation, racial discrimination, apartheid, colonial, neocolonial and alien domination and exploitation through
the exercise of permanent sovereignty over natural
resources;
(b) To take measures for the recovery, exploitation,
development, marketing and distribution of natural
resources, particularly of developing countries, to serve
their national inter~ts, to promote collective self-reliance among them and to strengthen mutually beneficial
international economic co-operation with a view to
bringing about the accelerated develQpment of developing countries;
·
(c) To facilitate the functioning and to fu:r:ther the
aims of producers' associations, including thc;ir joint
marketing arrangements, orderly commodity trading,
improvement in the export income of producing developing countries and in their terms of trade, and sustained growth of the world economy for the benefit
of all;
·
(d) To evolve a just and equitable relationship between the prices of raw materials, primary commodities, manufactured and semi-manufactured goods exported by developing countries and the prices of raw
materials, primary commodities, food, manufactured
and semi-manufactured goods arid capital equipment
imported by them, .and to work for a link between the
prices of exports of developing countries and the prices
of their imports from developed countries;
( e) To take measures to reverse the continued trend
of stagnation or decline in the real price of severnl
commodities exported by developing countries, despite
a general rise in commodity prices, resulting in a decline in the export earnings of these developing countries;
(f) To take measures to expand the markets for
natural products in relation to synthetics, taking into
account the interests of the developing countries, and
to utilize fully the ecological advantages of these
products;
(g) To take measures to promote the processing
of raw materials in the producer developing rnuntrfos .

2. Food
All efforts should be made:
(a) To take full account of specific problems •,)f:
developing countries, particularly in times of food
e Resolution 3201 (S-VI).

General A11embly-Sixth Special Seseion

6

shortages, in the international efforts connected with
the food problem;
(b) To take into account that, owing to lack of
means some developing countries have vast potentialities of unexploited or underexploited land which, if
reclaimed and put into practical use, would contribute
considerably to the solution of the food crisis;
(c) By the international co~munit¥ to undert~ke
concrete and speedy measures with a view to arresting
desertification salination and damage by locusts or
any other sio{ilar phe~omenon .involv~ng several developing countnes, particularly m Afnca, and gravely
affecting the agricultural production capacity of these
countries, and also to assist the developing countries
affected by any such phenomenon to develop the affected zones with a view to contributing to the solution of their food problems;
(d) To refrain from damaging or deteriorating natural resources and food resources, especially those derived from the sea, by preventing poflution and taking
appropriate steps to protect and reconstitute those
resources;
( e) By developed c~untries, in .evolving their policies relating to production, stocks, imports and exports
of food, to take full account of Ute interests of:
(i) Developing importing cc,juntries which cannot
afford high prices for their imports;
(ii) Developing exporting countries which need increased market opportunities for their exports;
(f) To ensure that developing c~untries can impo_rt
the necessary quantity of food without un~ue stram
on their foreign exchange resources and without unpredictable deterioration in their balance of payments,
and, in this context, that special measures are taken
in respect of the least. developed, land-locked ~nd
island developing countries as well as those de_veloJ:!mg
countries most seriously affected by economic cnses
and natural calamities;
(g) To ensure that concrete measures to increase
food production and stor~ge facil_ities in dev~loping
countries are introduced, inter alta, by ensurmg an
increase in all available essential inputs, including fertilizers, from developed countries on favourable terms;
(h) To promote export_s of food pro~ucts of developing countries through 1ust a?d e9U1_tabl_e arrangements, inter alia, by the progressive ehmma~1on of suc_h
protective and other measures as constitute unfa1r
competition.
3. General trade
All efforts should be made:
(a) To take the following measures for the amelioration of terms of trade of developing countries and
concrete steps to eliminate chronic trade deficits of
developing countries:
(i) Fulfilment of relevant commitments already
undertaken in the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development and in the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade;'
(ii) Improved access to markets in developed
countries through the progressive removal of
tariff and non-tariff barriers and of restrictive
business practices;
7 Resolution 2626 (XXV).

(iii) Expeditious formulation of commodity agreements where appropriate, in order to regulate
as necessary and to stabilize the world markets for raw materials and primary commodities;
(iv) Preparation of an over-all integrated programme, setting out guidelines and taking
into account the current work in this field,
for a comprehensive range of commodities
of export interest to developing countries;
(v) Where products of developing countries compete with the domestic production in developed countries, each developed country
should facilitate the expansion of imports
from developing countries and provide a fair
and reasonable opportunity to the developing countries to share in the growth of the
market;
(vi) When the importing developed countries derive receipts from customs duties, taxes and
other protective measures applied to imports
of these products, consideration should be
given to the claim of the developing countries
that these receipts should be reimbursed in
full to the exporting developing countries or
devoted to providing additional resources to
meet their development needs;
(vii) Developed countries should make appropriate adjustments in their economies so as to
facilitate the expansion and diversification of
imports from developing countries and thereby permit a rational, just and equitable international division of labour;
(viii) Setting up general principles for pricing policy
for exports of commodities of developing
countries, with a view to rectifying and
achieving satisfactory terms of trade for them;
(ix) Until satisfactory terms of trade are achieved
for all developing countries, consideration
should be given to alternative means, including improved compensatory financing schemes
for meeting the development needs of the
developing countries concerned;
(x) Implementation, improvement and enlargement of the generalized system of preferences
for exports of agricultural primary commodities, manufactures and semi-manufactures
from developing to developed countries and
consideration of its extension to commodities,
including those which are processed or semiprocessed; developing countries which are or
will be sharing their existing tariff advantages
in some developed countries as the result of
the introduction and eventual enlargement of
the generalized system of preferences should,
as a matter of urgency, be granted new openings in the markets of other developed countries which should offer them export opportunities that at least compensate for the
sharing of those advantages;
(xi) The setting up of buffer stocks within the
framework of commodity arrangements and
their financing by international financial institutions, wherever necessary, by the developed countries and, when they are able to
do so, by the developing countries, with the
aim of favouring the producer developing

Resolutions adopted OD the report of the Ad Hoe Committee

and consumer developing countries and of
contributing to the expansion of world trade
as a whole;
(xii) In cases where natural materials can satisfy
the requirements of the market, new investment for the expansion of the capacity to
produce synthetic materials and substitutes
should not be made;
(b) To be guided by the principles of non-reciprocity and preferential treatment of developing countries in multilateral trade negotiations between developed and developing countries, and to seek sustained
and additional benefits for the international trade of
developing countries, so as to achieve a substantial
increase in their foreign exchange earnings, diversification of their exports and acceleration of the rate of
their economic growth.

4. Transportation and insurance
All efforts should be made:
(a) To promote an increasing and equitable participation of developing countries in the world shipping
tonnage;
(b) To arrest and reduce the ever-increasing freight
rates in order to reduce the costs of imports to, and
exports from, the developing countries;
(c) To minimize the cost ·of insurance and reinsurance for developing countries and to assist the
growth of domestic insurance and reinsurance markets
in developing countries and the establishment to this
end, where appropriate, of institutions in these countries or at the regional level;
(d) To ensure the early implementation of the code
of conduct for liner conferences;
(e) To take urgent measures to increase the import
and export capability of the least developed countries
and to offset the disadvantages of the advene geographic situation of land-locked countries, particularly
wit& regard to their transportation and transit costs,
as well as developing island countries in order to increase their trading abifity;
(f) By the developed countries to refrain from
imposing measures or implementing policies designed
to prevent the importation, at equitable prices, of commodities from the developing countries or from frustrating the implementation of leftimate measures and
policies adopted by the developtng countries in order
to improve prices and encourage the export of such
commodities.

II.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY SYSTEM AND FINANCING OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

1. Objectives
All efforts should be made to refonn the international monetary system with, inter alia, the following
objectives:
(a) Measures to check the inflation already exi,erienced by the developed countries, to prevent it from
being transferred to developing countries and to study
and devise possible arrangements within the International Monetary Fund to mitigate the effects of inflation in developed countries on the economies of developing countries;

1

( b) Measures to eliminate the instability of the international monetary system, in particular the uncertainty of the exchange rates, especially as it affects
adversely the trade in commodities;
( c) Maintenance of the real value of the currency
reserves of the developing countries by preventing their
erosion from inflation and exchange rate depreciation
of reserve currencies;
(d) Full and effective participation of developing
countries in all phases of decision-making for the
formulation of an equitable and durable monetary
system and adequate participation of developing countries in all bodies entrusted with this reform and, particuiarly, in the proposed Council of Governors of the
International Monetary Fund;
(e) Adequate and orderly creation of additional
liquidity with particular regard to the needs of the
developing countries through the additional allocation
of SP.:Cial drawing rights based on the concept of world
liqutdity needs to be aprropriately revised m the light
of the new intcrnationa environment; any creation of
international liquidity should be made through international multilateral mechanisms;
(I) Early establishment of a link between special
drawinf rights and additional development financing
in the mterest of developing countries, consistent with
the monetary characteristics of special drawing rights;
(g) Review by the International Monetary Fund
of the relevant provisions in order to ensure effective
participation by developing countries in the decisionmaking process;
(h) Arrangements to promote an increasing net
transfer of real resources from the developed to the
developing c~untries;
(i) Review of the methods of operation of the International Monetary Fund, in particular the terms for
both credit repayments and "stand-by" arrangements,
the system of compensatory financing, and the terms
of the financing of commodity buffer stocks, so as to
enable the developing countries to make more effective
use of them.

2. Measures
All efforts should be made to take the following
urpnt measures to finance the development of developing countries and to meet the balance-of-payment
crises in the developing world:
(a) Implementation at an accelerated pace by the
developed countries of the time-bound programme as
already laid down In the International Developnient
Strategy for the Second United Nations Development
Decade, for the net amount of financial resource transfers to developing countries; increase in the official
component of the net amount of financial resource
transfers to developing countries so as to meet and
even to exceed the target of the Strategy;
( b) International financing institutions shou Id effectively play their role as development financing bank 'l
without discrimination on account of the political or
economic system of any member country, assistance
being untied;
( c) More enective participation oy developing countries, whether recipients or contributors, in the decision-making process in the competent organs of the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the International Development Association,

General A111embly-Sixth Special Senion

8

through the establishment of a more equitable pattern
of voting rights;
(d) Exemption, wherever possible, of the developing countries from all import and capit_al outflow controls imposed by the developed countries;
(e) Promotion of foreign investme~t, both ~ubl_ic
and private, from developed to deve)opmg co~mtnes m
accordance with the needs and rcqmremcnts m sectors
of their economies as determined by the recipient
countries;
(f) Appropriate urgent measures, i~~luding international action, should be taken to mitigate adverse
consequences for the current and future development
of developing countries arising from the burden of
external debt contracted on hard terms;
(g) Debt renegotiation on a case-by-case basis 'Yith
a view to concluding agreements on debt cancellation,
moratorium, rescheduling or interest subsidization;
(h) International financial institutions should t~ke
into account the special situation of each developing
country in reorienting their lending policies to suit
these urgent need_s; there_ is also nee~ fo~ impro_veme!1t
in practices of mternational financial mst1tut1ons m
regard to, inter alia, development financing and international monetary problems;
(i) Appropriate steps should be taken to give
priority to the lea~t developed, land-loc~ed and islan~
developing countries and to the countries most seriously affected by economic crises and natural calamities in the availability of loans for development purpos~s which should include more favourable terms and
conditions.

III.

INDUSTRIALIZATION

All efforts should be made by the international community to tak~ measures to encourage the industrialization of the developing countries, and to this end:
(a) The developed countries should respond favourably, within the framework of their official aid as well
as international financial institutions, to the requests of
developing countries for the financing of industrial
projects;
( b) The developed countries should encourage investors to finance industrial production projects, particularly export-oriented production, in developing
countries, in agreement with the latter and within the
context of their laws and regulations;
(c) With a view to bringing about a new international economic structure which should increase the
share of the developing countries in world industrial
production, the developed countries and the a~encies
of the United Nations system, in co-operation with the
developing countries, should contribute to setting up
new industrial capacities including raw materials and
commodity-transforming facilities as a matter of priority
in the developing countries that produce those raw
materials and commodities;
(d) The international community should continue
and expand, with the aid of the developed countries
and the international institutions, the operational and
instruction-oriented technical assistance programmes,
including vocational training and management development of national personnel of the developing countries, in the light of their special development requirements.

IV. TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGY
All efforts should be made:
{a) To formulate an international code of conduct
for the transfer of te.chnology corresponding to needs
and conditions prevalent in developing countries;
( b) To give access on improved terms to modem
technology and to adapt that technology, as appropriate. to specific economic, social and ecological conditions and varying stages of development in developing
countries;

(c) To expand significantly the assistance from
developed to developing countries in research and development programmes and in the creation of suitable
indigenous technology;
(d) To adapt commercial practices governing transfer of technology to the requirements of the developing countries and to prevent abuse of the rights of
sellers;
(e) To promote international co-operation in research and development in exploration and exploitation, conservation and the legitimate utilization of
natural resources and all sources of energy.

In taking the above measures, the special needs of the
least developed and land-locked countries should be
borne in mind.
V. REGULATION AND CONTROL OVER THE ACTIVITIES
OF TRANSNATIONAL CORPORATIONS

All efforts should be made to formulate, adopt and
implement an international code of conduct for transnational corporations:

(a) To prevent interference in the internal affairs
of the countries where they operate and their collaboration with racist regimes and colonial administrations;
(b) To regulate their activities in host countries, to
eliminate restrictive business practices and to conform
to the national development plans and objectives of
developing countries, and in this context facilitate, as
necessary, the review and revision of previously concluded arrangements;

(c) To bring about assistance, transfer of technology and management skills to developing countries on
equitable and favourable terms;·
(d) To regulate the repatriation of the profits accruing from their operations, taking into account the
legitimate interests of all parties concerned;
(e) To promote reinvestment of their profits in
developing countries.

VI. CHARTER OF ECONOMIC RIGHTS AND DuTIES
OF STATES
The Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of
States, the draft of which is being prepared by a working group of the United Nations and which the General
Assembly has already expressed the intention of
adopting at its twenty-ninth regular session, shall constitute an effective instrument towards the establishment
oi a new system of international economic relations
based on equity, sovereign equality, and interdependence of the interests of developed and developing
countries. It is therefore of vital importance that the

9

.- · ---·-···•·-·--~~~~~~~~~--=-==--==:.:.:::==--------=Taforementioned Charter be adopted by the General
VIII. ASSISTANCE IN THE EXERCISE OF PERMANEN
Resolutions adopted on the report of the Ad Hoe Committee

' th session.
'
Assembly at its twenty-run

VJJ. PROMOTION OF CO-OPERATION AMONG
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

1. Collective self-reliance and growing co-operation
among developing countries will further strengthen
their role in the new international economic order.
Developing countri~s, with a v~ew to expandin~ cooperation at the regional, subregional and mterreg1onal
levels, should take further steps, inter alia:
(a) To support the establishment and/or improvement of an appropriate mechanism to defend the prices
of their exportable commodities and to improve access
to and stabilize markets for them. In this context the
increasingly effective mobilization by the whole group
of oll-exporting countries of their natural resources for
the benefit of their economic development is to be
welcomed. At the same time there is the paramount
need for co-operation among the developing countries
in evolving urgently and in a spirit of solidarity all
possible means _to assist developin~ countries _to c~~
with the immediate problems resultmg from this legitimate and perfectly justified action. The measures already taken in this regard are a positive indication of
the evolving co-operation between developing countries;

(b) To protect their inalienable right. to permanent
sovereignty over their natural resources;
(c) To promote, establish or strengthen economic
integration at the regional and subregional levels;
(d) To increase considerably their imports from
other developing countries;

(e) To ensure that no developing country accords
to imports from developed countries more favourable
treatment than that accorded to imports from developing countries. Taking into account the existing international agreements, current limitations and possibiJities and also their future evolution, preferential
treatment should be given to the procurement of import requirements from other developing countries.
Wherever possible, preferential treatment should be
given to imports from developing countries and the
exports of those countries;
(f) To promote close co-operation in the fields of
finance, credit relations and monetary issues, including
the development of credit relations on a preferential
basis and on favourable terms;

(g) To strengthen efforts which are already being
made by developing countries to utilize available financial resources for financing development in the developing countries through investment, financing of exportoriented and emergency projects and other long-term
assistance;
·
(h) To promote and establish effective instruments
of co-operation in the fields of industry, science and
technology, transport, shipping and mass communication media.
2. Developed countries should support initiatives
in the regional, subregional and interregional cooperation of deveJopinJ countries through the extension
of financial and techmcal assistance by more effective
and concrete actions, particularly in the field of commercial policy.

SOVEREIGNTY
RESOURCES

OF

STATES

OVER

NATURAL

All efforts should be made:
(a) To defeat attempts to prevent the free and
effective exercise of the rights of every State to full
and permanent sovereignty over its natural resources;
( b) To ensure that competent agen~ies of the United
Nations system meet requests for assistance fro!fl developing countries in connexion with the operation of
nationalized means of production.

JX.

STRENGTHENING THE ROLE OF THE UNITED
NATIONS SYSTEM IN THE l'IELD OF INTERNI\TIONAL
ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION

1. In furtherance of the objectives of the lnJernational Development Strategy for the Second Umt_ed
Nations Development Decade and in a~cordance with
the aims and objectives of the Declaration o~ the Establishment of a New International Economic Order,
all Member States pledge to make full ~se of the
United Nations system in the implementation of the
present Programme of Action, jointly adop!ed by t~em,
in working for the establishment of a new mtemat10nal
economic order and thereby strengthening the role of
the United Nations in the field of world-wide co-operation for economic and social development.
2. The General Assembly of the United Nati?ns
shall conduct an over-all review of the implementation
of the Programme of Action as a priority item. All
the activities of the United Nations system to be undertaken under the Programme of Action as well as those
already planned, such as the World Population Conference 1974 the World Food Conference, the Second
General Conference of the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization and the mid-term review
and appraisal of the International Development Strate!?Y
for the Second United Nations Development Decade
should be so directed as to enable the special session
of the General Assembly on development, called for
under Assembly resolution 3172 (XXVIIT) of 17 December 1973, to make its full contribution to the establishment of the new international economic order. All
Member States are urged, jointly and individually, to
direct their efforts and policies towards the success
of that special session.
3. The Economic and Social Council shall define
the policy framework and co-ordinate the activities of
all organizations, institutions and subsidiary bodies
within the United Nations system which shall be entrusted with the ta~k of implementing the present Programme of Action. In order to enable the Economic
and Social Council to carry out its tasks effectively:
(a) All organizations, institutions and subsidiary
bodies concerned within the United Nations system
shall submit to the Economic and Social Council progress reports on the implementation of the Programme
of Action within their respective fields of competence
as ofren as necessary, but not less than once a year;
(b) The Economic and Social Council shall examine the progress reports as a matter of urgency, to
which end it may be convened, as neces!-ary, in special
session or, if need be, may function continuously. It
shall draw the attention of the General Assembly to
the problems and difficulties arising in connexion with
the implementation of the Programme of Action.

10

General Aaaembl:,--Slxah Special Seuion

4. All organizations, institutions, subsidiary bodies
and conferences of the United Nations system are entrusted with the implementation of the Programme of
Action. The activities of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, as set forth in General Assembly resolution 1995 (XIX) of 30 December
1964, should be strengthened for the purpose of following in collaboration with other competent organizations the development of international trade in raw
materials throughout the world.

5. Urgent and effective measures should be taken to
review the lending policies of international financial
institutions, taking into account the special situation
•.-" each developing country, to suit urgent needs, to
improve the practices of these institutions in regard to,
inter alia, development financing and international
monetary problems, and to ensure more effective participation by developing countries-whether recipients
or contributors-in the decision-making process
through appropriate revision of the pattern of votin[!
rights.
6. The developed countries and others in a position
to do so should contribute substantially to the various
organizations, programmes and funds established
within the United Nations system for the purpose of
accelerating economic and social development in developing countries.
7. The present Programme of Action complements
and strengthens the goals and objectives embodied in
the International Development Strategy for the Second
United Nations Development Decade as welt as the
new measures formulated by the General Assembly at
its twenty-eighth session to offset the shortfalls jn
achieving those goals and objectives.
8. The implementation of the Pro~ramme of Action
should be taken into account at the time of the midtenn review and appraisal of the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade. New commitments, changes, additions
and adaptations in the Strategy should be made, as
appropriate, taking into account the Declaration on
the Establishment of a New International Economic
Order and the present Programme of Action.
X.

SPECIAL PROGRAMME

The General Assembly adopts the following Special
Programme, including particularly en1ergency mea~ures
to mitigate the difficulties of the developing countries
most seriously affected by economic crisis. bearing in
mind the particular problem of the least developed
and land-locked countries:

The General Assembly,
Taking into account the following considerations:
(a) The sharp increase in the prices of their
essential imports such as food, fertilizers, energy
products, capital goods, equipment and services,
including transportation and .transit costs, has
gravely exacerbated the increasingly adverse terms
of trade of a number of developing countries,
added to the burden of their foreign debt and,
cumulatively, created a situation which, if left
untended, will make it impossible for them to
finance their essential imports and development
and result in a further deterioration in the levels
and conditions of life in these countries. The present crisis is the outcome of all the problems that

have accumulated over the years: in the field of
trade, in monetary reform, the world-wide inflationary situation, inadequacy and delay in provision of financial assist.:nce and many other
similar problems in the economic and developmental fields. In facing the crisis, this complex situation must be borne in mind so as to ensure
that the Special Programme adopted by the international community provides emergency relief and
timely assistance to the most seriously affected
countries. Simultaneously, steps are being taken
to resolve these outstanding problems through a
fundamental restructuring of the world economic
system, in order to allow these countries while
solving the present difficulties to reach an acceptable level of development.
{b) The special measures adopted to assist the
most seriously affected countries must encompass
not only the relief which they require on an emergency basis to maintain their import requirements,
but also. beyond that. steps to consciously promote
the capacity of the!".e countries to produce and
earn more. Unless such a comprehensive approach
is adopted, there is every likelihood that the difflcu lties of the most seriously affected countries
may be perpetuated. Nevertheless, the first and
most pressing tac;k of the international community
i!, to cn:ihle thcce countrie<: to meet the shortfall
in their balance-of-payments positions. But this
must be simultaneously supplemented by additional development assistance to maintain and
thereafter accelerate their rate of economic development.
(c) The countries which have been most seriously affected are precisely those which are at the
greatest disadvantage in the world economy: the
least developed, the land-locked and other lowincome developing countries as well as other developing countries whose economies have been
seriously dislocated as a result of the prec;ent economic crisis, natural calamities. and foreign aggression and occupation. An indication of the
countries thus affected, the level of the impact
on their economies and the kind of relief and
assistance they require can be asses~ed on the
basis, inter alin. of the following criteria:
(i) Low per capita income as a reflection of
relative poverty, low productivity, low
level of technology and development;
(ii) Sharp increase in their import cost of
essentials relative to export earnings;
(iii) High ratio of debt servicing to export

earnings;
(iv) Insufficiency in export earnings, comparative inelasticity of ex-port incomes and
unavailability of exportable surplus;
( v) Low level of foreign exchange reserves or
their inadequacy for requirements;
{vi) Adverse impact of higher transportation
and transit costs;
(vii) Relative importance of foreign trade in
the development process.
(d) The as~essment of the extent and nature
of the impact on the economies of the most seriously affected countries must be made flexible,
keeping in mind the present uncertainty in the
world economy. the adjustment policies that may

Resolutions adopted oa the report of the Ad Boe Commiuee

be adopted by the developed countries and the
flow of capital and investment. Estimates of the
payments situation and needs of these countries
can be assessed and projected reliably only on the
basis of their average performance over a number
of years. Long-term projections, at this time, cannot but be uncertain.
(e) It is important that, in the special measures to mitigate the difficulties of the most seriously affected countries, all the developed countries as well as the developing countries should
contribute according to their level of development
and the capacity and strength of their economies.
It is notable that some developing countries, despite their own difficulties and development needs,
have shown a willingness to play a concrete and
helpful role in ameliorating the difficulties faced
by the poorer developing countries. The various
initiatives and measures taken recently by certain
developing countries with adequate resources on
a bilateral and multilateral basis to contribute to
alleviating the difficulties of other developing
countries are a reflection of their commitment to
the principle of effective economic co-operation
among developing countries.
(f) The response of the developed countries
which have by far the greater capacity to assist
the affected countries in overcoming their present
diffic•lties must be commensurate with their responsibilities. Their assistance should be in addition to the presently available levels of aid. They
should fulfil and if possible exceed the targets of
the International Development Strategy for the
Second United Nations Development Decade on
financial assistance to the developing countries.
especiaJly that relating to official development
assistance. They should also give serious consideration to the cancellation of the external debts
of the most seriously affected countries. This would
provide the simplest and quickest relief to the
affected countnes. Favourable consideration
should also be given to debt moratorium and
rescheduling. The current situation should not
lead the industrialized countries to adopt what
will ulti~ately prove to ~ a self-defeating policy
aggravatmg the present cnsis.
Recalling the constructive proposals made by His
Imperial Majesty the Shahanshah of Iran 8 and His
Excellency Mr. Houari Boumediene, President of
the People's Democratic Republic of Algeria, 9
1. Decides to launch a Special Programme to
provide emergency relief and development assistance
to the developing countries most seriously affected,
as a matter of urgency, and for the period of time
necessary, at least until the end of the Second United
Nations Development Decade, to help them overcome their present difficulties and to achieve selfsustaining economic development;
2. Decides as a first step in the Special Programme
to request the Secretary-General to launch an emergency operation to provide timely relief to the most
seriously affected developing countries, as defined
in subparagraph (c) above, with the aim of maintaining unimpaired essential imports for the duration
of the coming twelve months and to invite the indus8 A/9548, annex.
9 Official Records of the General Assembly. Sixth Special
Session, Plenary Meetings, 2208th meeting, para., 3-JS2.

11

trialized countries and other potential contribut~rs
to announce their contributions for emergency ass1Stance, or intimate their intention to do so, by
15 June 1974 to be provided through bilateral or
multilateral channels, taking into account the commitments and measures of assistance announced or
already taken by some countries, and further requests
the Secretary-General to report the progress of t!te
emergency operation to the General Assembly at its
twenty-ninth session, through the ~onormc and
Social Council at its fifty-seventh session;
3. Calls upon the industrialized countries and
other potential contributors to extend to t~e most
seriously affected countries immediate rehef. and
assistance which must be of an order of magmtude
that is commensurate with the needs of these countries. Such assistance should be in addition to the
existing level of aid and provided at a very early
date to the maximum possible extent on a grant
basis and, where not possible, on soft terms. The
disbursement and relevant operational procedures
and terms must reflect this exceptional situation.
The assistance could be provided either through bilateral or multilateral channels, including such new
institutions and facilities that have been or are to be
set up. The spedal measures may include the following:
(a) Special arrangements on particularly favourable terms and conditions inoluding possible subsidies for and assured supplies of essential commodities
and goods;
( b) Deferred payments for all or part of imports
of essential commodities and goods;
( c) Commodity assistance, including food aid, on
a grant basis or deferred payments in local currencies,
bearing in mind that this should not adversely affect
the exports of developing countries;
(d) Long-term suppliers' credits on easy terms;
( e) Long-term financial assistance on concessionary terms;
(f) Drawings from special International Monetary
Fund facilities on concessional terms;
(g) Establishment of a link between the creation
of special drawing rights and development assistance,
taking into account the additional financial requirements of the most seriously affected countries;
( h) Subsidies, provided bilaterally or multilateralJy, for interest on funds available on commercial
terms borrowed by the most seriously affected countries;
(i) Debt renegotiation on a case-by-case basis
with a view to concluding agreements on debt cancellation, moratorium or rescheduling;
(j) Provision on more favourable terms of capital
goods and technical assistance to accelerate the industrialization of the affected countries;
(k) Investment in industrial and development
projects on favourable terms;
(/) Subsidizing the additional transit and transport
costs, especially of the land-locked countries;
4. Appeals to the developed countries to consider
favourably the cancellation, moratorium or rescheduling of the debts of the most seriously affected
developing countries, on their request, as an important contribution to mitigating the grave and urgent
difficulties of these countries;

ll2

General Aa,emhly-Sbtth Speejal Sealon

5. Decides to establish a Special Fund under the
auspices of the United Nations, throup voluntary
contributions
from industrialized countnes and other
"al
potenti contributors, as a part of the Special Programme, to provide emergency relief and development assistance, which will commence its operations
nt the latest by 1 January 197S;
. 6. Establishes an Ad Hoe Committee on the Spec1al Programme, composed of thirty-six Member
States appointed by the President of the General
A!SCmbly, after appropriate consultations, bearing in
mmd the purposes of the Special Fund and its terms
of reference:
(a) To make recommendations, inter aUa,.on the
scope, machinery and modes of operation of the
Special Fund, taking into account the need for:
(i) Equitable representation on its governing
body;
.
(ii) Equitable distribution of its resomces;
(iii) Full utilization of the services end facilities
of existing intemationaJ organizations;
(iv) The possibility of merging the United Nations
Capital Development Fund with the operations of the Special Fund,·
( v) A central monitoring body to oversee the
various measures being taken both bilaterally
and multilaterally;
and, to this end, bearing in mind the different ideas
and proposms submitted at the sixth special session;
including those put forward by Ira0 10 and those made
at the 2208th plenary meeting, and the comments
thereon, and the possibility of utilizing the Special
Fund to provide an alternative channel for normal
development ~istance after the emergency period;
(b) To monitor, pending commencement of the.
op~rations of the Special Fund, the various measures
betng taken both bilaterally and multilaterally to
assist the most seriously affected countries;
. ( c) To prepare,. on the basis of infonnation prov1ded by the countries concerned and by appropriate
agencies of the United Nations system, a broad assessment oft
(i) The magnitude of the difficulties facing the
most seriously affected countries;
( ii) The kind and quantities of the commodities
and goods essentially required by them;
(iii) Their need for financial assistance;
(iv) Their technical assistance requirements, inoluding especially access to technology;
7. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, the Secretary-General of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, the President of the International Bank for Reconstruction
and ~evelopment, the Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund, the Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme and the
~eads of th~ other competent international organizaUons to assist the Ad Hoe Committee on the Special
?rogramme in performing the functions assigned to
it under paragraph 6 above, and to help, as appropriate, in the operations of the Special ~d;

8. Requests the International Monetary Fund to
expedite decisions on:
(a) The establishment of an extended special
facility with a view to enabling the most seriously
affected developing countries to participate in it on
favourable terms;
(b) The creation of special drawing rights and
the early establishment of the link between their
allocation and development financing;
(c) The establishment and operation of the proposed new special facility to extend credits and subsidize interest charges on commercial funds borrowed
by Member States, bearing in mind the interests of
the developing countries and especially the additional
financial requirements of the most seriously affected
countries;
9. Requests the World Bank Group and the lnternational Monetary Fund to place their managerial,
financial and technical services at the disposal of
Governments contributing to emergency financial
relief so as to enable them to assist without delay in
channelling funds to the recipients, making such
institutional and procedural changes as may be
required;
.

10. Invites the United Nations Development
Programme to take the necessary steps, particularly
at the country level, to respond on an emergency
basis to requests for additional assistance which it
may be called upon to render within the framework
of the Special Programme;
11. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee on the Special Programme to submit its report and recommendations to the Economic and Social Council at its
fifty-seventh session and invites the Council, on the
basis of its consideration of that report, to submit
suitable recommendations to the General Assembly at
its twenty-ninth session;
12. Decides to consider as a matter of high priority at its twenty-ninth session, within the framework
of a new international economic order, the question
of special measures for the most seriously affected
countries.
2229th plenary meeting
1 May 1974

•

•

The President of the General Assembly subsequently informed the Secretary-Genera/11 that, in pursuance of section X,
paragraph 6, of the above resolution, he had appointed the
members of the Ad Hoe Committee on the Special Programme.
As a result, the Ad Hoe Committee will be composed of the
following M4mber States: ALGERIA, ARGENTINA, AUSTRALIA,
BRAZIL, CHAD, COSTA, RICA, CZECHOSLOVAKIA, FRANCE, GERMANY (FEDERAL REPUBLIC OP), GUYANA, INDIA, IRAN, JAPAN,
KUWAIT, MADAGASCAR, NEPAL, NETHERLANDS, NIGERIA, NORWAY, PAKISTAN, PARAGUAY, PHILIPPINES, SOMALIA, SR.I LANKA,
SUDAN, SwAZILAND, SYRIAN AllAB REPUBLIC, TtlRxEY, UNION'
OF SoVIET SoclALIST REPUBLICS, UNITED KINGDOM OP GREAT
BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
UPPER VOLTA, URUGUAY, VENEZUELA, YUGOSLAVIA and ZAIRE.

10 A/ AC. 166/L 1.5; see also A/9.548, annex.

11 A/9.5.58 and Add. 1. ·

•

•

•

•
