United Nations

A/RES/61/186

General Assembly

Distr.: General
25 January 2007

Sixty-first session
Agenda item 51 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 20 December 2006
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/61/420/Add.1)]

61/186. International trade and development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 56/178 of 21 December 2001, 57/235 of 20 December
2002, 58/197 of 23 December 2003, 59/221 of 22 December 2004 and 60/184 of
22 December 2005 on international trade and development,
Recalling also the provisions of the United Nations Millennium Declaration 1
pertaining to trade and related development issues, as well as the outcomes of the
International Conference on Financing for Development, 2 the World Summit on
Sustainable Development 3 and the 2005 World Summit Outcome, 4
Recalling further its resolution 60/265 of 30 June 2006 on follow-up to the
development outcome of the 2005 World Summit, including the Millennium
Development Goals and other internationally agreed development goals,
Reaffirming the value of multilateralism to the global trading system and the
commitment to achieving a universal, rule-based, open, non-discriminatory and
equitable multilateral trading system that contributes to growth, sustainable
development and employment generation in all sectors, and emphasizing that
bilateral and regional trading arrangements should contribute to the goals of the
multilateral trading system,
Stressing the importance of open, transparent, inclusive, democratic and more
orderly processes and procedures for the effective functioning of the multilateral
trading system, including in the decision-making process, so as to enable developing
countries to have their vital interests duly reflected in the outcome of trade
negotiations,

_______________
1

See resolution 55/2.
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18-22 March
2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
3
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution
1, annex, and resolution 2, annex.
4
See resolution 60/1.
2

06-50559

A/RES/61/186

Reiterating that development concerns form an integral part of the Doha
Development Agenda, which places the needs and interests of developing and least
developed countries at the heart of the Doha Work Programme, 5
Noting that agriculture lags behind the manufacturing sector in the process of
establishment of multilateral disciplines and in the reduction of tariff and non-tariff
barriers, and that, since most of the world’s poor make their living from agriculture,
the livelihood and standards of living of many of them are seriously jeopardized by
the serious distortions in production and trade in agricultural products caused by the
high levels of export subsidies, trade-distorting domestic support and protectionism
by many developed countries,
Taking note of the report of the Trade and Development Board 6 as well as the
report of the Secretary-General, 7
1.
Expresses serious concern at the indefinite suspension of the trade
negotiations of the World Trade Organization and considers it a serious setback for
the Doha Round, which places development at the heart of the multilateral trading
system, and calls upon the developed countries to demonstrate the flexibility and
political will necessary to break the current impasse in the negotiations, and also
calls for an early resumption of negotiations adhering to the development
imperatives and commitments of the Doha Ministerial Declaration,5 the decision of
the General Council of the World Trade Organization of 1 August 2004 8 and the
Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration; 9
2.
Stresses that in order for the Doha Round to be concluded satisfactorily,
the negotiations should result in the establishment of rules and disciplines in the
area of agriculture, adhering to the development imperatives and commitments of
the Doha Ministerial Declaration, the decision of the General Council of the World
Trade Organization of 1 August 2004 and the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration;
Also stresses the need for negotiations of the World Trade Organization
3.
in non-agricultural market access to live up to the development imperatives and
commitments of the Doha Ministerial Declaration, the decision of the General
Council of the World Trade Organization of 1 August 2004 and the Hong Kong
Ministerial Declaration;
Underlines the fact that the increasing interdependence of national
4.
economies in a globalizing world and the emergence of rule-based regimes for
international economic relations have meant that the space for national economic
policy, that is, the scope for domestic policies, especially in the areas of trade,
investment and industrial development, is now often framed by international
disciplines, commitments and global market considerations, that it is for each
Government to evaluate the trade-off between the benefits of accepting international
rules and commitments and the constraints posed by the loss of policy space, and
that it is particularly important for developing countries that all countries take into
account the need for appropriate balance between national policy space and
international disciplines and commitments;
_______________
5

See A/C.2/56/7, annex.
A/61/15 (Parts I-IV). For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session,
Supplement No. 15.
7
A/61/272.
8
World Trade Organization, document WT/L/579. Available from http://docsonline.wto.org.
9
World Trade Organization, document WT/MIN(05)/DEC. Available from http://docsonline.wto.org.
6

2

A/RES/61/186

5.
Expresses its deep concern at the imposition of laws and other forms of
coercive economic measures, including unilateral sanctions against developing
countries, which undermine international law and the rules of the World Trade
Organization and also severely threaten the freedom of trade and investment;
Reaffirms the commitments made at the Fourth Ministerial Conference of
6.
the World Trade Organization5 and at the Third United Nations Conference on the
Least Developed Countries, 10 in this regard calls upon developed countries that have
not already done so to provide immediate, predictable, duty-free and quota-free
market access on a lasting basis to all products originating from all least developed
countries, also calls upon developing countries that are in a position to do so to
extend duty-free and quota-free market access to exports of these countries, and in
this context reaffirms the need to consider additional measures for progressive
improvement in market access for least developed countries;
Also reaffirms the commitment to actively pursue the work programme of
7.
the World Trade Organization with respect to addressing the trade-related issues and
concerns affecting the fuller integration of countries with small, vulnerable
economies into the multilateral trading system in a manner commensurate with their
special circumstances and in support of their efforts towards sustainable
development, in accordance with paragraph 35 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration;5
8.
Recognizes the special problems and needs of the landlocked developing
countries within a new global framework for transit transport cooperation for
landlocked and transit developing countries, calls in this regard for the full and
effective implementation of the Almaty Programme of Action, 11 and stresses the
need for the implementation of the São Paulo Consensus, 12 in particular
paragraphs 66 and 84 thereof, by the relevant international organizations and donors
in a multi-stakeholder approach;
Also recognizes the need to ensure that the comparative advantage of
9.
developing countries is not undermined by any form of protectionism, including the
arbitrary and abusive use of non-tariff measures, non-trade barriers and other
standards to unfairly restrict the access of developing countries’ products to
developed countries’ markets, reaffirms in this regard that developing countries
should play an increasing role in the formulation of, inter alia, safety, environment
and health standards, and recognizes the need to facilitate the increased and
meaningful participation of the developing countries in the work of relevant
international standard-setting organizations;
10. Further recognizes that South-South trade should be enhanced and that
further market access should continue to stimulate South-South trade;
11. Recognizes the role that a successful conclusion of the ongoing third
round of negotiations on the Global System of Trade Preferences among Developing
Countries can play in South-South trade;

_______________
10

See A/CONF.191/13.
Report of the International Ministerial Conference of Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries and
Donor Countries and International Financial and Development Institutions on Transit Transport
Cooperation, Almaty, Kazakhstan, 28 and 29 August 2003 (A/CONF.202/3), annex I.
12
TD/412, part II.
11

3

A/RES/61/186

12. Calls for accelerating the work on the development-related mandate
concerning the Agreement on Trade-related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights 13
in the Doha Ministerial Declaration, especially on issues of making intellectual
property rules fully support the objectives of the Convention on Biological
Diversity; 14
13. Also calls for facilitating the accession of all developing countries, in
particular the least developed countries, and countries emerging from conflict that
apply for membership in the World Trade Organization, bearing in mind
paragraph 21 of resolution 55/182 of 20 December 2000 and subsequent
developments, and calls for the effective and faithful application of the World Trade
Organization guidelines on accession by the least developed countries;
14. Emphasizes the need for further work to foster greater coherence between
the multilateral trading system and the international financial system, and invites the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, in fulfilment of its mandate,
to undertake the relevant policy analysis in those areas and to operationalize such
work, including through its technical assistance activities;
15. Invites donors and beneficiary countries to implement the
recommendations of the Task Force on Aid for Trade established by the DirectorGeneral of the World Trade Organization, which aims to support developing and
least developed countries to build their supply and export capacities, including
infrastructure and institutions development, and the need to increase their exports,
and stresses in this regard the urgent need for its effective operationalization with
sufficient additional, non-conditional and predictable funding;
16. Welcomes the effort being made for operationalization of the Enhanced
Integrated Framework for Trade-related Technical Assistance to Least Developed
Countries with increased additional, non-conditional and predictable financial
resources to enhance the export and supply capacities of the least developed
countries, and urges the development partners to increase their contributions to the
Integrated Framework Trust Fund on a multi-year basis;
17. Reiterates the important role of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development as the focal point within the United Nations system for the
integrated treatment of trade and development and interrelated issues in the areas of
finance, technology, investment and sustainable development, and calls upon the
international community to work towards the strengthening of the Conference, to
enable it to enhance its contribution in its three major pillars, namely, consensusbuilding, research and policy analysis, and technical assistance, especially through
increased core resources of the Conference;
18. Invites the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, in
accordance with its mandate, to monitor and assess the evolution of the international
trading system and of trends in international trade from a development perspective,
and, in particular, to analyse issues of concern to developing countries, supporting
them in building capacities to establish their own negotiating priorities and
negotiate trade agreements, including under the Doha Work Programme;5

_______________
13
See Legal Instruments Embodying the Results of the Uruguay Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations,
done at Marrakesh on 15 April 1994 (GATT secretariat publication, Sales No. GATT/1994-7).
14
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1760, No. 30619.

4

A/RES/61/186

19. Reaffirms the fundamental role that competition law and policy can play
for sound economic development and the validity of the Set of Multilaterally Agreed
Equitable Principles and Rules for the Control of Restrictive Business Practices, 15 as
well as the important and useful role that the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development plays in this field, and decides to convene in 2010, under the
auspices of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, a sixth
United Nations conference to review all aspects of the Set;
20. Urges donors to provide the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development with the increased resources necessary to deliver effective and
demand-driven assistance to developing countries, as well as to enhance their
contributions to the trust funds of the Integrated Framework for Trade-related
Technical Assistance to Least Developed Countries and the Joint Integrated
Technical Assistance Programme;
21. Requests the Secretary-General, in collaboration with the secretariat of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, to submit to the General
Assembly at its sixty-second session a report on the implementation of the present
resolution and on developments in the multilateral trading system, under the
sub-item entitled “International trade and development” of the item entitled
“Macroeconomic policy questions”.
83rd plenary meeting
20 December 2006

_______________
15

A/C.2/35/6, annex.

5
