A/56/PV.82

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-sixth session

82

nd plenary meeting
Monday, 10 December 2001, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Han Seung-soo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

In the absence of the President, Mr. Kumalo
(South Africa), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 33
Return or restitution of cultural property to the
countries of origin
Report of the Secretary-General (A/56/413)
Draft resolution (A/56/L.41)
Mr. Šimonović (Croatia): Croatia is a country with
a rich cultural heritage. Situated at the crossroads of
different cultural influences, its culture has been
constantly enriched. However, due to the turbulent
political events and conflicts in the region, Croatia has
often fallen victim to the appropriation of its cultural
property. Consequently, the issue of the return or
restitution of cultural property to the countries of origin
is of utmost importance to my delegation.
We commend the valuable work of the United
Nations
Educational,
Scientific
and
Cultural
Organization (UNESCO) in this field, especially that of
its Intergovernmental Committee for Promoting the
Return of Cultural Property to its Countries of Origin
or its Restitution in Case of Illicit Appropriation. We
are pleased that Croatia was recently elected to that
Committee.

(Republic of Korea)

A large number of UNESCO member States are
exposed to illicit export and trafficking in cultural
artefacts, thus being deprived of their historical identity
and traditions. It has to be emphasized that the
effective fight against this crime against national
heritage can be achieved only through cooperation,
solidarity and organized initiatives at the international
level. Croatia will spare no effort to work together with
the other members of the Committee, as well as with
other member States of UNESCO, in this regard.
In our last speech on this subject, two years ago,
we informed the General Assembly about the grave
consequences Croatia’s cultural property suffered
during aggression and occupation in the 1990s. I could
illustrate this simply with just one sentence. According
to independent foreign reports, more cultural artefacts
were destroyed in Croatia during the first seven months
of war in 1991 and 1992 than during the entire duration
of the Second World War. We have also informed the
Assembly of cultural property taken away from
Vukovar and the Dubrovnik area, and we have
demanded its return.
After almost 10 years of being deprived of a
significant part of our cultural heritage, we are glad to
inform the General Assembly that bilateral negotiations
with the new Government in Belgrade have been
successfully concluded and that cultural property taken
away should be immediately returned to where it
belongs — to Vukovar and to the other parts of Croatia.
As an attractive tourist destination with a rich
natural and cultural heritage, Croatia is very vulnerable

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

01-68568 (E)

*0168568*

A/56/PV.82

to the loss of its cultural heritage in times of peace as
well. Therefore, we welcome the adoption of the
Convention on the Protection of Underwater Cultural
Heritage and are highly interested in joining
international initiatives for combating illicit trafficking
in cultural property.
The beauty of this world is in its diversity. We
live in different countries, speak different languages,
have different customs and enjoy different cultures. It
is exactly this diverse global heritage, which we should
all admire and learn about, that connects us and
enriches us all. That is also why the protection of
cultural property should be our common task.
Mr. Moushoutas (Cyprus): I am making this
statement on behalf of the Permanent Representative of
Cyprus, Ambassador Zackheos.
The issue of the return or restitution of cultural
property to the countries of origin constitutes an area in
which international relations are put to a test — a noble
test — to ensure that cooperation among State and nonstate actors can positively affect the lofty goal of
protecting the cultural heritage of mankind.
My delegation attaches particular importance to
this issue and to the efforts of the United Nations in
general, and the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) in particular, for
the considerable work that is being done in this
direction. In this respect, we welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s report contained in document A/56/413, as
well as the 10 recommendations contained in the report
of the Director-General of UNESCO on the action
taken by the organization on the return and restitution
of cultural property to the countries of origin.
Since our last discussion on this item before this
body, the recommendations adopted by the
Intergovernmental Committee for Promoting the
Return of Cultural Property to its Countries of Origin
or its Restitution in Case of Illicit Appropriation at its
eleventh session, held in Phnom Penh this year,
constitute a positive development that we warmly
welcome.
Another development was the creation by
UNESCO of the International Fund for the Return of
Cultural Property to its Countries of Origin or its
Restitution in Case of Illicit Appropriation. We also
welcome the adoption by the General Conference of
UNESCO of an International Code of Ethics for

2

Dealers in Cultural Property as an important
international voluntary standard for professionals.
Cyprus, as a State party to the Hague Convention
for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of
Armed Conflict of 1954 and a signatory of its Second
Protocol, adopted in 1999, follows with interest the
work undertaken to address the illicit sale of cultural
objects on the Internet and the need for Member States
to adopt appropriate international legislation in the
field.
The combating of illicit trafficking in cultural
property is a task that requires perseverance and
multifaceted collaborative efforts. One of the major
areas in this direction is the promotion of international
documentation for recording data of cultural property
and the dissemination of information in order to assist
in its recovery. Cyprus supports all efforts in this
regard, including the establishment of the UNESCO
online network that will include a regularly updated
inventory of stolen cultural artefacts, including those
removed illegally from areas of conflict and occupied
territories.
Cyprus also supports the view that, in order to
halt illicit trafficking, Member States should ensure
that officials of customs and border control services are
fully trained in their duties to apply the rules of the
UNESCO Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and
Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of
Ownership of Cultural Property of 1970 and to report
any cases of illicit activity to the appropriate
authorities of the State party concerned.
My country’s 9,000 years of recorded civilization
have left us with an immense cultural heritage that we
have an obligation to protect and bequeath to future
generations. By virtue of its geographical position at
the crossroads of three continents and many
civilizations, Cyprus’s cultural heritage has, through
the millennia, been continuously enriched and provides
a unique insight into the many civilizations that have
existed on the island during its long and eventful
history. Many of the artefacts of this rich cultural
history can be viewed in museums throughout the
world. Many more, unfortunately, have become the
objects of illicit trafficking, especially those removed
illegally from the territory of the island under foreign
occupation since 1974.
The plundering of the cultural heritage of Cyprus
in this area has been so widespread that it led to a

A/56/PV.82

decision by the United States, which we warmly
welcome, to impose in April 1999 an emergency
import restriction on Byzantine ecclesiastical and ritual
ethnological material from Cyprus unless such material
is accompanied by an export permit issued by the
Government of Cyprus. Our determination to
investigate the fate and to pursue the return of every
illegally removed object of our cultural heritage to its
rightful owner is unshakeable. We look to the
international community to extend its solidarity and
support in our effort to protect an invaluable part of the
cultural heritage of humanity.
Mr. Amer (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): The international community has laid down
specific rules within international law to protect and
return cultural property to the countries of origin.
There are many international conventions and
agreements on this issue, such as the 1970 Convention
on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit
Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural
Property; the 1972 Convention concerning the
Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage;
and the International Institute for the Unification of
Private Law Convention on Stolen or Illegally
Exported Cultural Property.
It is indeed gratifying to note the increased
international attention to the return of cultural property
to the people and nations that are its rightful owners, as
it is part of their history and a reflection of their
ancient civilizations. My delegation wishes to
commend the United Nations system, in particular the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO), for encouraging bilateral
negotiations on the return of such property, the
establishment of inventories of it and the limiting of
illicit trafficking in it.
While we welcome the UNESCO DirectorGeneral’s establishment of the International Fund for
the Return of Cultural Property to its Countries of
Origin or its Restitution in Case of Illicit
Appropriation, which is an important instrument in the
use of Object-ID and the training of museum experts,
we believe that this important issue calls for further
efforts, especially in the fields of information
exchange; raising awareness and education, especially
among the young; and the establishment of
comprehensive inventories of cultural property stolen
from its proper owners.

Libya, like many other countries, has suffered
extensive pillaging of its cultural heritage. Indeed, the
conditions that the colonialists imposed on the Libyan
people opened the door to the organized and systematic
theft of major elements of Libyan civilization, dating
back to ancient times. Visitors to museums and other
cultural centres in Europe and America can attest to the
artefacts, manuscripts and handicrafts that remain as
evidence of the refined tastes of Libyans who left
behind them a rich and wonderful heritage.
Colonialism has scattered some of these treasures
and buried others in vaults of antiquities. In the last
two decades of the nineteenth century, hundreds of
sculptures were stolen from the historic city of Shihat
in eastern Libya, along with dozens of pottery wares
and tablets telling the history of the city, and thousands
of rare coins made of precious metals. Historical
sources tell of dozens of fine columns and galleries that
were taken from Leptis Magna in western Libya and
are now in Britain, adorning the garden of one of its
royal palaces. The same sources describe dozens of
marble columns and smaller artefacts transported out of
the same city by a European. A different European took
from Benghazi more than 600 prehistoric objects that
are now in European museums.
The report of the Secretary-General contained in
document A/56/413 details the activities of the
Intergovernmental Committee for Promoting the
Return of Cultural Property to its Countries of Origin
or its Restitution in Case of Illicit Appropriation. The
Committee calls on Member States to ensure the
implementation of the rules of the UNESCO
Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and
Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of
Ownership of Cultural Property and urges the
competent authorities of the States parties concerned to
fully implement this Convention. The Committee has
also called on UNESCO to support, by all available
means, the efforts of Member States to establish
inventories of their cultural heritage to improve its
preservation at the national level, as well as to improve
the circulation of information concerning theft of such
property.
While my delegation appreciates and commends
these efforts, it notes that progress remains limited. We
are concerned that the majority of the countries that
have acquired cultural treasures have not shown any
serious intention of taking measures to implement the
resolutions adopted by the General Assembly under

3

A/56/PV.82

this item, which the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya was
among the first to seek to include in the agenda of this
session, consistent with the importance it attaches to
the return of cultural property to the countries of
origin.
Moreover, most of the countries that hold the
cultural property of others still refuse to join the
Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and
Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of
Ownership of Cultural Property, which was concluded
more than 30 years ago. This reveals that the views and
ideas of those who claim to be the leaders of modern
civilization and guardians of human heritage are still
hostage to a past that witnessed the theft of others’
property, including their cultural heritage.
My country has a rich cultural heritage that we
remain committed to recover, including our
manuscripts, artefacts, jewellery and other works of art.
We hope that the countries holding this property, which
they acquired unlawfully, by theft, will help in
returning it without delay or proscratination. To do
otherwise would be to ignore the resolutions of the
General Assembly. We cannot keep silent regarding our
stolen property and we will do everything possible to
recover those treasures. They are the symbol of our
past and identity, and we will not forget that.
Mr. Krokhmal (Ukraine): The issue of
cooperation between States in the sphere of return or
restitution of cultural property is becoming
increasingly important in terms of ensuring the safety
of the cultural space. Appeals for preservation of the
collective memory embodied in historic and cultural
achievements, and calls for the application of collective
experience and intellect in our efforts to deal with this
problem, are becoming stronger and stronger. No one
can doubt that cultural treasures are the key element in
communication,
mutual
understanding
and
rapprochement between peoples and between States.
Ukraine attaches great significance to finding
practical solutions to the persistent and complex
problems that hinder the restitution to the countries of
origin of stolen or illicitly removed cultural property.
Numerous valuable pieces of our cultural property have
been removed from the territory of Ukraine and
dispersed throughout the world, inaccessible to my
country and subtracted from its scientific and cultural
life.

4

Our country is developing international
cooperation at both the bilateral and multilateral levels
and is open to constructive dialogue with all interested
parties in this respect. We proceed from the
understanding that the return of cultural property to the
countries of origin is a delicate problem politically,
legally and ethically. That is why we are prepared to
address each case appropriately and carefully, with due
regard for the conditions under which masterpieces
were removed from our country.
We believe that the solution to these problems
should be based only on international law. Ukraine has
ratified a number of international instruments,
including the 1970 UNESCO Convention on the Means
of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export
and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property; the
Convention concerning the Protection of the World
Cultural and Natural Heritage, adopted by the General
Conference of UNESCO in 1972; and the 1954 Hague
Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in
the Event of Armed Conflict. We are convinced that
these important legal instruments are a solid foundation
for the protection of cultural treasures for future
generations.
I would also like to emphasize that an active
policy on the protection of cultural heritage is one of
the high priorities of the Ukrainian Government, which
recently adopted the State programmes “Return to
Ukraine” and “Cultural Treasures of Ukraine”, aimed
at the systematizing of activities aimed at the
restitution of our historic cultural heritage. These
projects envision wide cooperation with foreign
partners. In Ukraine, we have also established a State
service for control over the transferring of cultural
treasures across the State border.
In our view, a coordinated international approach
to the problem of the return of cultural property to the
countries of origin and of the reduction of the effects of
its illicit trafficking should become a significant
component of the global strategy of the United Nations.
In this regard, my delegation attaches particular
importance to the efforts of the United Nations in
general — and of UNESCO in particular — for the
considerable work that has been done in this regard.
We note with appreciation the report of the SecretaryGeneral submitted in cooperation with the DirectorGeneral of UNESCO, which provides a helpful account
of the work done by UNESCO in promoting bilateral

A/56/PV.82

negotiations for the return or restitution of cultural
property as a matter of cultural continuity and justice;
of the preparation of inventories of movable cultural
property; and of the dissemination of information to the
public in this field. We welcome the recommendations
contained in the report.

of human civilization, our nation has had its own,
indigenous culture and thereby contributed to the
development of culture and science. As early as the
seventh century, we engaged in astronomical
observation for meteorological study and used metal
print.

My delegation understands that it is our moral
obligation to work tirelessly to protect the historical
and cultural values of human civilization. We owe this
to both past and future generations.

There are many cultural properties in our country,
including royal tombs, temples, stone pagodas,
paintings, calligraphic works and folk artefacts, all
reflecting the history of the nation’s development and
its national wisdom.

In this regard, we welcome the proclamation of
2002 as the United Nations Year for Cultural Heritage.
Ukraine would like to thank the delegation of Greece
for its leadership in preparing the draft resolution on
the return or restitution of cultural property to the
countries of origin, which represents a good basis for
the development of cooperation among Member States
in this area. We are pleased to sponsor and support this
draft resolution and look forward to future progress in
its implementation.
Mr. Kim Chang Guk (Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea): The States Members of the United
Nations have underlined, through the resolutions of the
General Assembly, that cultural properties are an
important intellectual and cultural asset of each and
every country, and that therefore they should be
safeguarded and returned to the countries of origin in
the event of their illegal transfer.
A country’s national cultural heritage, created
over time, is imbued with the nation’s wisdom and
ingenuity and reflects the history of its development.
Preserving a nation’s cultural heritage is significant in
that this allows its people to inherit and develop a
cultural tradition, thus instilling in them national pride
and confidence.
The United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization (UNESCO) and other relevant
governmental and non-governmental organizations are
rendering technical assistance to the work of Member
countries in registering cultural properties and in
recovering and preserving them.

Many of these valuable cultural properties,
however, were damaged or lost during the aggression
by, and the colonial rule of, Japan. Japan plundered and
destroyed many of the cultural properties forming our
national treasure.
In order to extinguish the Korean nation, Japan
prohibited the teaching of the Korean language and
history and forcibly confiscated and burned history,
geography and other books. It also ravaged cultural
properties such as monuments and architecturally
significant buildings, which could give rise to national
sentiments on the part of the Korean people.
The number and value of the cultural properties
confiscated by Japan during its 40-year-long colonial
domination over Korea are incalculable. However,
Japan has not yet recognized its past crimes; rather, it
distorts the history of its aggression against Korea and
other Asian countries. Japan must return the cultural
properties it has taken from Korea and duly
compensate it for the property it has destroyed.
The Government of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has made major efforts to preserve
national cultural relics. The recovery of historical relics
and the preservation of cultural properties will enable
new generations to better know the history of their
nations and will imbue them with the spirit of national
independence by enabling them to inherit and develop
their cultural tradition.

My delegation wishes to take this opportunity to
express its appreciation for the activities of UNESCO
and of other relevant organizations for recovering and
preserving cultural properties.

In my country, we have restored to their original
state the tomb of Tangun, the founding father of Korea,
and the tomb of Tongmyong. We have rehabilitated old
tombs that had been damaged, and we have preserved
cultural properties that include mural paintings in such
tombs.

Our country is abundant in cultural properties, as
its history spans 5,000 years. From the very beginning

We are cooperating fully with UNESCO in its
efforts to preserve cultural property. We will further

5

A/56/PV.82

contribute to enriching the treasure house of
humankind by continuously recovering and preserving
historical relics.
Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): My
country deems it highly important for us to address the
question of the return of cultural properties to their
countries of origin or their restitution in case of illicit
appropriation, as this issue is very closely connected to
the rights of peoples to preserve their cultural roots and
heritage.
The international community has become
increasingly aware of the rights of peoples to recover
and preserve their cultural property, and this growing
awareness has been the catalyst for the efforts of the
international community, through the 1954 Convention
for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of
Armed Conflict and through the 1970 Convention on
the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit
Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural
Property. Finally, the Convention on Stolen or Illegally
Exported Cultural Objects was adopted in 1995 and
came into effect in 1998.
Egypt is one of the oldest civilizations in the
world. Our country is situated at a crossroads — a
meeting place for different civilizations and cultures.
This interaction has produced a unique human tapestry
that has given the world a trove of treasures, antiquities
and works of art of inestimable value — milestones
marking the long course of Egyptian civilization over
the ages. We believe that only the children of that
Egyptian civilization can safeguard such treasures.
Many Egyptian antiquities have unfortunately been
removed from the country over a period of many years.
Were it not for the artistic abundance of our civilization
and the new discoveries that are made on a daily basis,
very little would remain of that cultural property and
all of those works of art, given the organized theft and
intensive illicit trafficking that has taken place over the
years.
Egypt has worked very hard to recover the
cultural property that has been removed from the
country illegally. We have entered into bilateral and
multilateral dialogue with the countries where the
property is currently located. Despite the positive
results that have been reached in certain areas, we are
still very far from our goal. We would like to pay
special tribute to the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization for its role in this

6

connection. The Intergovernmental Committee for
Promoting the Return of Cultural Property to its
Countries of Origin or its Restitution in Case of Illicit
Appropriation has done commendable work. We
welcome the recommendations adopted by the
Committee at its eleventh session, in Cambodia last
March.
We would like to stress that it is necessary for
both States and individuals to respect the international
legal regime that governs these issues. Furthermore, all
countries must abide by their moral and legal
responsibilities. In this connection, we welcome the
adoption in 2000 of the International Code of Ethics
for Dealers in Cultural Property. We call upon the
international community to continue to work to ensure
that all museums, dealers and relevant cultural and
trade institutions respect that Code. We would like to
emphasize that States are responsible for ensuring the
implementation of the International Code of Ethics;
governmental cultural institutions must respect the
rules and principles laid down therein.
The restitution of cultural property has taken on
new impetus because of the proclamation of 2002 as
the United Nations Year for Cultural Heritage. We hope
that this will provide an opportunity for international
activities to be undertaken that will make it possible for
the works of art and cultural property — particularly
those that have been illicitly transported — of all
peoples throughout the world to be recovered and
returned to the countries of origin. Egypt supports
efforts to restore such cultural property and appeals to
all countries that have Egyptian cultural property that
has been illicitly transported to cooperate with us in
this connection. There can be no doubt that this just
cause is a true test of the international community’s
respect for the rule of law and the good governance
that are referred to so often in international forums and
declarations.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item for this meeting. I
should like to inform members that, at the request of
the sponsors, action on draft resolution A/56/L.41 will
be taken at a later date.

A/56/PV.82

Agenda item 18
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
Report of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples on its work during 2001 (A/56/23
(Parts I-III))
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/56/61,
A/56/65, A/56/159)
Draft resolutions (A/56/23 (Part III), chap. XIII,
sect. G, para. 7; A/56/L.40)
The Acting President: I call on Mr. Bernard
Tanoh-Boutchoué of Côte d’Ivoire, Acting Chairman of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, to
introduce the Committee’s report and draft resolution
A/56/L.40.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoué (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): It is a great honour for me, as representative
of the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire, to speak in the
General Assembly in my capacity as Acting Chairman
of the Special Committee, to provide a brief review of
the Committee’s work as the Assembly considers the
question of the implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples.
In the absence of the Rapporteur of the Special
Committee, Mr. Fayssal Mekdad, I also have the
honour to introduce the report of the Special
Committee on its work during 2001, as contained in
document A/56/23.
The report is divided into three parts, with the
recommendations for action being presented in part III.
Part I describes the establishment, organization and
activities of the Committee, its relations with United
Nations
bodies
and
intergovernmental,
nongovernmental and regional organizations, and its
activities relating to international conventions.
I wish, in particular, to draw the Assembly’s
attention to section J of chapter I of part I, which
outlines the future programme of work the Committee

intends to undertake during 2002, subject to the
approval of the General Assembly. Part I of the report
also deals with the Second International Decade for the
Eradication of Colonialism. In addition, it contains the
report of the Caribbean Regional Seminar held in
Havana, Cuba, in May 2001.
Part II of the report presents a brief account of the
Committee’s deliberations regarding the substantive
issues on its agenda. Those include the dissemination
of information on decolonization, the question of
sending visiting missions to Territories, economic and
other activities which affect the interests of the peoples
of the 17 remaining Non-Self-Governing Territories,
military activities carried out by administering Powers
in Territories under their administration, and the
implementation of the Declaration by the specialized
agencies and international institutions associated with
the United Nations. Part II also includes chapters
related to the information transmitted under Article
73 e of the Charter and chapters dealing with
Territories.
As I mentioned earlier, all the recommendations
of the Special Committee can be found in part III of the
report.
The report before the Assembly describes the
work carried out by the Special Committee in the
implementation of the mandate entrusted to it by the
General Assembly. I would now like to highlight some
of the activities of the last year.
Unfortunately, despite the progress made since
the adoption of the 1960 Declaration, the process of
decolonization is still incomplete. Therefore, our
deliberations during this first year of the Second
Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism have again
been focused essentially on the political, economic and
social situation prevailing in the remaining 17 NonSelf-Governing Territories. We have reviewed the
information provided by the administering Powers in
accordance with Article 73 e of the Charter, as well as
the working papers on each Territory prepared by the
Secretariat. We also heard statements made by
representatives of the Territories, petitioners, other
senior officials and non-governmental organizations.
The Committee held 10 formal meetings, five
informal meetings and numerous consultations in order
to reach consensus on the issues before it. At the end of
our session, we adopted 10 draft resolutions by
consensus, including one on the Falklands Islands

7

A/56/PV.82

(Malvinas) and one on Puerto Rico and one decision on
military activities and arrangements. We also continued
to point out the need for close collaboration between
the Economic and Social Council and the Special
Committee regarding international assistance to the
Territories. At Geneva last July, the Economic and
Social Council adopted a draft resolution on the
implementation of the Declaration by the specialized
agencies.
We were very encouraged by the record number
of participants from the Territories that attended the
Caribbean Regional Seminar held in Cuba in May. The
Committee took the opportunity to hear the concerns of
the participants and to inform them about its work,
particularly its desire to engage the administering
Powers in developing decolonization plans through
work programmes for the individual Territories
concerned. We emphasized that the views of the
peoples of the territories must be fully taken into
account in any future decolonization work
programmes. The Committee has repeatedly stressed
that the cooperation of the administering Powers is
essential for the Committee to make progress in its
work.
During 2001, we continued to enjoy the
constructive cooperation of New Zealand. We are
pleased that representatives of the United Kingdom and
the United States also attended some of our meetings,
albeit informally, and that, for the first time, the United
Kingdom officially attended our Regional Seminar in
Havana. France attended meetings devoted to New
Caledonia, and Portugal, the former administering
Power in East Timor, also attended meetings of the
Committee. We hope that our working relationship
with all the administering Powers will be further
strengthened to allow for real progress in the
consideration of the Territories’ needs and aspirations.
In that regard, the meetings held in June by the
members of the Committee with the representatives of
New Zealand and Tokelau were very instructive. We
discussed the best way to work in partnership to ensure
that any eventual plan for self-determination would
reflect faithfully the wishes of the people regarding
their future political status and living conditions. We
look forward to our future meetings on this issue.
Experience has also shown how the case-by-case work
programmes for decolonization can be a useful tool
when we have the cooperation and good will of all
parties involved.

8

Encouraged by our meetings on Tokelau, we look
forward to greater involvement in the work of the
Committee by all the administering Powers informally
or, preferably, formally. In that regard, we are still
awaiting the responses of the United Kingdom and the
United States on how to proceed together with the
informal dialogue begun over a year ago on Pitcairn
and American Samoa. Again, we must stress that any
decolonization process must include representatives of
the Territories at every stage. We hope that the
administering Powers will seize the opportunity before
them to make progress in the Committee’s work, to the
benefit of all partners. A process as complex as
decolonization undoubtedly requires consistent efforts
by all concerned if we expect to obtain the desired
results.
The elections for a Constituent Assembly held
this year in the Non-Self-Governing Territory of East
Timor provide cause for encouragement. The
Committee commends the people of East Timor for the
civic-mindedness they have resolutely displayed
throughout the process that is taking East Timor
towards independence. We also applaud the valuable
contribution of the United Nations and the international
community at large for the progress made in the
Territory.
I now wish to introduce, for the Assembly’s
consideration and approval, a draft resolution on the
implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
contained in document A/56/L.40.
The draft resolution before us closely follows the
text of the resolution adopted by the General Assembly
at its last session. Bearing in mind the declaration of a
Second International Decade for the Eradication of
Colonialism, the text reaffirms once again that the
existence of colonialism is incompatible with the
Charter of the United Nations, the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights; it also reaffirms the General Assembly’s
determination to continue to take all steps necessary to
bring about the complete and speedy eradication of
colonialism.
In the draft resolution, the General Assembly
affirms once again its support for the aspirations of the
peoples under colonial rule to exercise their right to
self-determination,
including
independence,
in

A/56/PV.82

accordance with relevant resolutions of the United
Nations on decolonization. It calls upon the
administering Powers to finalize before the end of 2002
a constructive programme of work on a case-by-case
basis for the Non-Self-Governing Territories to
facilitate the implementation of the mandate of the
Special Committee and the relevant resolutions on
decolonization, including resolutions on specific
Territories.
In that context, the draft resolution contains a
new element, appearing in operative paragraph 7, in
which the General Assembly welcomes the ongoing
consultations between the Special Committee and New
Zealand, as administering Power for Tokelau, with the
participation of representatives of the people of
Tokelau, with a view to formulating a programme of
work on the question of Tokelau.
Operative paragraph 8 contains several provisions
concerning the Special Committee’s programme of
work. In it, the Assembly requests the Special
Committee to formulate specific proposals to bring
about an end to colonialism; to examine the
implementation by Member States of relevant
resolutions; to continue to pay special attention to the
small Territories, including through the dispatch of
visiting missions; to finalize before the end of 2002 a
constructive programme of work on a case-by-case
basis for each Territory; to enlist worldwide support for
decolonization; to conduct seminars; and to observe
annually the Week of Solidarity with the Peoples of
Non-Self-Governing Territories.
The draft resolution also contains paragraphs
specifically concerning economic activities, the
exploitation of natural resources and military activities
and arrangements in the Territories.
The draft resolution urges all States and
specialized agencies to provide moral and material
assistance to the Territories and requests that the
administering Powers make use of all possible
assistance, on both a bilateral and a multilateral basis,
in the strengthening of the economies of those
Territories.
The draft resolution reaffirms that visiting
missions are an effective means of ascertaining the
situation in the Territories. It therefore calls upon the
administering Powers to continue to facilitate visiting
missions and upon those that have not participated

formally in the work of the Special Committee to do so
at its session in 2002.
Finally, the draft resolution requests the
Secretary-General, the specialized agencies and other
organizations of the United Nations system to provide
economic, social and other assistance to the Non-SelfGoverning Territories and to continue to do so, as
appropriate, after they exercise their right to selfdetermination, including independence.
The text of the draft resolution before the
Assembly is the fruit of transparent consultations
carried out in a spirit of cooperation with interested
delegations with a view to achieving consensus. I urge
all delegations to the General Assembly to welcome the
recommendations submitted by the Special Committee
so that we may proceed with our work of promoting the
rights and interests of the peoples of the Non-SelfGoverning Territories.
Before concluding, on behalf of all the members
of the Special Committee, I wish to thank SecretaryGeneral Kofi Annan for the effective technical and
substantive support of the Secretariat throughout the
session. I also wish to thank my colleagues on the
Bureau of the Committee — Vice-Chairman
Ambassador Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla of Cuba and
Rapporteur Mr. Fayssal Mekdad of the Syrian Arab
Republic — for their cooperation and support while I
was working as Acting Chairman of the Special
Committee. Naturally, I also wish to thank all the
members of the Special Committee for their dynamic
cooperation.
The Acting President: I should like to inform
members that the General Assembly will take action on
the two draft resolutions under agenda item 18 after all
reports of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) have been considered.
Reports of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee)
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will consider the reports of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) on
agenda items 85 to 91, 92 and 18, 93 and 12, 94 as well
as 18.
I request the Rapporteur of the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee, Mr. Graham Maitland
of South Africa, to introduce in one intervention the

9

A/56/PV.82

reports of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee.
Mr. Maitland (South Africa), Rapporteur of the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee): It is a privilege and a great
personal honour for me to introduce to the General
Assembly the reports of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) on
agenda items 85 to 94, as well as items 12 and 18.
These reports, contained in documents A/56/547 to
A/56/557, include the texts of draft resolutions and
decisions recommended to the General Assembly for
adoption.
The Fourth Committee considered all the items
allocated to it separately, with the exception of matters
pertaining to the Non-Self-Governing Territories and
related issues, which were considered in one cluster
and on which one single general debate was held.
Throughout its session, during the first part of the
fifty-sixth session of the General Assembly, the Fourth
Committee had a total of 22 formal meetings. An
informal interactive meeting was held under agenda
item 89, “Comprehensive review of the whole question
of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects”. An
open-ended working group established by the
Committee under item 86, “International cooperation in
the peaceful uses of outer space”, also held several
informal meetings.
The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee adopted 24 draft resolutions and 3 draft
decisions, of which 9 draft resolutions and 3 draft
decisions were adopted without a vote.
The first report, submitted under agenda item 85,
“Effects of atomic radiation”, is contained in document
A/56/547. The Fourth Committee considered the 2001
report of the United Nations Scientific Committee on
the Effects of Atomic Radiation (UNSCEAR), which
prepared the report and its scientific annex during its
forty-fourth and fiftieth sessions. The draft resolution
submitted under this agenda item is contained in
paragraph 7 of the report. In the draft resolution, the
General Assembly would, among other things,
commend UNSCEAR for the valuable contribution it
has been making in the course of the past 46 years,
since its inception, to wider knowledge and
understanding of the levels, effects and risks of
ionizing radiation; endorse the intentions and plans of
UNSCEAR for its future activities of scientific review;

10

and invite UNSCEAR to continue its consultations
with scientists and experts from interested Member
States in the process of preparing its future scientific
reports. On behalf of the Fourth Committee, I
recommend the adoption of this draft resolution by the
General Assembly.
The second report, submitted under agenda item
86, entitled “International cooperation in the peaceful
uses of outer space”, is contained in document
A/56/548. During its consideration of the item, the
Fourth Committee had an open-ended working group
which held a number of informal meetings, under the
chairmanship of the delegation of Chile, to formulate
the draft resolution contained in paragraph 10 of the
report. In that draft resolution, the General Assembly
would, among other things, endorse the work of the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and its
Scientific and Technical Subcommittee and its Legal
Subcommittee; follow up on the implementation of
recommendations of the Third United Nations
Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space — UNISPACE III — and decide that the
practice of sharing seats on the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space on a rotating basis
between Cuba and Peru as well as between the
Republic of Korea and Malaysia should be terminated,
that those four countries should become full members
of the Committee, and that Saudi Arabia and Slovakia
should become members of the same Committee. On
behalf of the Fourth Committee, I recommend this draft
resolution to the Assembly for adoption.
The third report, submitted under agenda item 87,
entitled “United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East”, is contained in
document A/56/549. The Fourth Committee adopted
seven draft resolutions related to various aspects of the
work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, and they are
contained in paragraph 22 of the report. The Fourth
Committee recommends the adoption of these draft
resolutions to the Assembly.
The fourth report, submitted under agenda item
88, entitled “Report of the Special Committee to
Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human
Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the
Occupied Territories”, is contained in document
A/56/550. The Fourth Committee considered the report
of the Special Committee concerning the protection
and promotion of the human rights of the Palestinian

A/56/PV.82

people and other Arab inhabitants of the occupied
territories. Throughout the debate on this item, the
activities of the Special Committee were widely
supported and appreciated by many States. Under this
item, the Fourth Committee adopted five draft
resolutions, which can be found in paragraph 22 of its
report. The Committee recommends these draft
resolutions to the Assembly for adoption.
The fifth report, relating to agenda item 89,
entitled “Comprehensive review of the whole question
of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects”, is
contained in document A/56/551. The Fourth
Committee heard a comprehensive introductory
statement by the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations and held a general debate
under this item. It also held informal interactive
discussions with the Under-Secretary-General and
other senior officials of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. No proposal was submitted
to the Committee under this agenda item at this stage
of its work.
The sixth report, submitted under agenda item 90,
entitled “Questions relating to information”, is
contained in document A/56/552. After hearing a
comprehensive introductory statement by the Interim
Head of the Department of Public Information,
Mr. Shashi Tharoor, the Fourth Committee considered
the report submitted by the Committee on Information.
The Fourth Committee adopted, without a vote, two
draft resolutions and one decision, which are
contained, respectively, in paragraphs 10 and 11 of the
present
report.
The
Special
Political
and
Decolonization Committee thus recommends that the
General Assembly adopt both draft resolutions and the
draft decision.
With regard to the cluster of items on Non-SelfGoverning Territories and the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples — agenda items 91, 92, 93, 12, 94 and 18 —
the Fourth Committee considered these items together.
Under these items, the Assembly has before it a
number of reports.
The report submitted under agenda item 91,
entitled “Information from Non-Self-Governing
Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter
of the United Nations”, is contained in document
A/56/553. The draft resolution on this item appears in

paragraph 7 of the report. The Fourth Committee
recommends it to the Assembly for adoption.
The report relating to agenda items 92 and 18,
entitled “Economic and other activities which affect the
interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories” and “Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples”, is contained in document A/56/554.
Under these two items, the Fourth Committee adopted
one draft resolution and one draft decision on “Military
activities and arrangements by colonial Powers in
Territories under their administration”, which are
contained, respectively, in paragraphs 9 and 10 of the
report. The Committee recommends this draft
resolution and the decision to the Assembly for
adoption.
The report relating to agenda items 93 and 12,
entitled “Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples by the specialized agencies and the
international institutions associated with the United
Nations” and “Report of the Economic and Social
Council”, is contained in document A/56/555. In
paragraph 7 of the report, the Fourth Committee
recommends one draft resolution to the Assembly for
adoption.
The report relating to agenda item 94, entitled
“Offers by Member States of study and training
facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing
Territories”, is contained in document A/56/556. Under
this item, the Fourth Committee recommends one draft
resolution, which is contained in paragraph 6 of the
report, for adoption by the Assembly.
The report submitted under agenda item 18,
entitled “Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples”, is contained in document A/56/557, which
contains chapters of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
relating to specific Territories not covered by other
agenda items. In this context, the Fourth Committee
adopted four draft resolutions, one of which covers 11
Territories, and one draft decision. The draft
resolutions on the question of Western Sahara, the
question of New Caledonia and the question of
Tokelau, the consolidated omnibus draft resolution

11

A/56/PV.82

concerning the 11 Territories and the draft decision on
the question of Gibraltar were adopted without a vote.
These draft resolutions are contained in paragraph 20
of the report. The Fourth Committee recommends that
the Assembly adopt these draft resolutions.
In addition to these reports, I should like to
inform the Assembly that the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee decided at this session to
adopt a methodology for the selection of its Bureau for
both this session and future sessions of the Assembly.
Since a precedent already exists for a Main Committee
to arrive at a methodology for selection of its
Bureau — namely, that chosen by the First
Committee — the Committee decided, on the proposal
of its Chairman, to adopt a system of rotation for the
posts of Chair, three Vice-Chairs and Rapporteur based
on the English alphabetical order of the regional
groups.
Under this rotational method, and because the
Chair this year was from Asia, the three Vice Chairs
this year were from the regional groups of the Eastern
European States, the Latin American and Caribbean
States and the Western European and other States,
while the Rapporteur was from the regional group of
African States.
Before concluding, I should like to stress the high
level of cooperation prevailing in the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee. This enabled it to fulfil
the mandate entrusted to it by the Assembly and to
complete its work effectively and constructively
despite the time constraints occasioned by the changes
in the Assembly’s schedule of work.
I should like to express, on behalf of the Bureau
of the Fourth Committee, our profound appreciation to
those delegations that coordinated the draft resolutions
adopted by the Committee. I should also like to thank
all delegations that participated in our efforts to reach
consensus on many resolutions and decisions. When
this was not possible, their cooperation helped the
Bureau to narrow the differences among interested
parties. All such contributions were made in a spirit of
cooperation which greatly facilitated our deliberations
on a number of sensitive issues.
I should like to pay particular tribute here to the
Chairman of the Fourth Committee, Ambassador
Hasmy Agam of Malaysia, whose vast knowledge and
experience, enhanced by his consummate diplomatic
skills, enabled the Committee to consider in depth all

12

the agenda items allocated to it by the General
Assembly. This was particularly important given the
wide-ranging and often difficult issues assigned to the
Committee.
The
Vice-Chairpersons
—
Mrs. Alexandrina Rusu of Romania, Mr. Cristián
Streeter of Chile and Ms. Anna-Maija Korpi of
Finland, with whom I had the pleasure of working —
also contributed to the successful conclusion of the
work of the Fourth Committee.
I should also like to express my appreciation to
Under-Secretary-General Chen Jian of the Department
of General Assembly Affairs and Conference Services
for his leadership of the Secretariat staff who provided
invaluable assistance to the Bureau.
I should also like to place on record our
appreciation for the able and efficient cooperation
provided by Ms. Lesley Wilkinson, Secretary of the
Committee, and her very competent team from the
Secretariat. It was through their efforts that the work of
the Committee always proceeded smoothly and in an
atmosphere of genuine cordiality and efficiency. We
are indeed grateful to them for ensuring that we
completed our work in a timely fashion despite a
number of time constraints.
Now I have the honour to submit to the General
Assembly for its consideration and adoption the
recommendations of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee contained in the reports in
documents A/56/547 to A/56/557.
The Acting President: If there is no proposal
under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it
that the General Assembly decides not to discuss the
reports of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) which are before the
Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendations of the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee have
been made clear in the Committee and are reflected in
the relevant official records. May I remind members
that under paragraph 7 of decision 34/401, the General
Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, i.e., either in the

A/56/PV.82

Committee or in plenary meeting unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee.”
May I remind delegations that, also in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee, I
should like to advise representatives that we are going
to proceed to take decisions in the same manner as was
done in the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee, unless the Secretariat is notified to the
contrary in advance. This means that where recorded
votes were taken, we will do the same. I should also
hope that we will proceed to adopt without a vote those
recommendations that were adopted without a vote in
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee.
Agenda item 85
Effects of atomic radiation
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/56/547)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report.
The Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
56/50).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 85?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 86
International cooperation in the peaceful uses of
outer space
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/56/548)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 10 of its report.
The Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
56/51).
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Brazil, who wishes to speak in
explanation of position on the draft resolution just
adopted.
Mr. Cordeiro (Brazil): Brazil joined the
consensus on the resolution just adopted, and we
support its general thrust. However, we want to express
our reservation with regard to the Spanish version of
the resolution’s second preambular paragraph and,
more specifically, with regard to the language that
characterizes outer space as the common heritage of all
mankind.
Let me note that, in the part of the resolution
where the English text reads “the province of all
mankind”, there is a clear disconnection between the
Spanish version and the texts in English, French and
the other languages.
We believe that the concept of outer space as the
common heritage of all mankind has not been accepted,
and that it needs further discussion before its
introduction into United Nations resolutions can be
considered. As long as there is no consensus on such a
concept, we believe that the Spanish version of the
second preambular paragraph should reflect the
language of the Treaty on Principles Governing the
Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer
Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies,
which is known as the Outer Space Treaty.

13

A/56/PV.82

We note in this regard that the English and French
versions of the second preambular paragraph of the
resolution just adopted are in line with the language of
the Outer Space Treaty. It is only the Spanish version
that deviates from it.
That said, I wish to reaffirm Brazil’s support for
the activities of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 86?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 87
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (A/56/549)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the seven draft resolutions
recommended by the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee in paragraph 22 of its
report. After all the votes have been taken,
representatives will again have an opportunity to
explain their vote.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled
“Assistance to Palestine refugees”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,

14

Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Zambia
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands
Abstaining:
Micronesia (Federated States of), United States of
America
Draft resolution I was adopted by 151 votes to 2,
with 2 abstentions (resolution 56/52).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Botswana and
Zimbabwe informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Working Group on the Financing of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East”.
The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee adopted draft resolution II without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 56/53).

A/56/PV.82

The Acting President: Draft resolution III is
entitled “Persons displaced as a result of the June 1967
and subsequent hostilities”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Zambia
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, United States of America

Abstaining:
Micronesia (Federated States of)
Draft resolution III was adopted by 151 votes to 3,
with 1 abstention (resolution 56/54).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Botswana and
Zimbabwe informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution IV is
entitled “Offers by Member States of grants and
scholarships for higher education, including vocational
training, for Palestine refugees”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,

15

A/56/PV.82

Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United
States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet
Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zambia
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Israel
Draft resolution IV was adopted by 154 votes to
none, with 1 abstention (resolution 56/55).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Botswana and
Zimbabwe informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution V is
entitled “Operations of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mexico,

16

Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Zambia
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, United States of America
Abstaining:
Micronesia (Federated States of)
Draft resolution V was adopted by 151 votes to 3,
with 1 abstention (resolution 56/56).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Botswana and
Zimbabwe informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution VI is
entitled “Palestine refugees’ properties and their
revenues”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,

A/56/PV.82

Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Zambia
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, United States of America
Abstaining:
Micronesia (Federated States of)
Draft resolution VI was adopted by 150 votes to 3,
with 1 abstention (resolution 56/57).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Botswana and
Zimbabwe informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution VII is
entitled “University of Jerusalem ‘Al-Quds’ for
Palestine refugees”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Bolivia, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, China,

Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Zambia
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, United States of America
Abstaining:
Micronesia (Federated States of)
Draft resolution VII was adopted by 151 votes to
3, with 1 abstention (resolution 56/58).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Botswana and
Zimbabwe informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 87?
It was so decided.

17

A/56/PV.82

Agenda item 88
Report of the Special Committee to Investigate
Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the
Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied
Territories
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/56/550)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the five draft resolutions
recommended by the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee in paragraph 22 of its
report. After all the votes have been taken,
representatives will have the opportunity to explain
their vote.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled “Work
of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli
Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the
Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied
Territories”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia,
Chile, China, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon,
Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Jordan, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania, Mexico, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia

18

Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), United States of America
Abstaining:
Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahamas, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Monaco, Mongolia, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, San Marino,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain,
Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Tonga, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay,
Yugoslavia
Draft resolution I was adopted by 83 votes to 4,
with 58 abstentions (resolution 56/59).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Botswana,
Kenya and Zimbabwe informed the Secretariat
that they had intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Applicability of the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, of 12 August 1949, to the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, including Jerusalem, and the other occupied
Arab territories”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,

A/56/PV.82

Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Zambia
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), United States of America
Abstaining:
Angola, Nicaragua
Draft resolution II was adopted by 148 votes to 4,
with 2 abstentions (resolution 56/60).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Botswana and
Zimbabwe informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: draft resolution III is
entitled “Israeli settlements in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, including Jerusalem, and the occupied Syrian
Golan”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,

Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Yugoslavia, Zambia
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), United States of America
Abstaining:
Nicaragua, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands
Draft resolution III was adopted by 145 votes to 4,
with 3 abstentions (resolution 56/61).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Botswana and
Zimbabwe informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution IV is
entitled “Israeli practices affecting the human rights of

19

A/56/PV.82

the Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, including Jerusalem”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Zambia
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), United States of America
Abstaining:
Nicaragua, Papua New Guinea

20

Draft resolution IV was adopted by 145 votes to 4,
with 2 abstentions (resolution 56/62).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Botswana,
Kenya and Zimbabwe informed the Secretariat
that they had intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution V is
entitled “The occupied Syrian Golan”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,

A/56/PV.82

Uruguay, Venezuela,
Yugoslavia, Zambia

Viet

Nam,

Yemen,

Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands
Abstaining:
Micronesia (Federated States of), Nicaragua,
United States of America
Draft resolution V was adopted by 147 votes to 2,
with 3 abstentions (resolution 56/63).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Botswana,
Kenya and Zimbabwe informed the Secretariat
that they had intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Papua New Guinea, who wishes to
speak in explanation of vote on the draft resolutions
just adopted.
Mr. Ovia (Papua New Guinea): Papua New
Guinea’s position on the question of the right to selfdetermination is well known in this Assembly, and I do
not need to repeat it. It is reflected in Papua New
Guinea’s affirmative votes in the past. However, as we
have all decided, peace cannot be achieved through
continued violence, such has been witnessed in the past
several months, especially the past two weeks, in the
Middle East region. As a Melanesian country — and,
for that matter, as a Pacific island country — we
believe in negotiation and discussion to resolve any
differences with our adversaries, as that is the best and
only way to bring peace in any conflict.
Papua New Guinea continues to believe that
Israel must recognize the right of the Palestinian people
to exercise their right to self-determination and to the
resulting statehood. We also believe, however, that
Israel has a right to coexist in a safe and secure
environment with its neighbours. As such, the State of
Israel must be assured of its right to exist within safe
and secure borders. Papua New Guinea also believes in
the purposes of the United Nations, as outlined in its
Charter.

Papua New Guinea believes in the sanctity of life,
whether Israeli or Palestinian. It is wrong to commit
suicide or to use one’s own body as a weapon of
destruction. Extrajudicial killings also have no place in
a civilized society that is founded on the rule of law.
By the same token, we are concerned about the
implementation of the rule of law, and governance
generally, inside Palestinian-controlled areas. Peaceful
coexistence requires the genuine desire of all parties to
the conflict to cooperate for such an outcome. There
cannot be a peaceful outcome when there are elements
in the conflict that do not recognize the right of Israel
to exist within secure borders. These matters are not
properly reflected in resolutions 56/59, 56/61 and
56/62. We therefore abstained in the voting on those
resolutions.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 88?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 89
Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/56/551)
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to take note of the report of
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) contained in document A/56/551?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 89.

Unless the United Nations takes action under
Chapter VII of the Charter on every other occasion, it
must be seen to be impartial in its dealings with all
parties to a conflict. It must not be seen to be taking a
position that can be interpreted as pre-empting the
outcome of any negotiations.

21

A/56/PV.82

Agenda item 90

Agenda item 91

Questions relating to information

Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories
transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the
United Nations

Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/56/552)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it draft resolutions A and B recommended by the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 10 of its report and a draft decision
recommended by the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee in paragraph 11 of the same
report.
I should like to inform members that action on
draft resolution B is postponed to a later date to allow
time for the review of its programme budget
implications by the Fifth Committee. The Assembly
will take action on draft resolution B as soon as the
report of the Fifth Committee on its programme budget
implications is available.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A, entitled “Information in the service of
humanity”.
The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee adopted draft resolution A without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution A was adopted (resolution
56/64 A).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
turn to the draft decision entitled “Increase in the
membership of the Committee on Information”.
The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee adopted the draft decision without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 90.

22

Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/56/553)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde,
Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian

A/56/PV.82

Arab Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Yugoslavia, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
None
Abstaining:
France, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America
The draft resolution was adopted by 149 votes to
none, with 6 abstentions (resolution 56/65).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 91?
It was so decided.
Agenda items 92 and 18
Economic and other activities which affect the
interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/56/554)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 9 of its report and the draft decision
recommended by the Committee in paragraph 10 of the
same report.
We turn first to the draft resolution, entitled
“Economic and other activities which affect the
interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories”.
A recorded vote has been requested.

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania, Mexico, Mongolia, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
France, Georgia, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland
The draft resolution was adopted by 147 votes to
2, with 5 abstentions (resolution 56/66).

23

A/56/PV.82

The Acting President: We now turn to the draft
decision entitled “Military activities and arrangements
by colonial Powers in Territories under their
administration”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chile, China,
Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Cyprus, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kuwait, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Madagascar,
Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mexico, Mongolia,
Mozambique,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Qatar, Saint
Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Paraguay,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, San
Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Yugoslavia
The draft decision was adopted by 92 votes to 51.

24

[Subsequently, the delegations of Botswana, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and Peru
informed the Secretariat that they had intended to
vote in favour.]
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 92?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
18.
Agenda items 93 and 12
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
by the specialized agencies and the international
institutions associated with the United Nations
Report of the Economic and Social Council
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/56/555)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report. The draft resolution is
entitled “Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples by the specialized agencies and the
international institutions associated with the United
Nations”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Australia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia,

A/56/PV.82

Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Saint
Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, San Marino, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Tonga, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Yugoslavia
The draft resolution was adopted by 106 votes to
none, with 50 abstentions (resolution 56/67).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 93?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The Assembly has
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
12.

Agenda item 94
Offers by Member States of study and training
facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing
Territories
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/56/556)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report.
The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
May I consider that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
56/68).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 94?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 18
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/56/557)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the four draft resolutions
recommended by the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee in paragraph 20 of its report
and on the draft decision recommended by the
Committee in paragraph 21 of the same report.
We turn first to the four draft resolutions
contained in paragraph 20 of the report.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Question of Western
Sahara”.
The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee adopted draft resolution I without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 56/69).

25

A/56/PV.82

The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Question of New Caledonia”.

Reports of the Secretary-General (A/56/61,
A/56/65 and A/56/159)

The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee adopted draft resolution II without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?

Draft resolutions (A/56/23 (Part III), chap. XIII,
sect. G, para. 7; A/56/L.40)

Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 56/70).
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is
entitled “Question of Tokelau”.
The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee adopted draft resolution III without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
56/71).
The Acting President: Draft resolution IV is
entitled “Questions of American Samoa, Anguilla,
Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman
Islands, Guam, Montserrat, Pitcairn, St. Helena, the
Turks and Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin
Islands”.
The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee adopted draft resolution IV without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution
56/72).
The Acting President: We turn now to the draft
decision, contained in paragraph 21 of the report,
entitled “Question of Gibraltar”.
The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee adopted the draft decision without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
this stage of our consideration of agenda item 18.
Agenda item 18 (continued)
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
Report of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples (A/56/23, Part III)

26

The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider the draft resolution contained in part III,
chapter XIII, section G, paragraph 7, of document
A/56/23, and draft resolution A/56/L.40.
Before giving the floor to the speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
I call on the representative of the United States,
who wishes to speak in explanation of vote before the
voting.
Mr. Hybl (United States of America): The United
States is fully supportive when countries choose
independence and is proud to work with them on an
equal and sovereign basis. For Territories that do not
choose independence, however, the United States also
supports the right of people in those Territories to a full
measure of self-government, if that is what they
choose. The United States reaffirms its respect for their
rights, which include the options of integration and free
association. Given the vast variety of people, places
and political circumstances that exist around the world,
we believe that a single standard of decolonization
should not be applied to every Territory, and we call on
all Member States to respect the choices made by the
residents of Non-Self-Governing Territories.
In that regard, the United States cannot support
the draft resolution on the implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples. The draft resolution
unfairly applies a single and narrow standard for
decolonization. Indeed, for the United States, the term
“non-self-governing” is of questionable applicability to
those who are able to establish their own constitution,
who elect their own public officers, who have
representation in Washington, and who choose their
own economic path.
Moreover, the United States cannot agree with the
implication in the draft resolution that the mere
presence of military activities and bases in the NonSelf-Governing Territories is harmful to the rights and

A/56/PV.82

interests of the people of the Territories. We cannot
support language that would infringe on the sovereign
right of the United States Government to plan its
military activities in accordance with its national
security interests.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will first take a decision on the
draft resolution entitled “Dissemination of information
on decolonization”, which is contained in part III,
chapter XIII, section G, paragraph 7, of the report of
the Special Committee.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad

and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Yugoslavia, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
France, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of)
The draft resolution was adopted by 147 votes to
2, with 4 abstentions (resolution 56/73).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/56/L.40, entitled
“Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Cape
Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Ireland, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland,

27

A/56/PV.82

Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo,
Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Yugoslavia, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Belgium, Bulgaria, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Israel, Italy,
Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Netherlands,
Republic of Korea, Slovenia, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey
Draft resolution A/56/L.40 was adopted by 132
votes to 2, with 21 abstentions (resolution 56/74).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
the speakers in explanation of vote after the voting,
may I remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Schelstraete (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
have the honour of taking the floor on behalf of the
European Union to explain the Union’s position
concerning the resolution on the question of Western
Sahara.
The Central and Eastern European countries
associated with the European Union — Bulgaria, the
Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia — and the
associated countries of Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, as
well as the European Free Trade Association country
belonging to the European Economic Area, Norway,
align themselves with this explanation of position.
The European Union is pleased that the resolution
on Western Sahara has once again been presented this
year as a proposal of the Chairman of the Fourth
Committee, and that it has been adopted by consensus.
The European Union continues to pay close
attention to the question of Western Sahara. It
welcomed the provisions of Security Council resolution
1359 (2001) of 29 June 2001. The European Union
fully supports the Secretary-General and his Personal
Envoy, Mr. James Baker, in their tireless efforts to

28

contribute to a fair, sustainable and negotiated
resolution of the dispute.
In its resolution 1359 (2001), the Security
Council clearly indicated the path to be followed. It has
invited all the parties to meet under the auspices of the
Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General to discuss the
draft Framework Agreement and to negotiate any
changes they would like to see to that proposal, as well
as to discuss any other proposal for a political solution
which may be put forward by the parties in order to
arrive at a mutually acceptable settlement. Resolution
1359 (2001) also envisages that the official proposals
submitted by the Polisario Front to overcome the
obstacles preventing the implementation of the
Settlement Plan would be considered while those
discussions are taking place.
The European Union encourages the parties to
participate constructively in the talks in progress under
the auspices of the Secretary-General’s Personal
Envoy.
There is no need to await the end of those talks
before settling certain pressing humanitarian issues,
such as the exchange of family visits. Under
international law, the parties are obliged to release
without delay all prisoners of war still in detention.
The European Union would like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute once again to the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO). MINURSO continues to play a crucial
role in the Western Saharan peace process.
Mr. Harrison (United Kingdom): I should like to
explain the United Kingdom’s votes on the draft
resolutions on the implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples and on the dissemination of information on
decolonization. As the Assembly will have seen, the
United Kingdom voted against both of these
resolutions.
The United Kingdom continues to find some
elements of the text on the implementation of the
Declaration unacceptable. These elements include, but
are not limited to, operative paragraph 12, which calls
on the administering Powers to eliminate the remaining
military bases in the Non-Self-Governing Territories.
This language is drawn from the military activities
decision, which we also voted against this year.

A/56/PV.82

With regard to the resolution on the dissemination
of information on decolonization, the United Kingdom
remains of the view that the obligation that this text
places on the Secretariat to publicize decolonization
issues represents an unwarranted drain on the scarce
resources of the United Nations. The resolution is
therefore unacceptable to the United Kingdom.
Despite our negative votes on these resolutions,
the United Kingdom delegation remains sincerely
committed to furthering the process of informal
dialogue with the Committee of 24 over the coming
year.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote.
Ms. Thomas (Jamaica): I will not prolong the
debate, but I should like to make a few remarks on
behalf of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean
States.
The Group is pleased that it has been able to
participate in the deliberations on agenda items 18, 12,
and 85 to 94 during the past three and a half months in
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee. In
this regard, we thank the Rapporteur for his reports,
and we also would note that this year’s deliberations
were marked by a spirit of camaraderie, which
permeated our discussions.
This year, our deliberations were threatened by
the events of 11 September. Despite this, the
Committee forged ahead, committed in its resolve not
to be daunted by the acts of terrorism, and successfully
completed its work by mid-November.

We especially pay tribute to Ambassador Hasmy
of Malaysia, Chairman of the Fourth Committee, for
his hard work in steering the proceedings of the
Committee. For the most part, he conducted
proceedings single-handedly, due to the absence of an
elected Bureau. We thank Ambassador Hasmy for his
initiative in recommending a system of rotation, which
will now determine the future membership of the
Bureau.
Finally, once again, the Group of Latin American
and Caribbean States will continue to remain engaged
in the work of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee.
Mr. Graveley (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): With respect to the draft decision on military
activities and arrangements adopted by administering
Powers in territories under their administration, as
contained in document A/56/23, part III, my
delegation, which had voted against the draft decision
by mistake in the Fourth Committee, decided to rectify
its error and vote in favour at this plenary meeting.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 18.
Again, I wish to express my thanks to all of the
people who make this look so easy. Believe me, it is
not because of my talents; it is because of their support.
Today we won the Nobel Peace Prize, and I think
it is well deserved.
The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.

29
