UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1998/314
9 April 1998
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 9 APRIL 1998 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to tranmit to you herewith a letter dated 9 April 1998
from the High Representative for Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring this letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.

(Signed)

98-10045 (E)

140498

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1998/314
English
Page 2

Annex
Letter dated 9 April 1998 from the High Representative
for Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina addressed to the Secretary-General

I have the honour to transmit to you the ninth report on the activities of
the High Representative for Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I would appreciate your making this report available to the
Security Council.

(Signed)

Carlos WESTENDORP

/...

S/1998/314
English
Page 3

Appendix
Report of the High Representative for Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina to the Secretary-General

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
By its resolution 1112 (1997) of 12 June 1997, the Security Council
endorsed my appointment as High Representative and reaffirmed the importance of
the role of the High Representative "in monitoring the implementation of the
Peace Agreement and giving guidance to and coordinating the activities of the
civilian organizations and agencies involved in assisting the parties to
implement the Peace Agreement".
2.
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1031 (1995) of 15 December 1995, in
which the Council requested the Secretary-General to submit reports from the
High Representative in accordance with Annex 10 of the Peace Agreement and
conclusions of the London Peace Implementation Conference of 8 and
9 December 1995, I herewith present the ninth report to the Council.
3.
The report covers the activities of the Office of the High Representative
and developments in the areas listed below during the period from the beginning
of January 1998 to the end of March 1998.

II.

INSTITUTIONAL ASPECTS

Office of the High Representative
4.
The period under review was productive in many respects, primarily in the
encouragement of normal life in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the establishment of
peace and stability in the country. Substantial progress has been made in
enhancing the climate of reconciliation and tolerance, ensuring freedom of
movement, and minority returns. Positive results also include arrangements on a
common passport, flag, licence plates, currency, etc. The situation in the
Republika Srpska was particularly much improved and the new Government there
made a profound difference to our dealings with this entity. Thus, the
programme of action approved at the Bonn Peace Implementation Conference of 9
and 10 December 1997 is working effectively - further embedding the peace
settlement. However, the peace process has not yet become irreversible and a
number of critical problems remain: tension around Brcko, complications in
implementing the results of municipal elections; strained relations between
Bosniaks and Croats especially in Mostar and Central Bosnia, among other
difficulties. I was using the powers given to me by the Bonn Conference in a
moderate way in order to avoid "a dependency syndrome" which might discourage
initiative and the taking of responsibility by the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities for the country’s destiny.
5.
Therefore, now as never before, the task of making Bosnian common
institutions self-sustaining and self-supporting becomes extremely important.
Only well coordinated and constructive work of the representatives of all the
/...

S/1998/314
English
Page 4

constituent peoples within the framework of their power structures will make
possible the solving of the complicated problems which Bosnia and Herzegovina
faces. In this respect the next few months will be crucial in the lead-up to
the general elections in September which will guide the direction of the country
for the next four years. I intend to proceed from the assumption that the
positive dynamics which have been achieved can be preserved and further taken
forward through the consistent realization of the requirements of the Bonn
Conference which clearly outlined the parameters for the involvement of the
international community in Bosnia and Herzegovina for the remainder of the
consolidation period. The nurturing of self-sustaining common structures
committed to in the Peace Agreement remains a central task.
6.
My headquarters in Sarajevo and the secretariat in Brussels have, in the
period under review, continued to maintain operational coordination of civilian
implementation activities inside Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as contacts
with the headquarters of the respective implementation organizations and
agencies, closely following, to the extent possible, the various international
forums dealing with different aspects of the Bosnian peace process.
7.
My regional offices in Mostar, Tuzla and Banja Luka continued to promote
regional coordination and monitoring of the situation on the ground and to
facilitate contacts at a local level, assisting inter-entity cooperation. Given
the positive developments in the Republika Srpska I intend to further strengthen
the regional offices in Banja Luka.
8.
During the period described, the termination of assignments of the majority
of international staff seconded to the Office of the High Representative by the
respective Governments resulted in substantial personnel turnover. The capacity
achieved by my Office to conduct pro-active and follow-up action could be
further developed if countries that contribute personnel maintained their
current level of commitment. I am thankful to the Governments who have replaced
or extended the terms of duty of the staff and hope that steady contribution in
this regard will be maintained.
Peace Implementation Council
9.
The Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council has continued to
meet on a monthly basis at the level of political directors of respective
Foreign Ministries. I have also convened weekly meetings of the Board at the
ambassadorial level in Sarajevo. Each monthly meeting was devoted to specific
issues of the peace process, special emphasis being placed on the implementation
of the Bonn Conclusions. Thus, the meeting held in Brussels on 29 January
concentrated on Brcko and municipal elections implementation and future
elections, while the meeting on 27 February focused on the Federation. A
further meeting on 26 March in Brussels dealt primarily with reconstruction and
return issues. Preparations are already under way for the next mid-term
Ministerial Steering Board meeting, to be held in Paris in June.
Brcko dispute
10. One of the most contentious and publicly debated issues in the reporting
period has been the Brcko Arbitration. After the Vienna hearings in February,
/...

S/1998/314
English
Page 5

the Tribunal issued a Supplemental Award for Brcko on 15 March which maintains
the current status quo under the present international supervision arrangements
and defers a final arbitration award to the end of 1998-early 1999. Although
blamed by politicians and public in both entities for being inconclusive, the
Supplemental Award did not lead to "spontaneous" expressions of dissatisfaction.
The Republika Srpska decided to set up a special government commission with
Bosniak participation to ensure implementation of the Award as regards refugee
return and restoration of Brcko as a multi-ethnic community. The further
development of the multi-ethnic police, judiciary and administration in Brcko
has continued. Particular success has been achieved with the police, this being
due to the high standard of the work of the International Police Task Force
(IPTF) and the United Nations Civil Affairs Office. The return of refugees and
displaced persons has continued and now over 800 families are back in their
homes, with over 1,000 houses under reconstruction. Freedom of movement is
improving both for vehicles and for visitors to Brcko town. Some increase in
the amount of financial assistance is now apparent, but more will be required if
a full revitalization of the economy of Brcko is to happen.
11. The way ahead for Brcko will now be a strengthened determination by both
entities to be seen to comply with the Peace Agreement. The onus is now very
much on the new Government of Republika Srpska to deliver a significantly higher
level of cooperation with the international community than did its predecessor.
The Federation will increase its pressure to ensure that it does. An active
campaign to return more people to their homes will only succeed well if a twoway return process develops and, whilst Republika Srpska must do more, the
Federation must also improve in this requirement. The multi-ethnic nature of
Brcko will need to continue to develop, but this will depend upon the
revitalization of the economy to bring more jobs and security to the population.

III.

COORDINATION OF CIVILIAN IMPLEMENTATION

Overall coordination
12. I have continued extensive consultations with representatives of
Governments and organizations at different levels. On 9 February I met the
Secretary-General and other senior United Nations officials in New York and on
the same day reported to the members of the Security Council on progress in the
peace implementation. I also had meetings with the Secretary General of NATO
and the Chairman-in-Office of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE).
13. Regular discussions with the principals in Sarajevo have been maintained.
These consultations, with the participation of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, the IPTF Commissioner, the Special Envoy of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the Commander of the Stabilization Force
(SFOR) and the OSCE Head of Mission, proved to be very useful and I shall
continue them.
14. The Economic Task Force, which meets under my chairmanship, remains the
main body for coordinating economic reform policies and international
reconstruction assistance. Recently its role has been strengthened by the
/...

S/1998/314
English
Page 6

establishment of an Economic Task Force secretariat. This secretariat has
initiated monthly meetings with sector task force leaders and bilateral donors
in order to improve the level of coordination. Also, it publishes a monthly
newsletter to keep the international community informed on economic reform and
reconstruction issues.
15. Following the appointment of my Deputy with responsibility for Return and
Reconstruction Task Force matters, the Return and Reconstruction Task Force has
been restructured and relaunched. The representatives of the International
Organization for Migration, SFOR and the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) are all now full members of the Task Force, and following
the approval of the Steering Board on 26 March a secretariat is being
established. A high-level Return and Reconstruction Task Force meeting was held
in Sarajevo on 19 March. This meeting agreed the overall return strategy for
1998, and endorsed a paper which will be presented to the next donor conference.
Regional Task Force structures have already been strengthened and a satellite
office opened in Drvar. In close cooperation with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees substantial support has been given
through political interventions to assist the local authorities with the
preparation of cantonal return plans as required by the Bonn Conference.
16. The Freedom of Movement Task Force has continued to be a valuable forum for
exploring various ways to promote freedom of movement for people, goods and
services.
Common institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina
17. The process of establishing the common institutions of Bosnia and
Herzegovina proceeds steadily. The Presidency, the Council of Ministers and the
Parliamentary Assembly have continued to meet regularly in the reporting period.
However, the efficiency of their work, although it has improved, is still
hindered by a lack of political will to take decisions. My Office intends to
work intensively on reaching agreement on administrative structures and their
permanent locations.
18. In the reporting period, the Presidency held few working sessions, but met
frequently with high-ranking international delegations. The results of the
working meetings have been limited; the only decision of note is the longawaited appointment of the 33 new Ambassadors of Bosnia and Herzegovina. This
follows the agreement of August 1997 on the distribution of ambassadorial posts.
19. The three-member Presidency failed to agree on several crucial issues, most
prominent of which was the common currency, which, as a consequence, I was
forced to impose in accordance with the Conclusions of the Bonn Conference.
20. The Council of Ministers on various occasions again referred issues to the
Presidency upon which it was unable to agree. This was often a function of the
lack of clear procedures governing the Council itself, and of the differing
interpretations of the respective areas of competence of these two bodies. This
practice weakened the political position of the Council, which should serve as
the major policy and decision-making organ at the state level. The Council

/...

S/1998/314
English
Page 7

nonetheless continued to stand out as the most active of the common
institutions, meeting on average at least once weekly.
21. During the period under review, the Council continued its efforts to
implement the Law on Travel Documents and on the Council of Ministers. On
26 March, the Council took a significant step forward by accepting in its
entirety a package my Office had proposed, which offers clear solutions on the
three key issues of permanent locations of the Council and its ministries, the
staffing of the Council’s services and the internal structures of the three
Ministries. The Council must also ensure proper implementation of the Law on
Citizenship which I imposed on an interim basis last December. Progress on
other issues has been slow.
22. My Office will continue to work intensively with Council members and staff
to maintain the positive momentum. This is particularly necessary when one
notes the failure of the Council to meet important Bonn deadlines which must be
fully respected to avoid negative consequences for the implementation process.
23. In the reporting period, both houses of the Parliamentary Assembly
continued to meet regularly. However, it failed to adopt several important
laws. As a consequence I decided to enforce the Law on Foreign Investment and
the Law on the Flag of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
24. The latter of the aforementioned laws has brought into force a new state
flag for Bosnia and Herzegovina. The new flag was raised at the United Nations
in New York on 6 February and at the opening ceremony of the Winter Olympics in
Nagano, Japan. The flag was designed by an independent commission which I
established following the failure of the ruling parties to reach consensus. The
flag has been well received by the public and can be seen in increasing numbers
around the country.
25. The Parliamentary Assembly did manage to fulfil several obligations
stemming from the Bonn Conclusions by adopting the Law on Customs Tariffs and
ratifying several agreements most prominent of which was the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel
Mines and on Their Destruction.
26. The judges of the Constitutional Court pursue their work with efficiency
and professionalism. The judges participated in the Round Table on
Constitutional Justice, at which experts and judges of the constitutional courts
of both entities and from abroad also took part. However, so far the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities have not made any resources available to the
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
27. The Standing Committee for Military Matters held its fifth session on
11 February in Sarajevo at which NATO’s Bosnia Task Force made a presentation on
the proposed Security Cooperation Programme. The Committee endorsed two joint
statements - on the way ahead for military representation overseas, and on the
Mines and Ordnance Amnesty.
28. My Military Adviser has now handed over the chair of the secretariat of the
Standing Committee for Military Matters which consists of the three Presidential
/...

S/1998/314
English
Page 8

Military Advisers, to a new coordinator appointed in February to develop the
Standing Committee for Military Matters and its secretariat further. The
ultimate aim is to make the secretariat, and thereby the Committee, selfsustaining. In March the members of the secretariat paid a successful visit to
London where they had meetings in the Ministry of Defence, Foreign Office and
Houses of Parliament; the important themes of democratic control over armed
forces and Western approaches to arms control were discussed during the
meetings. Plans are now being drawn up to strengthen the secretariat with more
resources. Work is also being carried out to identify future work areas.
Unfortunately the sixth session of the Standing Committee for Military Matters,
scheduled for 31 March at Lukavica in the Republika Srpska, was not held owing
to a protocol dispute over the positioning of the new flag of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
Essential legislation
29. My Office, together with representatives of the relevant state and entity
ministries and international organizations, is working on legislation in the
field of telecommunications, civil aviation and immigration. The appropriate
draft laws will be forwarded to the Council of Ministers shortly. My Office and
the Council of Europe are also assisting the entities in elaborating harmonized
citizenship legislations. Since the beginning of March my Office is
coordinating the drafting of a number of commercial laws by USAID and the
European Commission.
30. Although the forthcoming general elections will still be held under the
Rules and Regulations of the Provisional Election Commission, a draft Election
Law for Bosnia and Herzegovina has been elaborated by my Office together with
OSCE and the Council of Europe and will be presented to the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities shortly.
31. My Office continues to be actively involved in media issues. An interim
regulatory and disciplinary body, the Intermediate Standards and Licensing
Commission is being established by my Office to regulate all media in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, including broadcast, print and emerging electronic outlets.
Additionally, it will require all broadcasters across the whole of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to be licensed to a set of minimum structural and editorial
standards of broadcasting. This will include a judicial body with powers of
sanction to ensure compliance. The Commission will be staffed by local and
international experts and officials and will include representatives of both
entities and state.
32. The Bosnia and Herzegovina education authorities should cooperate with the
entities in the field of higher education, particularly encouraging enrolment of
students from throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina and cooperating with the entity
authorities on the issue of financing. In this field, they should ensure
academic freedom and self-government of institutions, promote the adequate
graduation of trained professionals, and encourage the role of universities as a
locus of peaceful inter-group dialogue.

/...

S/1998/314
English
Page 9

Special parallel relationships and succession issues
33. The Special Parallel Relationship Agreements, respectively, between the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the Republika Srpska, and between the
Republic of Croatia and the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina have still not
been aligned with the Peace Agreement and the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitution. My Office has urged the parties to immediately resume the
activities of respective working groups, which my Office established in 1997.
34. Discussions on succession issues were held with all five States at plenary
meetings in Brussels from 4 to 6 February and from 25 to 27 March under the
chairmanship of the Special Negotiator for Succession Issues. They focused on a
possible agreement on certain specific succession issues such as archives,
citizenship, pensions, treaties and acquired rights as well as on possible
distribution of diplomatic and consular properties and some financial assets of
the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia abroad. A compromise
package was submitted to the five States by the Special Negotiator on which
their response is expected by the end of April. The Conclusions of the Bonn
Conference, namely access to records and data relevant to the settlement of
succession issues, were also discussed.
35. Other outstanding succession issues in the broader draft Framework
Agreement submitted last November by the Special Negotiator will also need to be
addressed in the future, as will the future course of the negotiations on these
issues.
Joint commissions
36. Activities of the Provisional Election Commission (Annex 3), chaired by
OSCE, are referred to in the elections sections of this report.
37. My Office is encouraged by progress made in recent months towards the goal
of securing adequate and stable funding for the Human Rights Chamber, the Human
Rights Ombudsperson and the Commission for Real Property Claims. In response to
my proposal to the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Conference, the
two largest donors (the European Union and the United States of America) have
pledged the full amount suggested under the funding key, and a number of other
Governments have made substantial contributions to the 1998 budgets of the
institutions. However, the commitment by the Bosnia and Herzegovina Government
to contribute DM 200,000 to each institution from its 1997 budget has not yet
been met. This failure is all the more troubling given that the contribution of
the Bosnia and Herzegovina Government is expected to increase incrementally with
a view to assuming full responsibility by the end of the five-year transition
period, as underscored by the Bonn Conclusions.
38. While the caseload of the three institutions is continuing to expand, there
is still a serious lack of cooperation on the part of the authorities in
ensuring that the decisions and recommendations of these institutions are
effectively implemented. Mechanisms to ensure respect for the final and binding
decisions of the Human Rights Chamber and the Commission for Real Property
Claims as well as implementation of recommendations by the Ombudsperson and the
Federation Ombudsmen should be strengthened. My Office is actively involved in
/...

S/1998/314
English
Page 10

monitoring authorities’ responses and coordinating intervention in cases in
which the authorities have failed to meet their obligations. The drafting of
implementing legislation for the Commission for Real Property Claims is under
way and legislation on behalf of the Commission on Human Rights may also be
necessary. Coordination among the institutions has improved and measurable
progress has been made in terms of the institutions’ impact in contributing to
the respect for human rights and the rule of law in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
39. At its seventh session held in Banja Luka on 11 March the Commission to
Preserve National Monuments in Bosnia and Herzegovina (Annex 8) has continued
its important work relating to the question of the restoration of cultural
heritage in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In particular, the Commission extended its
selection of monuments and sites to 70 properties in both entities.
40. Significant progress has been achieved by the Commission on Public
Corporations in the implementation of Annex 9 of the Peace Agreement, especially
in the organization and the operation of railways: inter-entity rail traffic
has resumed, albeit not regularly, and the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the Republika Srpska have recently signed an agreement establishing a joint
railway Public Corporation as part of the Transportation Corporation. There
also appears to be political will to create other joint public corporations:
work is continuing in the field of power (particularly transmission) and
discussions are taking place in other sectors. My Office remains involved in
this matter and actively supports the work of the Commission.
Elections
41. Since my last report, preparations for the 1998 general elections have
begun under the supervision of the Provisional Election Commission. On
11 March, the Commission agreed that elections will be held on 12 and
13 September for all levels of government with the exception of the municipal
level. However, elections will also be held for the 10 new municipalities in
the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina that have been constituted in
accordance with the recently adopted Law on Split and New Municipalities.
42. The membership of the Provisional Election Commission has been expanded to
include three additional, non-party- or government-affiliated members and their
deputies. This should bring more transparency to the electoral process and
diversify the discussions of the Commission.
43. The Provisional Election Commission has amended its rules pertaining to
membership in the local election commissions and is currently working on
amendments to the rules regulating political party and coalition registration.
The intent of these rules is to limit the number of frivolous parties
participating in the electoral process, to require parties to produce political
platforms that specify issues and adhere to the principles of the Peace
Agreement, and to provide more flexible coalition arrangements that will allow
opposition parties to establish themselves in the political landscape. While
the regulatory work of the Commission is moving forward, much still needs to be
completed in time for voter registration.

/...

S/1998/314
English
Page 11

44. In parallel with the preparation for general elections, the reporting
period has seen an intensive joint effort on the part of my Office and OSCE to
mediate in a large number of municipalities which had failed to meet the
criteria for final certification. It was agreed at the Bonn Conference that
municipalities where the requirements have not been fulfilled will be submitted
to OSCE and my Office for final and binding arbitration. Despite our mediation
efforts, nine municipalities had to be arbitrated.
45. The following municipalities went to arbitration: Bosanski Brod, Foca,
Gornji Vakuf, Kresevo, Novi Travnik, Prozor, Srebrenica, Stolac and Zepce. As
of the end of March the municipalities of Foca, Kresevo, Prozor and Srebrencia
have not implemented the arbitration awards. The arbitration awards are final
and binding and not open to appeal.
46. There is a continuing need to monitor the implementation of the municipal
election results. In the light of this, a decision was adopted in the
Provisional Election Commission whereby the OSCE Head of Mission, in his
capacity as Chairman of the Provisional Election Commission, will retain, for a
period of six months after final certification, the discretion to revoke final
certification from a municipality if it violates the rules and regulations or
acceptable conditions.
Federation issues
47.

My Office continued to focus attention on Federation issues.

48. Following the arbitration of my Office on the establishment of the new
municipality of Usora, the Law on Split and New Municipalities was adopted by
the Parliamentary Assembly in January. The adoption of this law had been
blocked for nearly a year and was a cause of serious disputes between the Party
of Democratic Action (SDA) and the Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ) which
hindered progress on other important issues.
49. The Parliamentary Assembly has, in addition, finally adopted the housing
and property legislation package, bringing it into line with Annex 7 (the Law
regulating Application of the Law on Temporarily Abandoned Real Property Owned
by Citizens, the Law on Cessation of the Application of the Law on Abandoned
Apartments and the Law on Taking Over the Law on Housing Relations).
Implementation of these laws will now have to be carefully monitored and, if
necessary, guided.
50. Through the intensive mediation of OSCE and my Office the 1997 municipal
election results have by March been successfully implemented. Several
Federation municipalities will have to be monitored to ensure observation of
inter-party agreements. It is hoped that the establishment of fully functioning
municipal authorities, representing both domestic and displaced residents, will
play an important role in the return process in the Federation.
51. The political and security situation in the Federation continued to improve
overall, despite security incidents and the lack of substantial progress in the
field of returns. The successful establishment of a joint police force in most

/...

S/1998/314
English
Page 12

of the cantons and recent progress in reforming the judicial systems in the two
cantons with a special regime has contributed to this atmosphere.
52. There is still evidence that structures of the "Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina" and the "Croat Republic of Herceg-Bosna" continue to operate
despite the fact that they should have been disbanded following the
establishment of Federation structures and common institutions of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. My Office will continue its efforts to disband these parallel
structures.
Republika Srpska
53. During the period under review, significant political developments have
taken place in the Republika Srpska. The new Government headed by Prime
Minister Dodik came to power on 18 January at the second session of the National
Assembly of the Republika Srpska, elected by a majority of deputies including
those having mostly been elected by displaced persons in the Federation. The
new Government was elected only after the former Pale-based leadership, through
the deputies of the Serbian Democratic Party (SDS) and the Serbian Radical Party
(SRS), had exhausted all means and possibilities of obstructing the vote. The
election of a new Government represents a major democratization step in the
Republika Srpska and likely a turning point for the overall implementation of
the Peace Agreement.
54. Owing not least to efforts by my Office, in close cooperation with SFOR and
IPTF, the election of the new Government did not lead to a much feared split of
the Republika Srpska into western and eastern parts nor to any active resistance
to it on the ground. With appropriate persuasion applied by my Office, both SDS
(which lost power for the first time since its establishment almost eight years
ago) and SRS decided not to opt for confrontation, but to assume the role of
opposition parties.
55. Although the new Government, which continues to be purely Serb, has only
been in office for little more than two months, it has already demonstrated its
resolve to undertake serious implementation efforts and improve inter-entity
cooperation. It has also started to address the serious social and economic
situation in the entity. Thanks to short-term budgetary support received from
international donors, whose release is administered and monitored by my Office,
the Government has managed to calm social tensions by paying long-standing
salaries to several categories of public employees.
56. By the end of March, the Government established full control over military,
police, judiciary and customs authorities as well as the public prosecutor’s
office. The most recent arrests of former customs officials and businessmen
charged with customs fraud and tax evasion represent a clear intention to fight
corruption and organized smuggling.
57. My Office provided some support to the new National Assembly of the
Republika Srpska in order to foster democratic practice and pluralism in the
Republika Srpska. In the reporting period, the Assembly held four sessions.
Despite its fairly fragile majority, the government coalition managed to adopt
several important decisions including the annulment of all laws adopted by the
/...

S/1998/314
English
Page 13

previous National Assembly since its official dissolution by Republika Srpska
President Plavsic in July 1997. The budget was also adopted as well as a
decision on the change of the seat of government and its institutions from Pale
to Banja Luka.
Media
58. My media strategy, which is based on three pillars, namely, (1) editorial
intervention and media restructuring and regulation, (2) encouragement of
independent media and the provision of alternative sources of information, and
(3) an extensive public service information campaign, is now fully under way.
Our primary aim is to break the monolithic control of media by government and
political parties and to reorganize the media landscape in line with
internationally recognized standards. Political control of information has
starved the population of Bosnia and Herzegovina of the knowledge necessary to
make informed judgements on the peace process. Redressing the balance of access
to objective information is my most urgent priority in the run up to the
September elections, and I believe our most effective means of accomplishing
this is support for this media strategy. It has to be stressed that adequate
funding of the strategy is urgently needed.
59. As regards the first pillar of my strategy, the situation with Srpska Radio
Television (SRT) has improved dramatically during the reporting period. The
restructuring of SRT is proceeding successfully and in accordance with the
Restructuring Agreement signed by the Republika Srpska. The International
Administrator is in place and receiving good cooperation. One of the first
indications of this cooperation was the return of equipment removed from Veliki
Zep. Talks are currently under way to ensure the security of the transmission
sites which will allow for a withdrawal of the SFOR troops from those locations.
In addition, the re-establishment of the entire SRT system has taken place with
direct links to regional studios, including Pale, again operational. The new
SRT Board of Governors recently appointed by the National Assembly in accordance
with the model recommended by my Office has adopted the SRT statute.
60. Following the success with the restructuring of SRT in the Republika
Srpska, the concentration of this effort will now be extended to the Federation.
The plan for restructuring Radio Television Bosnia and Herzegovina (RTV BH) has
already begun. Initial meetings have taken place with representatives of both
the main communities of the Federation with the aim of establishing a new
Federation television network based on a reorganized RTV BH which also
enfranchises the Croat opinion. It is also intended to engineer a third channel
which will form a cooperative venture between the new Federation television and
SRT that will create a genuine Bosnia and Herzegovina-wide television public
service broadcaster.
61. The Intermediate Media Standards and Licensing Commission will deal with
the broader issue of regulation of the media in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It will
aim to ensure that all broadcasters and media outlets will conform to a set of
minimum standards based on western democratic principles. The establishment of
this Commission is moving forward on schedule. A high-calibre team of expert
media consultants have been appointed to put together the necessary structure.
The Licensing Sub-Commission will be the first element to be established. The
/...

S/1998/314
English
Page 14

absorption of the OSCE Media Experts Commission will take place in a phased
fashion in consultation with OSCE. The Intermediate Media Standards and
Licensing Commission will remain in operation until a permanent statutory
commission or commissions are established under new entity and state laws on
media and telecommunications. In the interim, the Standards and Licensing
Commission will also be responsible for managing the transition to these
statutory structures and in the development of the necessary laws.
62. Concerning the second pillar of my strategy, the largest and most ambitious
independent media project is the Open Broadcast Network. A number of
independent surveys and research work, notably the Prism Research survey
commissioned by USAID, have found Open Broadcast Network to be making a serious
impact on the television scene in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Moreover, its
political relevance has been highlighted through statements by both Croatian
leaders and opposition politicians who acknowledge that the Network is one of
few outlets available for political debate outside the stranglehold of the
leading nationalist political parties. The biggest problem facing the Network
now is that of the unpredictability of funding flow. However indications are
that there is an increasing understanding in the international community of the
urgent need to keep this project afloat and I expect a healthy response to
outstanding funding requirements at the next media pledging meeting.
63. The Public Service Information Campaign makes up the third pillar of my
strategy. The intention is to provide clear information, unfettered by
political dogma, to the whole population of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
production elements are currently under way, with a team in theatre and working
closely with the international organizations. Preparation of the first pilot
programme and advertising strand is ongoing and completion of this phase is
expected soon.
Return of refugees and displaced persons
64. One of the major achievements during the reporting period was the Sarajevo
Return Conference held in February under the joint chairmanship of my Office,
the United States Government and the European Commission. The Conference agreed
on concrete steps to be taken by the authorities and the international community
to make Sarajevo a model canton for minority return and multinational
coexistence. While good progress has been made in education, employment and
demining, the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities have failed to deliver in the
critical sectors of housing and public security. My Office is considering
corrective measures in this regard.
65. Returns to Brcko have made further progress, with reconstruction
practically completed in the original six villages designated for the first
phase of returns. This phase has targeted previously destroyed areas on the
former front lines. The recently established multi-ethnic administration of
Brcko has been engaged in the efforts to address the more sophisticated
challenge of return close to areas inhabited by displaced persons and to the
town itself.
66. A partial return for 8 of 14 municipalities was adopted by the HerzegovinaNeretva Canton government on 20 March. Intensive negotiations to include the
/...

S/1998/314
English
Page 15

remaining six Mostar city - municipalities in the plan have been to no avail,
because of the refusal of the three Croat majority municipalities to cooperate
on the basis of the established principles.
67. I am encouraged that Stolac is making some progress on minority return
since the Mayor was removed at my request in early March. I am working closely
with SFOR and the HDZ leadership to ensure that the sporadic house-burnings that
continue to mar the area will be stopped definitively and with immediate effect.
Freedom of movement
68. On 2 February the Uniform Licence Plates system was introduced following a
closely coordinated effort by my Office and IPTF. An initial quota of 2,000
plates was issued to both the Federation and the Republika Srpska. In addition
my Office and IPTF have worked on a Common Vehicle Registration Document which
will be issued with the new licence plates. The second quota of some 200,000
licence plates is being printed and distributed all over the country.
69. The demand and the interest from car owners are enormous, representing a
strong desire for full freedom of movement. In spite of the new uniform licence
plate not yet being available in sufficient numbers, there has been a noticeable
increase of vehicles even with old plates crossing the inter-entity boundary
line.
70. Progress on freedom of movement for the Republika Srpska citizens of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and displaced Serbs from Croatia in the Republika Srpska across
the Bosnia and Herzegovina borders into Croatia has not been satisfactory. This
issue has repeatedly been addressed with the Croatian Government which continued
to uphold visa and other impediments.
71. On 25 February and 12 March 1998, the third and fourth meetings of the
Border Commission were held in Banja Luka and Slavonski Brod. Attention was
concentrated on customs and infrastructure. Commendable work on customs issues
continues to be done by the European Commission’s Customs and Fiscal Assistance
Office, with current efforts directed at the opening of border crossings between
the Republika Srpska and Croatia for high-duty goods. Provisions of veterinary
and phyto-sanitary facilities and restrictions at crossings have also been
addressed. Agreement on the opening of the Gradiska crossing for high-duty
goods and provision of veterinary examination facilities was reached. Such
operations began on 23 March.
72. Infrastructure issues continue to require attention. In the reporting
period, my Office has focused its efforts on opening up navigation on the Sava
River, resumption of railway traffic between Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia
and the reconstruction of bridges over the Una and Sava rivers. Protocols and
agreements are now being prepared which will improve prospects for freedom of
movement of persons and goods.
73. Police restructuring is still not finished in two of the Federation
cantons. On 6 February, my Office, jointly with IPTF, set out the concretized
implementation procedures to the Federation authorities to finish the process.
Also, after its completion in the two remaining cantons, IPTF will have to work
/...

S/1998/314
English
Page 16

closely with the Federation authorities to further professionalize the police
and to further diversify its national composition.
74. Police restructuring in the Republika Srpska is proceeding well, but not at
a sufficient pace.
Missing persons, mass graves
75. The issue of missing persons remains very sensitive and is frequently
manipulated by different actors for political purposes. The Working Group on
Missing Persons, chaired by the International Committee of the Red Cross,
continues to make it possible for representatives of the family associations to
have direct contact with the relevant local authorities.
76. An important step forward has been made by the Joint Exhumation Commission,
chaired by the Office of Human Resources. The Commission, comprising
representatives of the three parties, is the principal forum for inter-party
exhumations. During March exhumations it has become possible for the first time
to work without total reciprocity. The Republika Srpska team started
exhumations in Jajce on 2 March, the Croat team began exhumations in the area of
Kakanj two days later and the Bosniac team in West Mostar, in the middle of
March. The work continues in the same cooperative manner and so far
approximately 250 bodies have been exhumed in 20 to 30 micro locations in four
main areas since the beginning of March.
77. The exhumations are performed with the help of the international community.
Physicians for Human Rights assists with technical and scientific expertise,
sponsored by the International Commission on Missing Persons which also provides
funds for demining and forensic materials. The United Nations assists with mine
assessment visits to the sites and IPTF monitors the local police who are
responsible for security at the sites. SFOR provides area security and the
possibility for emergency evacuation.
Human rights
78. During the reporting period, there have been numerous incidents of
violations of freedom of movement during assessment visits of potential
returnees, as well as continued allegations of harassment and intimidation
against members of minority groups in all regions. Of particular concern is the
situation in Teslic municipality where there have been nine serious allegations
of police abuse since the current Chief of Police assumed his position in late
October 1997, including five cases since my last report. IPTF has conducted an
investigation into these cases as well as allegations of the failure of Teslic
local police to respond effectively to other human rights violations, and it is
essential that the recommendations included in the IPTF report be fully
implemented. Destruction of property and violence directed against returnees
and minority residents, in places such as Drvar, Stolac and Travnik, continues
to impede return of refugees and displaced persons.
79. Significant advances have been made with respect to property and housing
laws. Through the adoption of these laws, the Federation National Assembly has

/...

S/1998/314
English
Page 17

put in place the essential legal framework for return of refugees and displaced
persons to their pre-war homes.
80. The focus in the Federation has now turned to the difficult task of
ensuring that these laws are implemented thoroughly and promptly, in a manner
fully consistent with their letter and spirit. At the same time, the new
Government of Republika Srpska has established a working group to develop
property and housing law amendments. Initial drafts have been prepared, and my
Office is working with Republika Srpska authorities to ensure that the proposed
laws comply with Annex 7 and are consistent with laws adopted within the
Federation.
Strengthening the rule of law and cooperation with the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia
81. Judicial system reform remains a priority for 1998. Following the Bonn
Conclusions, a number of steps have been taken to ensure accelerated progress in
this field, including enhanced coordination of activities by my Office.
Effective monitoring of the judicial system is a precondition for this work, and
UNMIBH’s proposal for additional resources to undertake this critical task is
strongly supported.
82. Recent developments have again confirmed that the independence and
effectiveness of the judiciary remains compromised by flaws in the judicial
appointment process. A comprehensive process is needed to ensure that judicial
appointments are based on merit rather than political criteria, and to ensure
that all ethnic groups are fairly represented in the judicial system. At the
same time, training programmes for legal professionals, including the initiative
to establish a judicial training institute for Bosnia and Herzegovina, should be
supported. Efforts to establish an inter-entity commission for judicial
cooperation have moved forward, with the decision by the Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to establish the Commission. However, the necessary
appointments to the Commission have not yet been made, and the Commission is not
yet functioning.
83. In January, SFOR troops detained a Bosnian Serb in Bijeljina indicated by
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia for war crimes. At the
same time, cooperation with Republika Srpska authorities has increased
significantly with the voluntary surrender of three Bosnian Serbs to SFOR troops
in February and one Bosnian Serb in March. Nevertheless, two persons subject to
publicly disclosed indictments (both Croats) remain at large in the Federation,
while 47 Serbs publicly indicted by the Tribunal are not in custody.
84. Federation authorities arrested three Bosnian Serb men during the past
month on war crimes charges; one of them was subsequently released when the
investigating judge accepted his claim of mistaken identity. In one case, IPTF
has issued a report strongly criticizing the manner in which the arrest and
interrogation were conducted, and making broad recommendations for reform of
police procedures. While these arrests raised concerns under the Rome Agreement
(rules of the road), Federation authorities responded promptly to rectify the
problems identified. It is essential, however, that both the Federation and the
Republika Srpska follow the rules of the road to the letter, including the
/...

S/1998/314
English
Page 18

requirement that a file must be submitted and a response received from the
Tribunal Prosecutor prior to any arrest. My Office will continue to work to
ensure full understanding and implementation of the rules of the road in the
coming months.
85. My Office also remains actively involved in efforts currently under way to
reform the legal framework applicable to non-governmental organizations to
establish a proper legal and security environment which supports the development
of civil society organizations. Non-governmental organizations are vital to
pluralism and democracy and they are important vehicles for communication and
cooperation among the communities in the various regions of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The current legal framework hinders the development of such
organizations, in particular of those non-governmental organizations which
undertake country-wide activities. My Office supports locally based efforts to
develop a sound legislative framework which will regulate and stimulate
activities of non-governmental organizations such as trade unions, citizens
groups, cultural and sports associations in both entities. The authorities of
both the Republika Srpska and the Federation have acknowledged the need for such
a comprehensive, legislatory framework and have expressed willingness to be
supportive of this process.
Economic reform and reconstruction
86. The Bonn Conference demanded that the competent authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina reach agreement on several relevant issues in the field of economic
management. Considerable progress was made regarding the common currency, the
Law on Customs Tariffs, the Law on Foreign Investment, and the 1998 budgets of
the State and the entities.
87. As the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina could not come to a final
agreement on the designs for the common currency, I was compelled to use my
mandate for arbitration. The designs for the notes were presented to the public
and will be issued as of the beginning of May. The common currency will
facilitate trade between the entities, and will contribute to a mutual
strengthening of their economies.
88. At my request, the European Union and the Governments of Canada, the
Netherlands, Sweden, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America decided to provide extraordinary budgetary
support to the new Government of the Republika Srpska. The funds are used to
clear the arrears of salaries in all public sectors except for the Ministries of
the Interior and Defence. Contributions received to date amount to about
DM 18 million.
89. In the period under review, some important progress has been made on new
projects from major donors. The World Bank has started implementation of two
projects to which it pledged $27 million. Total costs will amount to
$109 million of which $65 million is for reconstruction in the Republika Srpska
and $44 million for a gas project in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Furthermore, Parliament has ratified an energy project of the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development worth $15 million and a telecommunications
project of $20 million is recently approved. The European Commission will sign
/...

S/1998/314
English
Page 19

contracts on 2 April worth $69 million. These contracts are part of an
integrated reconstruction and return programme with total project costs of
$141 million. This project will provide new housing for about 20,000 people.
Additionally, the European Commission has signed a memorandum of understanding
that it will continue the existing demining project of $11 million in 1998,
pledging an additional $2.7 million.
90. The 1998 budget of the Republika Srpska was adopted by the National
Assembly in March. The budget of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina is
about to be adopted by its Parliament. The two budgets have made provisions for
the State budget and the servicing of external debt. For both items there are
automatic transfers, as demanded by the Bonn Conference, but a final agreement
on this issue with the International Monetary Fund is not yet reached.
91. At my instigation the Government of the Republika Srpska has halted the
existing privatization programme. The process of privatization was lacking
transparency and therefore unacceptable. With the help of several international
donor agencies, a new programme is being designed which would facilitate the
transition towards a market economy based on private investment.
92. The programme of privatization in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
is still in the preparation phase. However, most of the essential laws have
been passed by Parliament. Some doubts have arisen as to the fate of assets
which were either socially owned or owned by the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina
in its previous internal structure of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The purpose of the privatization law is to create a secure legal environment for
the privatization process by the two entities.
93. The first post-war delivery of mail from Sarajevo to Banja Luka took place
in early February. Further negotiations by my Office led to an agreement on
25 March on the text of a memorandum of understanding concerning the resumption
of inter-entity mail transports. The parties stated a strong desire to move
forward and to look into options for restructuring the sector.
94. During the reporting period, inter-entity phone links were significantly
improved. As a result of the European Commission reconstruction project which
created a backbone in the Republika Srpska, three links each of 30 lines were
made operational at the end of March. My Office has negotiated for an
additional 30 lines between Sarajevo and Banja Luka to become available as from
the beginning of April. Also, the Telecommunications Commission has met twice
to discuss issues of inter-entity and international telecommunications.
Significant progress has also been made in developing a State-level law on
telecommunications.
95. In order to complete the new customs legal regime, a new customs code is
essential. A working group, with the help of experts from the European
Commission Customs and Fiscal Assistance Office, is close to an agreement on a
final text for the code. The new code will replace the existing interim Customs
Policy Law, and will introduce modern customs procedures based on the existing
European Customs Code and other international legislation.

/...

S/1998/314
English
Page 20

96. As part of efforts in the fight against corruption and diversion of funds
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, my Office chaired a conference on this topic in Mons,
Belgium. The conference was attended by SFOR, NATO, IPTF, the European
Commission, the World Bank, the United States Treasury, and USAID and focused on
the areas to be strengthened. My Office intends to activate its anti-fraud
unit, mainly tasked to support the judicial authorities in dealing with
corruption cases.
97. In May the fourth donor conference for Bosnia and Herzegovina could be
held, if preconditions including a letter of intent on a stand-by agreement from
the International Monetary Fund are fulfilled. The Conference will be organized
by the European Commission and the World Bank. The target set for international
aid at the end of the war was $5.1 billion. At the previous three Conferences,
donors pledged a total of $3.4 billion. I am confident that the upcoming
conference will show a continued willingness of the international community to
support the peace process.
98. Recently, my economic department has renewed the initiative of bringing
representatives of the two entities together regarding trade within the whole of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. So far, incompatible tax systems and a lack of
coordination have damaged trade and resulted in evasion of taxes. Policy
coordination should result in restored trade relations which will benefit both
the Federation and the Republika Srpska.
Civil aviation
99. There is some encouraging progress in civil aviation. More air companies
from European countries are preparing to fly into airports in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Arrangements between the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and commercial companies have led to Yugoslav
Airlines flying to Banja Luka, as well as Yugoslav and Bosnia and Herzegovina
air companies preparing joint ventures between Belgrade, Sarajevo and Banja Luka
and between Podgorica and Sarajevo. On 2 March, the Department of Civil
Aviation of Bosnia and Herzegovina signed a bilateral agreement with Eurocontrol
regarding overflight charges. As soon as respective rules are published in the
Official Gazette of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Eurocontrol will begin the
collection and distribution of fees. The average income for Bosnia and
Herzegovina is assessed to be about US$ 100,000 a month.
100. Despite extensive discussions and insistence by my Office, the Bosniac and
Bosnian Croat authorities could not find agreement on the modalities for opening
Mostar Airport. I have therefore imposed an interim solution in order to allow
for the opening of the airport in April for a period of six months. I shall
continue to press the parties to come to a permanent agreement within this time.
It is inconceivable that the international community should provide money to
help reconstruct Mostar while commercial opportunities are being thrown away.
Mine clearance
101. In response to the requirements of the Bonn Conference on landmines the
Federation and the Republika Srpska confirmed their full compliance in relation
to the anti-personnel mines. The Board of Donors has decided that in order to
/...

S/1998/314
English
Page 21

ensure international donor confidence on demining in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
authorities need to commit themselves on all landmines. Further clarification
is being pursued.
102. The Board of Donors has approved the Decree on the Establishment of the
Federation Mine Action Centre. The Federation has now adopted the Board’s draft
decree with some minor amendments and its official publication is expected
shortly.
103. The Government of the Republika Srpska has still not produced its Mine
Action Centre Decree and the Office of the High Representative is taking
measures to ensure its adoption.
104. Through the Board of Donors, there is now much improved coordination
between SFOR and civilian demining. In particular, SFOR is participating fully
in the formulation of the entity mine action plans and ensuring that entity
forces mine removal enhances civilian demining programmes.

IV.

COOPERATION WITH THE STABILIZATION FORCE

105. As the pace of civil implementation increases, my Office and SFOR continue
to work ever more closely together further enhancing their mutual cooperation.
The decision of the NATO Atlantic Council to extend the mandate of SFOR has been
instrumental in enabling all civilian agencies to make firm plans for 1998. The
secure environment that SFOR provides is the sine qua non of all current
progress, and is likely to remain so. Overall cooperation with, and support
from, SFOR continues to be outstanding.

-----
