A/RES/70/82

United Nations

Distr.: General
15 December 2015

General Assembly
Seventieth session
Agenda item 53

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 9 December 2015
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/70/495)]

70/82.

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 51/122 of 13 December 1996, 54/68 of 6 December
1999, 59/2 of 20 October 2004, 61/110 and 61/111 of 14 December 2006, 62/101 of
17 December 2007, 62/217 of 22 December 2007, 65/97 of 10 December 2010,
65/271 of 7 April 2011, 66/71 of 9 December 2011, 67/113 of 18 December 2012,
68/50 of 5 December 2013, 68/74 and 68/75 of 11 December 2013 and 69/85 of
5 December 2014,
Emphasizing the significant progress in the development of space science and
technology and their applications that has enabled humans to explore the universe,
and the extraordinary achievements made over the past 50 years in space
exploration efforts, including deepening the understanding of the planetary system
and the Sun and the Earth itself, in the use of space science and technology for the
benefit of all humankind and in the development of the international legal regime
governing space activities,
Recognizing, in that regard, the unique platform at the global level for
international cooperation in space activities represented by the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and its Scientific and Technical Subcommittee and Legal
Subcommittee and assisted by the Office for Outer Space Affairs of the Secretariat,
Welcoming the fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations Conference on the
Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, to be commemorated in 2018, which
will be an opportunity to consider the current status and chart the future of the
contribution of the Committee to global space governance, and for which the
Committee and its subsidiary bodies have set in motion the preparatory work for
their thematic sessions in 2018,
Deeply convinced of the common interest of all humankind in promoting and
expanding the exploration and use of outer space, as the province of all humankind,
for peaceful purposes and in continuing efforts to extend to all States the benefits
derived therefrom, and also of the importance of international cooperation in this
field, for which the United Nations should continue to provide a focal point,
Reaffirming the importance of international cooperation in developing the rule
of law, including the relevant norms of space law and their important role in
15-16836 (E)

*1516836*

Please recycle

A/RES/70/82

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space

international cooperation for the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful
purposes, and of the widest possible adherence to international treaties that promote
the peaceful uses of outer space in order to meet emerging new challenges,
especially for developing countries,
Seriously concerned about the possibility of an arms race in outer space, and
bearing in mind the importance of article IV of the Treaty on Principles Governing
the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the
Moon and Other Celestial Bodies, 1
Recognizing that all States, in particular those with major space capabilities,
should contribute actively to the prevention of an arms race in outer space with a
view to promoting and strengthening international cooperation in the exploration
and use of outer space for peaceful purposes,
Deeply concerned about the fragility of the space environment and the
challenges to the long-term sustainability of outer space activities, in particular the
impact of space debris which is an issue of concern to all nations,
Noting the progress achieved in the development of peaceful space exploration
and applications as well as in various national and cooperative space projects, and
the importance of further developing the legal framework to strengthen international
cooperation in space,
Convinced that space science and technology and their applications, such as
satellite communications, Earth observation systems and satellite navigation
technologies, provide indispensable tools for viable long-term solutions for
sustainable development and can contribute more effectively to efforts to promote
the development of all countries and regions of the world, and stressing in that
regard the need to harness the benefits of space technology towards implementing
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, 2
Seriously concerned about the devastating impact of disasters, 3 and desirous of
enhancing international coordination and cooperation at the global level in disaster
management and emergency response through greater access to and use of spacebased services and geospatial information for all countries and facilitating capacitybuilding and institutional strengthening for disaster management, in particular in
developing countries,
Firmly convinced that the use of space science and technology and their
applications in areas such as tele-health, tele-education, disaster management,
environmental protection, natural resources management and ocean and climate
monitoring contribute to achieving the objectives of the global conferences of the
United Nations that address various aspects of economic, social and cultural
development, particularly poverty eradication,
Deeply concerned about the devastating effects of infectious diseases,
including Ebola virus disease, to the detriment of human life, society and
development, and urging the international community to enhance the role of spacebased solutions, in particular tele-epidemiology, in monitoring, preparedness and
response activities,

_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 610, No. 8843.
Resolution 70/1.
3
The term “disasters” refers to natural or technological disasters.
2

2/7

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space

A/RES/70/82

Recalling the fact that the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012, recognized
the important role that space science and technology play in promoting sustainable
development, 4
Having considered the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space on the work of its fifty-eighth session, 5
1.
Endorses the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space on the work of its fifty-eighth session;5
2.
Agrees that the Committee, at its fifty-ninth session, should consider the
substantive items recommended at its fifty-eighth session, 6 taking into account the
concerns of all countries, in particular those of developing countries;
3.
Notes that, at its fifty-fourth session, the Legal Subcommittee of the
Committee continued its work, 7 as mandated by the General Assembly in its
resolution 69/85;
Agrees that the Legal Subcommittee, at its fifty-fifth session, should
4.
consider the substantive items and reconvene the working groups recommended by
the Committee, 8 taking into account the concerns of all countries, in particular those
of developing countries;
5.
Urges States that have not yet become parties to the international treaties
governing the uses of outer space 9 to give consideration to ratifying or acceding to
those treaties in accordance with their national law, as well as incorporating them
into their national legislation;
Notes with satisfaction that the space law curriculum developed by the
6.
Office for Outer Space Affairs of the Secretariat and published in all official
languages of the United Nations could encourage further studies within States in
cooperation with relevant entities in support of capacity-building efforts in space
law and policy;
7.
Notes that, at its fifty-second session, the Scientific and Technical
Subcommittee of the Committee continued its work, 10 as mandated by the General
Assembly in its resolution 69/85;

_______________
4

Resolution 66/288, annex, para. 274.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/70/20).
6
Ibid., para. 360.
7
Ibid., chap. II.C; and A/AC.105/1090.
8
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/70/20), paras. 266–271.
9
Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space,
including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 610, No. 8843);
Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, the Return of Astronauts and the Return of Objects Launched into
Outer Space (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 672, No. 9574); Convention on International Liability for
Damage Caused by Space Objects (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 961, No. 13810); Convention on
Registration of Objects Launched into Outer Space (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1023, No. 15020);
and Agreement Governing the Activities of States on the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies (United
Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1363, No. 23002).
10
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/70/20), chap. II.B;
and A/AC.105/1088.
5

3/7

A/RES/70/82

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space

8.
Agrees that the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee, at its fifty-third
session, should consider the substantive items and reconvene the working groups
recommended by the Committee, 11 taking into account the concerns of all countries,
in particular those of developing countries;
9.
Reiterates the importance of information-sharing in discovering,
monitoring and physically characterizing potentially hazardous near-Earth objects to
ensure that all countries, in particular developing countries with limited capacity in
predicting and mitigating a near-Earth object impact, are aware of potential threats,
emphasizes the need for capacity-building for effective emergency response and
disaster management in the event of a near-Earth object impact, and notes with
satisfaction the establishment of and work carried out by the International Asteroid
Warning Network and the Space Mission Planning Advisory Group to implement the
recommendations for an international response to the near-Earth object impact
threat; 12
10. Notes with appreciation that some States are already implementing space
debris mitigation measures on a voluntary basis, through national mechanisms and
consistent with the Space Debris Mitigation Guidelines of the Inter-Agency Space
Debris Coordination Committee and with the Space Debris Mitigation Guidelines of
the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, 13 endorsed by the General
Assembly in its resolution 62/217, and invites other States to implement, through
relevant national mechanisms, the Space Debris Mitigation Guidelines of the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space;
11. Considers that it is essential that States pay more attention to the problem
of collisions of space objects, especially those with nuclear power sources, with
space debris, and other aspects of space debris, calls for the continuation of national
research on this question, for the development of improved technology for the
monitoring of space debris and for the compilation and dissemination of data on
space debris, also considers that, to the extent possible, information thereon should
be provided to the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee, and agrees that
international cooperation is needed to expand appropriate and affordable strategies
to minimize the impact of space debris on future space missions;
12. Urges all States, in particular those with major space capabilities, to
contribute actively to the goal of preventing an arms race in outer space as an
essential condition for the promotion of international cooperation in the exploration
and use of outer space for peaceful purposes;
13. Requests the Committee to continue to consider, as a matter of priority,
ways and means of maintaining outer space for peaceful purposes and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session, and agrees that the
Committee should continue to consider the broader perspective of space security
and associated matters that would be instrumental in ensuring the safe and
responsible conduct of space activities, including ways to promote international,
regional and interregional cooperation to that end;
14. Notes with satisfaction that the Committee, at its fifty-eighth session,
endorsed the plan of work of the fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations
_______________
11

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/70/20), paras. 192–195.
Ibid., para. 153; ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/68/20), para. 144; and A/AC.105/1038,
para. 198, and annex III.
13
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/62/20), annex.
12

4/7

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space

A/RES/70/82

Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space in 2018
(UNISPACE+50), welcomes the establishment of the steering committee for the
preparations for UNISPACE+50 composed of the members of the bureaux of the
Committee and its subsidiary bodies (the Group of 15), the Chairs of the working
groups of the Committee and its subsidiary bodies and the Director of the Office for
Outer Space Affairs, and encourages the steering committee to work with other
experts, as appropriate; 14
15. Recognizes the central role of the Office for Outer Space Affairs in
fostering capacity-building in the use of space science and technology and their
applications for the benefit of all countries, in particular developing countries, and
urges all Member States to contribute to the Trust Fund in Support of the United
Nations Programme on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space in order to enhance the
capacity of the Office to provide technical and legal advisory services in its priority
thematic areas;
16. Endorses the United Nations Programme on Space Applications for 2016,
as endorsed by the Committee; 15
17. Notes with satisfaction the significant achievements made and the
advisory support provided to 35 Member States within the framework of the United
Nations Platform for Space-based Information for Disaster Management and
Emergency Response (UN-SPIDER), with the valuable contributions of its network
of regional support offices, and encourages Member States, on a voluntary basis, to
provide the programme with the additional resources necessary to address the
increasing demand for support successfully and in a timely manner;
18. Welcomes the adoption of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction 2015–2030, 16 in which the value of space-based technology and Earth
observation for disaster management and emergency response is recognized, and
notes with satisfaction the efforts of the Office for Outer Space Affairs and its
UN-SPIDER programme towards promoting international cooperation as a way to
enhance the use of space-based technologies and related services at the national and
local levels;
19. Notes with satisfaction the continuous progress made by the International
Committee on Global Navigation Satellite Systems with the support of the Office
for Outer Space Affairs, in its capacity as executive secretariat of the International
Committee, towards achieving compatibility and interoperability among global and
regional space-based positioning, navigation and timing systems and in the
promotion of the use of global navigation satellite systems and their integration into
national infrastructure, particularly in developing countries, and notes with
appreciation that the International Committee marks its tenth anniversary in 2015
and will hold its tenth meeting in Boulder, United States of America, from 1 to
6 November 2015;
20. Notes with appreciation that the regional centres for space science and
technology education, affiliated to the United Nations, namely, the African regional
centres for space science and technology education in the French and English
languages, located in Morocco and Nigeria, respectively, the Regional Centre for

_______________
14

Ibid., Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/70/20), paras. 350 and 351.
Ibid., para. 79.
16
Resolution 69/283, annex II.
15

5/7

A/RES/70/82

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space

Space Science and Technology Education for Asia and the Pacific, located in China,
the Centre for Space Science and Technology Education in Asia and the Pacific,
located in India, the Regional Centre for Space Science and Technology Education
for Latin America and the Caribbean, with campuses located in Brazil and Mexico,
and the Centre for Space Science and Technology Education for Western Asia,
located in Jordan, have continued their education programmes in 2015, encourages
the regional centres to continue to promote greater participation of women in their
education programmes, and agrees that the regional centres should continue to
report to the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space on their activities;
21. Emphasizes that regional and interregional cooperation in the field of
space activities is essential to strengthen the peaceful uses of outer space, assist
States in the development of their space capabilities and contribute to the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,2 to that end
requests relevant regional organizations and their groups of experts to offer the
assistance necessary so that countries can carry out the recommendations of regional
conferences, and in that regard notes the importance of the equal participation of
women in all fields of science and technology;
22. Recognizes, in that regard, the important role played by organizations
such as the Asia-Pacific Space Cooperation Organization and the European Space
Agency and by conferences and other mechanisms such as the African Leadership
Conference on Space Science and Technology for Sustainable Development, the
Asia-Pacific Regional Space Agency Forum and the Space Conference of the
Americas in strengthening regional and international cooperation among States;
23. Emphasizes the need to increase the benefits of space technology and its
applications and to contribute to an orderly growth of space activities favourable to
sustained economic growth and sustainable development in all countries, including
strengthening sustainable spatial data infrastructure at the regional and national
levels and building resilience to reduce the consequences of disasters, in particular
in developing countries;
24. Reiterates the need to promote the benefits of space technology and its
applications in the major United Nations conferences and summits for economic,
social and cultural development and related fields, and recognizes that the
fundamental significance of space science and technology and their applications for
global, regional, national and local sustainable development processes should be
promoted in the formulation of policies and programmes of action and their
implementation, including through efforts towards achieving the objectives of those
conferences and summits and in implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development;
25. Encourages Member States, to that end, to promote the inclusion in those
conferences, summits and processes of the relevance of space science and
technology applications and the use of space-derived geospatial data, with the
involvement of the Office for Outer Space Affairs;
26. Encourages the Office for Outer Space Affairs to take active part in those
conferences, summits and processes, and other activities in support of the objectives
of UNISPACE+50, as appropriate;
27. Urges the Inter-Agency Meeting on Outer Space Activities (UN-Space),
under the leadership of the Office for Outer Space Affairs, to continue to examine
how space science and technology and their applications could contribute to the
6/7

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space

A/RES/70/82

2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and encourages entities of the United
Nations system to participate, as appropriate, in UN-Space coordination efforts;
28. Notes with satisfaction that the Office for Outer Space Affairs will issue
a special report by UN-Space for consideration by the Committee at its fifty-ninth
session on the implementation of the report of the Group of Governmental Experts
on Transparency and Confidence-building Measures in Outer Space Activities 17 as
pertaining to the United Nations system, and coordinate the preparation of that
report with relevant United Nations entities; 18
29. Encourages the Office for Outer Space Affairs to conduct capacitybuilding and outreach activities associated with space security and transparency and
confidence-building measures in outer space activities, as appropriate, and within
the context of the long-term sustainability of outer space activities;
30. Welcomes the agreement of the Committee and its Legal Subcommittee,
at their respective sessions in 2015, to discontinue the use of unedited transcripts
and to use digital recordings on a permanent basis and that the digital recording
application should be further enhanced; 19
31. Endorses the composition of the bureaux of the Committee and its
subcommittees for the period 2016–2017, and reiterates that the Committee and its
subcommittees, at their respective sessions in 2016, should elect their officers
nominated for that period; 20
32. Encourages the regional groups to promote active participation in the
work of the Committee and its subsidiary bodies by the States members of the
Committee that are also members of the respective regional groups.
70th plenary meeting
9 December 2015

_______________
17

A/68/189.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/70/20), para. 339.
19
Ibid., para. 355.
20
Resolution 69/85, paras. 29–31; Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session,
Supplement No. 20 (A/70/20), paras. 353 and 354; and official communication from the Office for Outer
Space Affairs to States members of the Committee dated 29 July 2015.

18

7/7
