S/2021/266

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 March 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 18 March 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen; Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator; and Ms. Nirvana Shawky, CARE’s Regional Director for the Middle
East and North Africa, as well as the statements delivered by the representatives
of China, Estonia, France, India, Ireland, Kenya, Mexico, the Niger, Norway, the
Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Viet Nam
in connection with the video-teleconference on “The situation in the Middle East
(Yemen)” convened on Tuesday, 16 March 2021. A statement was also delivered by
the representative of Yemen.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of
the Security Council addressed to Permanent Representatives of the members of
the Council dated 7 May 2020 (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of the
extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, these
briefings and statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Linda Thomas-Greenfield
President of the Security Council

21-03775 (E) 230321 220421

*2103775*

S/2021/266

Annex I
Briefing by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
Martin Griffiths
Unfortunately, I am returning to the Security Council yet again to report a
deterioration of the conflict in Yemen. This time, it is quite a dramatic deterioration.
Ansar Allah’s offensive on Ma’rib governorate continues, putting civilians, including
an estimated 1 million internally displaced persons, at risk. Fighting forces on both
sides have suffered heavy losses. I see shocking reports of children increasingly
getting drawn into the war effort and deprived of their future.
Cross-border attacks also increased significantly in recent weeks. I am
concerned by the intensification of missile and drone strikes, including ones that have
targeted civilian and commercial infrastructure in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
Subsequently, airstrikes took place within the confines of Sana’a city, endangering
civilians there as well. We are also seeing other fronts in Yemen opening up,
including with military escalations in Hajjah and Taiz.
In Al-Hudaydah, there has been a troubling continuation of violence, causing
civilian deaths and injuries, including women and children. I join Lieutenant General
Guha, Head of the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement
(UNMHA), in condemning attacks that endanger civilians. UNMHA continues its
efforts to reactivate the Redeployment Coordination Committee and its subsidiary
joint mechanisms and to achieve a more balanced mission footprint across the
territory of Al-Hudaydah. I encourage the parties to work constructively with the
Mission to make progress in those regards.
Even as the conflict intensifies, acute fuel shortages for civilians persist in
Sana’a and the surrounding governorates. Fuel imports have not been permitted
to enter Al-Hudaydah since January. This has contributed to the increase in the
cost of basic commodities and put hospitals and services at risk. This is simply
unacceptable on humanitarian grounds, and the United Nations has consistently
drawn the attention of the Council to these issues. It is vital that obstacles to imports
and domestic distribution of fuel for civilian use be removed. I call on the parties to
prioritize civilian needs above all else and not to weaponize the economy.
As a result, I call here on the Government of Yemen to urgently permit the
entry of fuel ships to Al-Hudaydah. There should be no further delay. The revenues
stemming from the fees and taxes of the oil ships should be exclusively used for
the payment of the salaries of civil servants based on the 2014 payroll database. I
hope the parties will engage constructively with United Nations efforts to find a
sustainable solution to this critical humanitarian issue.
The situation in Aden and the surrounding governorates remains difficult. It
is encouraging that the new Cabinet continues to execute its functions from inside
Yemen. This is good for State institutions and the overall prospects for peace in
Yemen. But it is clear that improving basic services, including access to electricity,
making sure that salaries will be paid to Government employees without further
delay, ensuring security and stabilizing the economy will require more resources.
Such resources are currently in short supply.
It is not only Yemenis who are suffering in Yemen. The world was reminded
of the plight of the migrant community last week when a horrific fire broke out at
a detention facility in Sana’a holding predominantly Ethiopian migrants. Dozens
were killed in the fire, and over 170 seriously injured. There must be an independent
investigation into the cause of the fire. All people in Yemen, regardless of nationality,
must be afforded protection and kept safe.
2/32

21-03775

S/2021/266

Allow me to turn to the proposed way forward. There have been many reports
and much public commentary of late on the efforts being made to bring an end to the
fighting and to the need for the launch of the political process. I would like here to
clarify for the Council my own appreciation of the situation.
We are often, and rightly, reminded that Yemen is the world’s largest
humanitarian disaster and that famine has now arrived to add to the tragedy of
Yemen. In this connection, Mark Lowcock often reminds us of the link between the
incidence of famine and the places where the war is hottest. So it has been incumbent
upon the parties for a long time, and now more than ever, to agree to stop the fighting,
to silence the guns. A nationwide ceasefire, along with opening Sana’a airport and
ensuring the unhindered flow of fuel and other commodities into Yemen through the
Al-Hudaydah ports, are urgent humanitarian imperatives. These measures will ease
the impact of the conflict on civilians and facilitate Yemenis’ right to the freedom of
movement. We must do all we can to allow Yemen to breathe.
In addition to these humanitarian considerations, my particular task is to
help the parties to end the conflict, and that can come about only through resolving
their differences through negotiation. This is my focus, and this is why I include
the resumption of an inclusive political process to the three humanitarian priorities
listed above. Hence the urgent agenda of the United Nations for negotiations are
four issues, three of them are humanitarian and one the launch of the much-delayed
political process.
I must, however, clarify that there can be no preconditions for resuming the
political process. Resuming the process and engaging seriously in it is an obligation
upon the warring parties. And they must engage constantly and seriously at all stages
with the United Nations to make this happen. They owe it to the Yemeni people to
provide hope that there is an end in sight to this conflict. I am alarmed that the mere
fact of meeting across the table to discuss the contours of ending the war is being
framed as a concession rather than an obligation.
We have been pursuing this agenda with renewed vigour these past weeks.
We are fortunate to work closely with key Member States on these issues, and
their engagement gives us all more energy and a great deal more hope. I want to
particularly thank you, Madam President, and your Government for your support
in recent weeks and for the tireless efforts of your Special Envoy, Tim Lenderking.
I wish that today I could bear glad tidings. But we are not there yet. We know
what the Council wants. We know what the international community wants. We
know what the people of Yemen want. An end to all this misery, to the lives thrown
away for illusory military gains and to the tragedy of Yemen’s families desperate for
that end and a way out of this misery. To them, to us all, we say those glad tidings
cannot come a day too soon.

21-037753/32

S/2021/266

Annex II
Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mark Lowcock
We and my colleagues in the leadership of the humanitarian system have been
warning you for a long time now that Yemen is speeding towards a massive famine
and that the main reason that things have got so much worse on the humanitarian side
is because of the shortage of resources.
As you know, on 1 March, the Secretary-General convened a pledging
event for Yemen, co-hosted by Sweden and Switzerland. Several donors, including
Canada, France, Germany and Japan, pledged more than ever at that event. I released
another $40 million from the Central Emergency Response Fund, and the Yemen
Humanitarian Fund just allocated $73 million.
All together, the event on 1 March raised $1.7 billion. But that is less than
half of what we need for this year’s response plan. It is nearly $1 billion less than we
received in 2019. And it will mean that we will not reverse the protracted process
of prolonged starvation that millions of people across Yemen have been subject
to, ending in their death, especially for women and children, an experience I have
described to you before. So what we had on 1 March was a down payment, and more
efforts will be needed.
Of course, money is not the only factor. I want to echo everything Martin
Griffiths said about the Ansar Allah offensive in Ma’rib. Particularly, we are
concerned about the 1 million people who already fled from other places to Ma’rib.
There is additional displacement already as a result of the ongoing onslaught. It is,
at the moment, at a relatively low level — about 15,000 people — as a result of the
current battle. But what we are worried about is that, if the escalation continues, the
numbers of people will mount exponentially. And, as Martin also said, hostilities
in Ma’rib have also set off escalations elsewhere, notably in Taiz, Al-Hudaydah
and Hajjah.
I also want to echo everything Martin said about the plight of refugees, asylum
seekers and migrants. I completely agree with everything he said to you about the
devastating fire that ripped through an overcrowded migrant detention centre in
Sana’a on 7 March.
But we also saw, on 4 March, at least 20 people drown when human traffickers
forced dozens of passengers to jump off a crowded boat bound for Yemen. And that
was the third such drowning in six months.
And, as Martin said, everybody in Yemen, wherever they originate from,
is entitled to protection and support. And we urge all of the authorities across
the country to reduce the hurdles that humanitarian agencies face in helping
those people.
Let me say a few words next on humanitarian access. The Government of
Yemen has been working with us recently to address several ongoing concerns, all
which I talked about before, on things like project approvals and other administrative
constraints. They have also been working with us in a crucial way on preparing for
a planned coronavirus disease vaccination campaign.
We continue to face many obstacles in the north. Last year, as we told you
previously, we did see important improvements on key issues such as assessments
and biometric targeting. And that process needs to continue.
I want to say a few words about the economic situation. Again, building on
what Martin said, because the economic collapse is a major driver of the ongoing
4/32

21-03775

S/2021/266

progress and expansion of the potentially huge famine. The economic collapse
also fuels instability, by the way, as is evidenced by the recent protests which
Martin referred.
There are two straightforward things to do to mitigate the dire straits of
Yemen’s economy. The first is to strengthen the currency, the Yemeni rial, which
slipped again into an alarming depreciation in recent months, which means that more
and more people can no longer afford food or other essential items. We know that, in
the past, the provision of foreign exchange has stabilized the currency, and we know
it can do it again. And I have discussed this in detail with the Prime Minister and
others in the Government, and we know they want help in this area. And I do really
urge Yemen’s partners to address this request with the seriousness and importance
that it deserves.
The other issue that needs to be addressed relates to the blockade of commercial
imports, which Martin referred to, especially the decision by the Government of
Yemen and others not to allow fuel into Al-Hudaydah. Fuel, as everybody knows
and understands, is essential if you want to transport food, or pump water or keep
hospitals open.
Fuel prices have doubled or tripled in some areas as a result of the desperate
shortages that there now are. And that, of course, is also pushing up prices of food
and health care and everything else. We have, in fact, seen more reports of health
facilities closing down in the last several weeks because they have run out of fuel.
Now the Government has blocked all commercial fuel imports to Al-Hudaydah,
through which more than half of Yemen’s fuel imports come. All of those imports
have been blocked since January.
And right now, there are 13 fuel ships waiting outside Al-Hudaydah, carrying
enough supplies for about two months. On average, those ships have been waiting
more than 80 days for Government clearance. All of them, by the way, have been
inspected and cleared by the United Nations Verification and Inspection Mechanism.
You are all familiar with the origins of this problem — the dispute between
the Government and Ansar Allah over revenue. But the consequences of this, as
always in Yemen, are not borne by those making the decisions. The consequences
are borne by ordinary Yemenis. And this again contributes to the protractive process
of prolonged starvation I described earlier.
Let me, finally, reinforce what Martin said about the need for progress towards
peace. And I again repeat that, in our view, the renewed United States commitment
to a diplomatic solution and the United States focus on the humanitarian tragedy
of Yemen does provide the best opportunity we have seen for years to resolve the
conflict, get the parties to the table and find a way forward for the people in the
country. And that is still true despite the recent escalation.
But that opportunity needs to be taken. It will not be possible to take it if
Yemen tips into a huge famine, so we have to stop the famine.
But the parties need to engage in the peace process as well and, in order to
do that, Ansar Allah has to stop the dangerous Ma’rib offensive. The fuel blockade
on Al-Hudaydah needs to end, commercial goods must be let in and Yemen needs
a nationwide ceasefire — not just in Ma’rib but across the country — and, to say it
again, a return to the political process.

21-037755/32

S/2021/266

Annex III
Briefing by the CARE Regional Director for the Middle East and
North Africa, Nirvana Shawky
I am honoured to address the Security Council today on behalf of my
organization, CARE, and the humanitarian community in Yemen.
After the Second World War, CARE was established to help Europeans who
were living in hunger and poverty. Today we are assisting people in Yemen suffering
the same anguish — 16 million people are hungry, and four in five Yemenis live
below the poverty line.
CARE has been in Yemen for almost 30 years, since 1992, and last year we
were fortunate to deliver humanitarian and development assistance to almost 3
million people in 14 governorates across the country.
We have over 400 staff members, the vast majority of whom are Yemenis
living and working close to the people they support. It is on their behalf that I have
the privilege to speak to you today and share their perspectives from the ground.
So what is the general mood in Yemen? My colleagues tell me, “We have heard
countless times in the past six years about opportunities for peace in Yemen. We
hear that, with sufficient will and effort from the international community, the war in
Yemen can be ended”. However, despite moments like the signing of the Stockholm
Agreement and the Riyadh agreement, this sense of optimism is not sustained.
My Yemeni colleagues tell me that, every time they hear these speeches and
statements, they feel hopeful. Every time, they think it means that the conflict is
finally coming to an end. And then the attacks and fighting resume, the war enters
a new year, new front lines are opened and the brutal reality swiftly replaces any
fleeting hope. It is hard to imagine the toll this takes on people’s psychological
well-being.
As we enter the seventh year of the conflict, there are millions of Yemeni
children and teenagers who struggle to remember life without insecurity and food
shortages, and millions of parents are constantly suffering psychological trauma.
In addition to the violence, funding cuts to the humanitarian response are
taking an enormous toll on Yemenis. For our Yemeni colleagues, who often support
more than 20 people in their extended families, these cuts are deeply unsettling and
anxiety-provoking. They worry that more cuts will mean they can no longer provide
the necessities to their families.
I would like to take this opportunity to update you about the situation on the
ground. Over the past few weeks, as fighting has intensified on the front lines in
Ma’rib, the focus has rightly turned to the risks that face internally displaced people
in camps and settlements scattered across the governorate and the country.
Four million people have been displaced from all over the country since the
beginning of the conflict, in 2015, and just under one third of displaced households
are headed by women or girls. My colleagues working in governorates like Ma’rib
and Hajjah, which see the highest numbers of internally displaced people, tell me that
displaced women and girls suffer the most from a lack of privacy without substantial
shelters or proper latrines, as well as threats to their safety and limited access to
basic services, making them even more vulnerable to violence and abuse.
They heard of one woman, a widow with three daughters — aged 14, 15
and 16 — who had fled from fighting in Taiz. They were living in a very basic
shelter without doors or windows, leaving the girls extremely exposed and at risk of
6/32

21-03775

S/2021/266

harassment. For this woman, the only way to protect her girls was to marry them to
much older men.
We all know that life is much harder if you are displaced even once — you lose
your home, your community, possessions, livestock and identification documents.
Imagine, then, having to flee for multiple times — two, three or even four times. You
have nothing. You may manage only to carry around necessities like two or three
kitchen items, some dirty bedding and precious family photographs.
One man, Ali Nasser, told our field staff that he and his family fled from
airstrikes in Medghal district to seek refuge in Ma’rib city last year. Ali Nasser’s
wife told us, “We ran for our lives when fighting suddenly broke out in our area. I
needed help because my son is mentally ill and has diabetes. We stayed in an empty
cramped room for about a month. Then we came here to Ma’rib city and we ended
up living on the sand.”
Families’ coping mechanisms have become increasingly desperate over the
past year, as the impacts of funding cuts, the blockade and a lack of remittances take
their toll on food prices and their ability to buy food. As Mr. Lowcock has told the
Council, people are already dying of acute malnutrition in parts of Yemen. The latest
data show that 2.25 million children and over 1 million pregnant women and new
mothers are severely malnourished and at risk of starvation.
Take, for example, the story of Samer, a new-born baby in Al-Hudaydah. His
mother, who could not breastfeed him because she was malnourished herself, had
to use poor-quality baby formula, which meant Samer suffering from severe acute
malnutrition as well. Luckily, he is receiving treatment, which means he will live to
see his next birthday. But there are thousands of Yemeni children who do not share
his luck.
As these stories show you, we see how women and children suffer the most —
from higher levels of malnutrition, less access to food and health care and increased
exposure to gender-based violence. This is why it is crucial to equip women and
young people with skills to enable them to earn an income and lead safe, secure and
dignified lives. This is where CARE tries to support.
Another point to bring to your attention is the state of Yemen’s economy.
Before the current conflict, Yemen was exporting oil and gas, which generated
enough revenue for the country. But since 2015 those exports have reduced to a
trickle. Large oil and gas companies have not resumed their activities, even in areas
without active conflict If they were to resume, it would help to stabilize the economy.
It would also provide fuel for electricity power stations and enable civil servant
salaries to be paid. All of this would help to lower the price of food and essential
needs in Yemen. It is impossible to imagine any kind of future for Yemen without
stressing the need to support and strengthen the economy.
The conflict has left communities to face increasing health risks, often
aggravated by a lack of money to buy medicine or travel to clinics, as well as the
simple but deadly threat of poor water and sanitation services. One of our staff in
Hajjah told me, for example, that people depend on rainwater ponds as their only
source of water for drinking, cleaning and washing. She said that usually the ponds
are full of rubbish and worms and can cause serious illnesses, including cholera and
typhoid, which already malnourished people do not have the immune systems to
fight. But they have no other choice.
Last year the humanitarian community implemented effective coronavirus
(COVID-19)disease prevention programming, but with a second wave of COVID-19 on
the horizon, people are worried that the meagre health facilities will be overwhelmed.
21-037757/32

S/2021/266

Given my remarks today, you will not be surprised to hear that I support the
recommendations just outlined by Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Lowcock.
On behalf of my Yemeni colleagues, my request to the Council is to please
remember that the needs of the Yemeni people are simple. They want to be able to
go to the market with enough money to buy food. They want to be able to educate
their children instead of sending them to work, or to fight or to beg, or having
to marry them off. For this we urge the Council to address the following three
pressing priorities.
First, the Council should address economic stabilization and recovery as a
fundamental and urgent priority, to allow Yemenis to escape the cycle of poverty and
to live with the choices and dignity that we take for granted elsewhere.
Secondly, the humanitarian response, which as you all know is the lifeline for
millions of people, must be fully funded. As Mr. Lowcock just explained, the morethan $2 billion funding gap must be filled. While improving humanitarian access
is an absolute necessity, which Security Council members must endeavour to assist
us with, we must always prioritize the needs of those who have no alternatives to
humanitarian aid for survival.
Thirdly, as a matter of urgency, the Security Council should exercise its
responsibility to end this dreadful conflict once and for all and support Yemenis to
regain peace, stability and prosperity.
The hopes of Yemenis are universal; they are not asking for anything beyond
what most of us take for granted. But their futures are all contingent on the conflict
ending. Yemeni people live on the hope that life will be better one day. This is
what keeps everyone going and helps them to support each other as communities
and families.
Please help to provide some light to the Yemeni people, who have been living
in the darkness of this conflict for far too long. They are depending on you all.

8/32

21-03775

S/2021/266

Annex IV
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Geng Shuang
[Original: English and Chinese]
I would like to thank Special Envoy Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock and Ms. Shawky for their briefings. Their briefings show us that Yemen
still faces complex and grave political security and humanitarian challenges. The
international community should strengthen unity and pull together for an early and
comprehensive solution to the Yemen issue.
First, military clashes and all hostilities must be immediately stopped. The
protracted conflict in Yemen has caused huge losses for all parties and untold
suffering for its people. Facts have repeatedly proven that military means cannot
resolve the problem. Instead, war can lead only to disasters. Since last year, the
United Nations has vigorously striven for the implementation of the global ceasefire
initiative. Launching military offensives and provoking hostilities now are the
most unconscionable things to do. China expresses its concern over the escalation
in the clashes in Ma’rib, condemns attacks against Saudi civilians and civilian
infrastructure and calls for the immediate cessation of hostilities and violence, so
as to create the necessary conditions for a political settlement of the Yemen issue.
Secondly, political commitments should be honoured and political negotiations
advanced. Despite difficulties and setbacks, there should be no deviation from the
pursuit of a political settlement to the Yemen issue. Parties to the conflict should
break free of the vicious cycle of going back and forth between the battlefield and the
negotiating table. They should implement past agreements, build mutual trust and
make new gains. Special Envoy Griffiths has proposed a way forward to advance the
political process. We hope that the parties can collaborate with his mediation efforts
and participate in consultations with the utmost political sincerity so as to reach
early consensus.
Thirdly, everything must be done to mitigate the humanitarian crisis and
save lives. Under-Secretary-General Lowcock elaborated on the dire humanitarian
situation in Yemen. The mounting food security crisis is heartbreaking. China
welcomes the Yemen virtual high-level pledging event organized early this
month and hopes that the international community can build on the momentum,
step up assistance to Yemen and fully fund the Yemen humanitarian response
plan. China welcomes the Secretary-General’s announcement of the creation of
a high-level task force on preventing famine. I look forward to seeing it play an
important role in mobilizing global resources and strengthening coordination among
humanitarian agencies.
Yemen highly relies on imports for its food security. Parties should ensure
operations at commercial ports. Parties with actual control inside Yemen should
comply with international humanitarian law and provide safe and unimpeded
humanitarian access so as to create conditions for the protection of civilians, in
particular women, children and other vulnerable groups. On the matter of the
FSO SAFER oil tanker, China urges the Houthis to expeditiously grant access to
the United Nations technical team for inspection and repairs so as to prevent a
catastrophic accident.
Fourthly, regional security cooperation should be strengthened to help ease
the tension. Resolving the Yemen issue requires a favourable regional security
environment. China has proposed an initiative for a multilateral dialogue platform
in the Gulf region. Other countries have put forward similar ideas. China hopes that
21-037759/32

S/2021/266

those ideas can be put into practice through joint efforts so as to promote a regional
peace process. We hope that, on the premise of respecting Yemen’s sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity, relevant countries can utilize their
advantages to positively influence the parties in Yemen so as to contribute to a
political settlement of the Yemen issue.

10/32

21-03775

S/2021/266

Annex V
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I thank Special Envoy Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and Ms.
Shawky for their briefings.
The continuation of the military escalation is extremely worrisome.
Considering the unprecedented scale of the humanitarian crisis it causes, there can
be no justification for increased hostilities.
We reiterate our call to the Houthis to immediately cease the assault on Ma’rib,
which is putting 2 million civilians in danger, as well as to cease the cross-border
attacks on the territory of Saudi Arabia. We also remind all parties to the conflict
to respect their obligations under international humanitarian law and international
human rights law and refrain from indiscriminate attacks against civilians.
Only an inclusive political solution can end the conflict. We welcome the
diplomatic engagement by the United States and urge all parties to seize the shift
in dynamics, engage with Special Envoy Griffiths and agree on a ceasefire and
confidence-building measures without delay.
The deadly fire at the overcrowded migrant holding centre in Sana’a on 7
March was a grim reminder of the many dangers migrants face in Yemen. The
fire claimed at least eight lives and injured at least 170 people, with some now in
critical condition. We call for urgent humanitarian access to the injured and for an
international investigation to determine the cause of the incident.
We welcome the recent renewal of the Yemen sanctions regime and the mandate
of the Panel of Experts. We consider it important that the resolution underlines the
need for accountability for violations of international humanitarian law as well as
violations and abuses of human rights. The designation of an individual based on
their actions related to systematic detention, torture and sexual violence against
politically active women is also significant.
We call for full, equal and meaningful participation of women in the political
process and regret the absence of women from the recently formed Government
of Yemen.
We reiterate our continued deep concern about the humanitarian situation,
especially the rising food insecurity. A holistic, long-term solution is needed in order
to truly help this country. That includes unhindered humanitarian access, stepping
up humanitarian assistance, strengthening Yemen’s economy and finding a longterm solution to the import of fuel and commercial items.
Finally, we reiterate our call upon the Houthi authorities to ensure immediate
and full access to the FSO SAFER oil tanker for the United Nations team, as any
further delays may cause a humanitarian and environmental catastrophe.

21-0377511/32

S/2021/266

Annex VI
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of France to
the United Nations, Nathalie Broadhurst Estival
[Original: English and French]
I thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Mark Lowcock for their briefings.
I would like to reiterate our full support for their efforts. I also thank Nirvana Shawky
for her poignant testimony, and I would like to commend all humanitarian workers
for their remarkable work in Yemen.
A window of opportunity has been opened to finally put an end to the war
in Yemen. The Houthis must stop refusing peace and seize this opportunity. They
must immediately renounce the attack on Ma’rib. We condemn that offensive, which
would be a humanitarian disaster for more than 1 million displaced people. It would
brutally undermine the political process. The escalation in Al-Hudaydah and Taiz
must also cease.
We also call on the Houthis to immediately stop attacks against Saudi
territory. Those attacks threaten the stability of the region and we condemn them
in the strongest terms. We call on the Houthis to allow access to the FSO SAFER
oil tanker, immediately and without preconditions, in order to avoid an ecological
disaster, for which they would bear full responsibility.
We condemned the attack of 30 December in Aden against the Yemeni
Government. In that regard, the evidence provided by the Panel of Experts on Yemen
since then is extremely worrying. The Council must follow up on that.
We have said it so many times: there is no military solution in Yemen. We
therefore call on the parties to agree to an immediate ceasefire throughout Yemen,
in line with the Special Envoy’s proposal, the Secretary-General’s call and resolution
2532 (2020).
The parties must engage in good faith in political discussions with the Special
Envoy. They must take confidence-building measures and find a lasting and inclusive
political solution that respects the territorial integrity of Yemen. The voices of Yemeni
youth, such as that of Omer Badokhon in November (see S/2020/1109), and of women,
such as that of Rasha Jarhum on 8 March, were heard by the Council. They must also
be heard by the Yemeni parties. The parties should also implement the conclusions
of the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict (S/AC.51/2020/1).
We call on States that have an influence over the parties to exercise that
influence so that they commit to peace without delay.
On the humanitarian front, the risk of large-scale famine increases every
day. We have a collective responsibility and a moral obligation to avoid such a
tragedy. That includes the full funding of the humanitarian response plan. France
has increased its contribution in comparison to last year. We announced at least €11
million at the donors’ conference.
That also means guaranteeing full humanitarian access to all those who need
it. Respect for international humanitarian law is non-negotiable. I am also thinking
of the protection of civilians, including humanitarian and medical workers, which
must remain an absolute imperative.
The Council can count on France’s unfailing and continuous commitment.

12/32

21-03775

S/2021/266

Annex VII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations, Nagaraj Naidu Kakanur
I would like to thank the briefers for their updates on the situation in Yemen.
We are concerned by the recent escalation in hostilities in several parts of
Yemen, especially in Ma’rib. The reports of military confrontations in Taiz, AlJawf and Sana’a governorates are also deeply concerning. The confrontations have
resulted in several casualties, extensive destruction and the renewed displacement
of civilians. We deeply regret the loss of valuable human lives, including in the
fire accident at the immigration holding facility in Sana’a, and convey our heartfelt
sympathies to the families of those affected. The current escalation will also provide
opportunities for terrorist groups, such as Al-Qaida and the Islamic State, to spread
their presence in Yemen, which is worrisome.
We condemn the drone and missile attacks launched by Ansar Allah into
Saudi Arabia and the deliberate targeting of civilian and energy infrastructure in
the country. We call upon all parties to the conflict to eschew violence and to take
meaningful steps towards dialogue and negotiations for a political settlement.
Two years ago, when Yemen was faced with a perilous situation in AlHudaydah, the international community acted swiftly and decisively, which resulted
in the signing of the Stockholm Agreement and averted a humanitarian catastrophe.
A similar focused diplomatic push is now required, not only to stop the battle for
Ma’rib but also conflicts elsewhere in the country.
The already dire humanitarian situation in Yemen requires the full attention
of the international community. We welcome the efforts by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Sweden and Switzerland to host the highlevel pledging event for the humanitarian crisis in Yemen. The outcome may be
disappointing, but the continued pledges from Yemen’s regional partners to support
humanitarian and aid operations in the country and the enhanced contribution of some
donor countries give reasons for hope. India stands ready to continue its assistance to
the people of Yemen. We will continue to facilitate the medical treatment of people
of Yemen travelling to India.
We are disappointed that recent talks on the exchange of prisoners and
detainees ended without any agreement between the parties. We hope to see the
resumption of talks in the near future.
We appreciate the United Nations engagement with Ansar Allah on the
FSO SAFER oil tanker issue. All pending issues related to logistical and security
arrangements must be resolved urgently, and the United Nations technical team will
get access to inspect the vessel soon.
Let me also add my voice of support to the contribution made by the women of
Yemen to peace efforts in the country. The promises made in the National Dialogue
Conference outcomes and enshrined in Yemen’s National Action Plan on Women,
Peace and Security must be fulfilled.
In conclusion, let me reaffirm India’s strong commitment to Yemen’s unity,
sovereignty and territorial integrity. India has strong and historical ties with Yemen
and its people, and we hope to see peace return to Yemen soon. I once again urge
all parties to refrain from violence and engage constructively in good faith with the
Special Envoy to bring about a lasting political settlement in the country.

21-0377513/32

S/2021/266

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ireland to the
United Nations, Geraldine Byrne Nason
I thank, as always, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen Griffiths
and Under-Secretary General Lowcock for their briefings. We particularly welcome
hearing the voice of Ms. Shawky here today. We know the incredible work that
CARE International and other non-governmental organizations do on the ground in
Yemen, and I have to say that she struck a particularly deep chord with all of us this
morning, bringing a perspective of the depth and the seriousness of the humanitarian
crisis right across Yemen, so I thank her.
Even by our own standards within the Council in the discussion of Yemen,
I must say that today’s briefings by both Martin Griffiths and Mark Lowcock
were particularly sobering. We have clearly reached a critical point in the conflict
in Yemen, described as a moment of great fragility. We welcome Special Envoy
Griffiths’s relentless efforts, together with other envoys, despite the conditions on
the ground, to try to inject new political momentum into those talks. We see that as
a shared objective for a genuine and inclusive political process, bringing what I can
only describe as a modicum of hope to the increasingly desperate Yemeni people.
Putting an end to fighting, we know, offers the only route to bringing an end to
this conflict and to the suffering of the Yemeni people. We implore all actors to
hear the call of the Yemeni people and of the international community to end the
fighting and to end it now. The overwhelming humanitarian crisis in Yemen makes it
imperative that there be an urgent end to this conflict. I am therefore reiterating the
Council’s call for an immediate de-escalation and a nationwide ceasefire, as outlined
in resolution 2564 (2021), adopted just four weeks ago.
The ongoing Houthi escalation in Ma’rib, in an area that we have already
heard has 1 million people already internally displaced, continues to be deeply
worrying and clearly inflicts unacceptable civilian suffering. We once again call
on the Houthis to cease that offensive immediately, without preconditions. Ireland
condemns in the strongest possible terms the intensified cross-border attacks on the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
We are also concerned by the increased attacks on Sana’a, and call for a deescalation and ceasefire. Violations of international humanitarian and human rights
law continue to be perpetrated at what are now alarming levels.
It is quite simply fundamental to everything that we have heard from the
speakers this morning that all parties in Yemen turn towards peace. There are no two
ways to say this: it is time to return to the negotiating table.
The insidious, and I would say horrific, link between conflict and hunger that we
discussed in the Council under your presidency, Madam, just last week is absolutely
crystal clear in Yemen. As Martin Griffiths pointed out, those are not coincidences.
It is difficult to overstate the peril of food insecurity facing most Yemenis as a result
of this conflict, and Mark Lowcock’s repeated reference to a protracted process of
prolonged starvation is truly a shocking indictment of the situation in which we
find ourselves as an international community. We know that it is a struggle on a
daily basis for people simply to survive, with half the population facing acute food
shortages and millions — we repeat that to ourselves, millions — facing famine.
Half of all children under five in Yemen will face acute malnutrition this year, with
nearly 400,000 already suffering from severe acute malnutrition and likely to die if
we do not ensure that they get urgent assistance. The international community shares
responsibility for that situation. We must step up to ensure that adequate humanitarian
assistance reaches those facing those multiple threats to their survival. We share the
14/32

21-03775

S/2021/266

Secretary-General’s concerns about resources for humanitarian assistance following
the pledging conference at the beginning of this month.
A further catastrophic humanitarian and environmental threat also looms
in the form of the FSO SAFER oil tanker. We call once more on the Houthis to
facilitate immediate access for an assessment to be carried out. We have seen
previous explosions and oil spills in recent memory cause tremendous devastation
and a lasting impact. For the Houthis to allow such a catastrophe to unfold, when
help is being offered, would be simply unforgivable.
At last week’s Arria Formula meeting, which Ireland hosted, and in which
you, Madam President, indeed participated, we heard the strong support of Member
States for the direct and substantive participation of women in United Nations-led
peace processes, including in Yemen. Twelve Security Council members sponsored
that call. I echo the words of the Yemeni woman peacebuilder Rasha Jarhum, who
joined us at that meeting and said, “without women, and without gender equality,
peace is not an attainable goal”.
As we look with hope to the potential of new diplomatic efforts despite
everything that we have heard today, we reiterate the fundamental point that no
negotiating table should be without women. We must reject and address barriers to
the full, equal and meaningful participation of women in political and public life. We
call for an end to the human rights violations that aim to prevent such participation,
such as arbitrary detention and sexual and gender-based violence. The Council took
concrete steps towards that goal with the adoption of resolution 2564 (2021) last
month, but we can, and must, do more. We cannot accept that it be otherwise.

21-0377515/32

S/2021/266

Annex IX
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Kenya to the
United Nations, Michael Kiboino
I thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock and Ms. Nirvana Shawky for their sobering briefings.
Kenya’s delegation learned with sadness of the fire incident that occurred
on 7 March at the immigration holding facility in Sana’a. We convey our heartfelt
condolences to the families of those who lost their lives and wish a quick recovery to
the injured. We call for a quick investigation into the incident.
Kenya is gravely concerned over the escalating conflict in Ma’rib. The reports
of further displacement of over 15,000 people who were already living in informal
settlements and the uncertainty faced by the more than 1 million internally displaced
persons near Ma’rib is quite disturbing.
We are further concerned by the intensified hostilities between factions
with access to more weaponry. We should be progressing further with a political
negotiation that is the basis for sustained peace, rather than the reversals that we
are observing.
The ongoing fuel blockade, which has prevented commercial ships from
bringing fuel into Al-Hudaydah, further exacerbates the already dire humanitarian
situation. Kenya calls on all stakeholders with any impact on humanitarian-related
infrastructure in Yemen to ensure that it is protected and that there are no deliberate
or inadvertent blockages.
We urge the Council to take note of objective and verified information
regarding any party that may be deliberately undermining or frustrating the United
Nations humanitarian relief effort. All efforts must be made to ease the unnecessary
suffering of millions of civilians.
Kenya encourages humanitarian agencies to deploy new and innovative
solutions that invest in strengthening local food production.
It is clear that terrorist groups in Yemen, and elsewhere, are a present and
future threat to any established peace. The Special Envoy should practice the utmost
caution in ensuring that the peace process does not offer those groups a way to insert
and escalate their ideological reach and operations.
Furthermore, we strongly recommend that the peace resolution and recovery
process have in-built disarmament, demobilization and reintegration plus. That plus
represents a disengagement process that uses psychosocial and counter-narrative
tools, including family trust-building, and robust vetting to minimize the risk to
disengaged combatants who have fought for terrorist groups.
Resolution 2564 (2021), which we adopted on 25 February, broadly expresses
the concerns and aspirations that the Security Council has with regard to Yemen. We
have also had the opportunity to listen to the voices of Yemeni women and youth.
We believe that they should be enabled to meaningfully contribute to a Yemeni-led
and Yemeni-owned peace process. We encourage the Special Envoy to include the
voices of the victims of terrorism in Yemen; the voices of women, in their quest
for empowerment and inclusion; and civil voices from the religious community,
renowned for advocating for freedom of religion.
We recognize ,with thanks, the countries and institutions contributing
to the humanitarian relief effort in Yemen, and encourage them to sustain their
compassionate commitment.
16/32

21-03775

S/2021/266

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Mexico to the
United Nations, Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez
[Original: Spanish]
We thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock and Ms. Shawky for their detailed presentations.
Mexico expresses its serious concern over the continuing violence in various
locations, but most especially with regard to the offensive in Ma’rib, which puts the
lives of thousands of civilians at risk and is driving a new wave of displacement.
Ma’rib already hosts 1 million displaced persons, but almost 400,000 other
people are at risk of being displaced yet again. This would further exacerbate the
urgent need to address the humanitarian situation. We also vigourously condemn
the increasing attacks against infrastructure, including health centres and schools
in Taiz, in which medical personnel as well as patients and/or students, including
children, have been killed or injured.
We echo the call of the Special Envoy to find and punish those responsible for
the fire in the Sana’a migrant detention centre.
We call on Houthi militias to stop their offensive on Ma’rib and immediately
cease any type of aggression putting the civilian population at risk. We likewise
condemn the attacks against Saudi territory and targets and urge Ansar Allah and
the parties to the conflict to immediately cease all attacks and acts of provocation.
Mexico urges regional partners with the greatest influence to persuade the
leadership of Ansar Allah and the Government of Yemen alike to act with the greatest
of moderation, as the circumstances require, and to bring them into constructive
dialogue to achieve a nationwide ceasefire. We welcome the efforts of the United
States Government and its Special Envoy to facilitate dialogue with Ansar Allah.
The cessation of hostilities is indispensable for facilitating humanitarian assistance.
At the same time, we welcome the report of the National Commission of
Inquiry to investigate allegations of violations and abuses committed by all parties
to the conflict in Yemen, and we encourage the investigation of arbitrary detentions
and forcible disappearances. However, we regret that conversations in the context of
the most recent meeting of the Supervisory Committee on the Implementation of the
Prisoners and Detainees Exchange Agreement, facilitated by the Special Envoy and
representatives of the International Committee of the Red Cross, not did not bear
fruit. We urge the parties to make progress in consultations with a view promptly
releasing detainees and clarifying the facts surrounding forced disappearances.
Mexico once again thanks Special Envoy Griffiths, United Nations personnel
in Yemen and several national delegations for their participation in the meeting of
the Informal Group of Experts on Women and Peace and Security, which took place
on 1 March.
Almost six years since the conflict began, the humanitarian situation continues
to deteriorate, with Yemeni women being most affected: gender-based violence and
the use of sexual violence as a weapon of war are unacceptable.
It is necessary to ensure the meaningful and equitable participation of women
in the peace process. The role of women in conflict mediation and rebuilding peace
is crucial to ensuring robust, sustainable and inclusive outcomes. The efforts of the
Special Envoy to increase the number of women in delegations participating in the
political process, as well as his continuous engagement with the Yemeni Women’s
21-0377517/32

S/2021/266

Technical Advisory Group, are of the greatest relevance. There is an urgent need
to fully implement the National Action Plan on Women and Peace and Security,
officially launched in May 2020.
In conclusion, we urge, once again, Ansar Allah to abstain from imposing
new conditions for the inspection of the FSO SAFER ship and to permit immediate
access to United Nations teams. This is a time bomb that we must deactivate or the
environmental and humanitarian consequences will be catastrophic.

18/32

21-03775

S/2021/266

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
[Original: French]
I would like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths and Mr. Mark Lowcock for their
briefings on the situation in Yemen. My thanks also go to Ms. Nirvana Sharkey of
CARE International, who gave us an overview of the conditions facing humanitarian
workers in the country
The war in Yemen continues and, with it, its mounting toll of desolation and
suffering inflicted on the Yemeni population over almost seven years now. This
humanitarian crisis, categorized as the most catastrophic in the world, and which we
seem resigned to contemplating from afar, must provoke out collective conscience,
since any human suffering is a tragedy for all of humankind.
As is clear from the briefings we have just heard, famine is imminent and
may affect more than half of the Yemeni population if nothing is done in the days
and months ahead. We therefore call on donor countries to honour the commitments
made at the conference on the humanitarian situation in Yemen held on 1 March
in order to allow humanitarian agencies to come to the aid of populations already
weakened by economic crisis, the effects of the coronavirus disease pandemic and
the recent resumption of hostilities, particularly in the province of Ma’rib.
It is very disconcerting today to see the glimmers of hope glimpsed in late
2020 — with the release of thousands of detainees, the formation of a new Government
and the favourable predisposition shown by the parties towards the proposals of the
Special Envoy — fade away due to the resumption of hostilities.
My delegation condemns the recent attacks and the launching of rockets on
civilian residential areas and on camps for internally displaced persons, which have
claimed the lives of several dozen people and caused the displacement of more than
150,000 others. The use of armed drones by the Houthi rebels on towns and oil
facilities in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is a source of great concern.
If the political process in Yemen is stagnating, that is entirely due to the
inability of the parties to agree on a common denominator that would serve as
the basis for a political process leading to a general ceasefire, guaranteeing the
resumption of talks on the basis of the proposals made by the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General.
The Niger remains of the view that resolving the crisis will inevitably require
dialogue among Yemenis, with the support of the international community. We call
on all the parties to work together to restore peace in Yemen and for the good of
its people.
It is very clear this crisis cannot be resolved by military means, but a change
of approach is required on the part of the United Nations and Yemen’s international
partners. This approach must combine increased diplomatic pressure on the parties
and the maintenance of regular contacts with all actors involved in this crisis.
In this regard, my country encourages regional actors and the members of the
Council with influence over the parties to the conflict to spare no effort to accompany
Yemenis on the difficult but essential path of dialogue, reconciliation and peace.
The recent visit by the Special Envoy of the United States of America for
Yemen, Mr. Timothy Lenderking, to the region and his readiness to work with the
United Nations Special Envoy is a genuine step in the right direction.
21-0377519/32

S/2021/266

No effort must be spared to achieve a de-escalation of the situation and give
the negotiations a real chance, as they are the only alternative for saving the lives of
millions of people, the majority of them women and children.
I should like, in conclusion, to reaffirm the steadfast support of the Niger to
the Special Envoy, Mr. Martin Griffiths, in his tireless efforts seeking to re-launch
dialogue between the Yemeni parties, as well as our support for United Nations
agencies and non-governmental organizations for their essential assistance to people
in distress and under circumstances made even more difficult by violence and
resourcing shortfalls.

20/32

21-03775

S/2021/266

Annex XII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Norway to the
United Nations, Mona Juul
I would like to thank Special Envoy Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock for their briefings and their tireless efforts to make progress in Yemen.
Thanks also to Nirvana Shawky for sharing important experiences from the ground.
We fully support the efforts of the United Nations to bring this conflict to an end and
to alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni people.
For far too long, we have witnessed vicious cycles of violence in Yemen, which
persist and, as we have heard today, are even deteriorating to this day. We are alarmed
by the ongoing Houthi offensive in Ma’rib, and the increasing number of missile and
drone attacks against Saudi Arabia. We are also following developments in Taiz, AlHudaydah and Sana’a with concern. These developments will only contribute to the
escalation of the conflict.
We call on all parties to de-escalate and seize this opportunity for a nationwide
ceasefire linked to political talks. An easing of the ongoing embargo would also be
an important measure to allow sufficient import of fuel and other basic goods to
cover the needs of the population. There is no military solution to this conflict. It is
high time to end the cycle of violence and the deteriorating humanitarian crisis. Only
an inclusive political process can lead to sustainable peace and stability in Yemen.
We stress the need to consult a wide range of actors and ensure that negotiations
reflect the population and the situation on the ground. It is important to ensure the
full, equal and meaningful participation of women. Experience shows that inclusive
peace processes that bring those most affected by the conflict to the negotiating table
are more durable.
Furthermore, regional and international actors that are involved in the conflict
must also do their part in ensuring political talks get started.
The humanitarian situation is dire. The pledging conference in Geneva was
important, but we cannot be satisfied with the outcome. As we have heard so many
times: increased donor support, humanitarian access and an end to violence are all
vital if we want to avert a large-scale famine and contribute to peace in Yemen. The
grim truth is that millions of Yemenis are at risk of death of starvation. We cannot
let this happen.
The condition of the FSO SAFER oil tanker continues to be of grave concern.
We call again on the Houthis to provide immediate and unconditional access and
contribute constructively towards a solution. There is no time for further delays.
The environmental and humanitarian consequences of a possible leakage will be
tremendous. And the impact will be felt for decades. It would also lead to a closure
of the port in Al-Hudaydah and be detrimental to the Houthis’ own interests.
To conclude, I want to stress that the protection of civilians is a core obligation
under international humanitarian law. The recruitment and use of children in armed
conflict are unacceptable. The same is true for air attacks on camps for internally
displaced persons. We are shocked by the recent fire in a migrant holding facility in
Sana’a, as well as the military use of, and attacks on, schools. Humanitarian access
to people in need must be granted immediately. Any violations of international
humanitarian law must be investigated and those responsible held accountable.

21-0377521/32

S/2021/266

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
[Original: Russian]
We thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock for the briefings on the political and humanitarian situations in Yemen. We
also closely followed the briefing by Ms. Shawky.
This video-teleconference convenes against the backdrop of a dangerous
escalation in Yemen, where an almost-six-year long deadly conflict has put two thirds
of the population into dire need of urgent humanitarian assistance. We have to state
with regret that the logic of armed confrontation still prevails. We are particularly
concerned over the situation around Ma’rib, where deadly clashes resumed in early
February. Fighting is also reported in other Yemeni governorates. We call on the sides
to stop fighting and solve the problem by political and diplomatic means. We intend
to further support relevant efforts taken by the Special Envoy for Yemen, Martin
Griffiths. We emphasize that all sides to the conflict must uphold international
humanitarian law. Any combat operations that can damage civilian infrastructure or
claim lives of civilians are unacceptable.
A new coalition Government was formed on 18 December 2020 — wherein
representatives of the southern regions for the first time received a considerable
share of ministerial posts — to support the implementation of the Riyadh agreement
of 5 November 2019, which was designed to normalize the situation in the south
of Yemen.
We hope that the implementation of the aforementioned agreements will
enhance public security and allow efforts to focus on urgent socioeconomic and
humanitarian problems in this part of Yemen. We also advocate for practical
implementation of the Riyadh provisions addressing the launch of negotiations of a
consolidated delegation of official Yemeni authorities and the Southern Transitional
Council with the leadership of the Houthi Ansar Allah movement on issues of the
future political structure of Yemen.
Some encouraging signals have recently arrived from Washington. I
am referring to the United States decision to reconsider having the Ansar Allah
Houthi movement on the list of foreign terrorist organizations, and the proclaimed
commitment of the new United States Administration to join efforts aimed at bringing
the conflict to an end promptly. Should this constructive approach be backed up by
corresponding practical steps, the prospects for restoring long-awaited peace and
stability to Yemen will increase significantly.
Humanitarian assistance to Yemen should be a priority track of our joint
work. To counter the hunger that is spreading throughout the country, and diseases,
including the coronavirus disease, Yemen needs the broad support of the international
community. We take note of the international pledging event on Yemen held on 1
March, which resulted in donors assuming an obligation to cover about 50 per cent
of the budget of Yemen’s humanitarian response plan. The United Nations leadership
believes this result to be insufficient to reverse the negative humanitarian trend in
Yemen. We call on donors, including those from the region, to enhance their financial
support for United Nations programmes providing basic assistance, including those
ensuring the population’s food security and access to clean water and medical
services. We believe that the non-discriminatory distribution of humanitarian
assistance among the entire population of the country is the key factor that can ease
the humanitarian catastrophe in Yemen.
22/32

21-03775

S/2021/266

We also believe that mutually acceptable and non-politicized solutions can be
found to solve the problem of the FSO SAFER tanker.
In conclusion, we recall that the launch of a confidence- and securitybuilding process in the Persian Gulf, and eventually in the entire Middle East, would
contribute to resolving crises, including the Yemeni conflict. In this regard, we once
again call on our colleagues to pay attention to the fact that the entire subregion
needs comprehensive stabilization, based, among other things, on resolution 598
(1987) and the Russian collective security concept.

21-0377523/32

S/2021/266

Annex XIV
Statement by the Political Coordinator of Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines to the United Nations, Isis Gonsalves
Good morning and welcome to our briefers. We recognize your steadfast
dedication to the people of Yemen; however, it is with heavy hearts that we receive
your sobering updates. First, allow me to express deep concern at the plight of
migrants in and around Yemen, including those caught in the deadly fire that broke
out in the migrant detention centre in Sana’a and those who suffered at the hands of
traffickers en route to Yemen. These matters must be thoroughly investigated and we
call for a recommitment to the protection of migrants from all parties.
It is clear that Yemen is on the precipice of another catastrophe from which it
may not be able to return. Yemen’s weak economy, the ongoing hostilities, including
escalations in Marib and Al-Hudaydah, and the dire humanitarian situation —
exacerbated by fuel shortages, the ongoing blockade of commercial imports in
Al-Hudaydah, and the coronavirus disease pandemic — have combined to create
unbearable suffering. Over 2 million children under five years old are projected
to face acute malnutrition. Over half of Yemen’s population is facing acute food
shortages. And as we have heard before from the World Food Programme Executive
Director, Mr. David Beasley, millions are knocking on the door of famine. The cost
of this conflict is high and its consequences will reverberate for years.
The joint declaration proposed by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen has been a starting point from which Yemen can navigate these challenges.
There is need for an immediate nationwide ceasefire. The ongoing violence, including
cross-border attacks, is inimical to progress towards peace, and within Marib,
hostilities threaten the worst mass displacement of the war. A ceasefire will mitigate
the humanitarian situation by facilitating the delivery of life-saving assistance to
the Yemeni people. Humanitarian access must be unhindered and humanitarian
responders must be sufficiently equipped with the resources necessary to provide
much-needed reprieve.
The virtual pledging event held on 1 March was an opportunity for the
international community to reaffirm and reinforce its solidarity with the people of
Yemen, yet the outcome was disappointing. While we welcome the pledges made and
encourage these to be disbursed with a sense of urgency, we appeal to others in the
international community to increase their support by providing funds to ensure that
life-saving humanitarian programmes are able to continue.
While the most recent round of prisoner exchange talks was not fruitful,
we encourage the parties to continue their discussions and efforts to meet their
commitments. We have already seen in the past that dialogue can result in progress
and encourage confidence-building.
Last week, we celebrated International Women’s Day, recognizing the social,
economic, cultural and political contributions and achievements of women. In so
doing, we called for further action to ensure gender parity in all spheres. In Yemen,
women’s aspirations and needs must be realized. This must start by ensuring their
equal participation in the peace process. We encourage the Special Envoy to continue
his work with women in Yemen, including the Yemeni Women’s Technical Advisory
Group. Let us ensure that women have the platform and a safe space for their voices to
be heard and not merely ventilated but translated into concrete action on the ground.
In closing, we affirm our commitment to the Special Envoy, Mark Lowcock,
and all actors working to promote peace in Yemen. We stand in solidarity with
the people of Yemen. To that end, we call on all parties to prioritize safeguarding
24/32

21-03775

S/2021/266

the environment by allowing, without delay, the deployment of a United Nations
mission to the FSO SAFER oil tanker in order to prevent a catastrophe in the Red
Sea. Politicizing and weaponizing this issue only engenders a further threat to the
lives and livelihoods of the Yemeni people.

21-0377525/32

S/2021/266

Annex XV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations,
Barbara Woodward
Thank you, Madam President, and thank you to our briefers. Ms Shawky, your
words eloquently capture the universal hopes of the Yemeni people and — along with
the continued warnings from Mr Lowcock that Yemen is on the brink not just of a
devastating famine, but a prolonged starvation — the reason why ending the conflict
in Yemen is a priority for the United Kingdom and why it should be a priority for
the world.
We urgently need an opportunity to advance peace. We need, as we have
heard, an end to fighting, a nationwide ceasefire and an inclusive political process
that ends the conflict. The United Kingdom is grateful to the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Griffiths, for his tireless work and for his renewed
efforts in recent weeks.
But despite recent efforts, the Houthis have, as resolution 2564 (2021) warns,
escalated military attacks, intensifying attacks on Saudi Arabia and on Marib. Their
actions are making the humanitarian crisis worse. With 140,000 people already
displaced from Marib, the United Kingdom strongly condemns these escalations,
as we did in a joint statement with France, Germany, Italy and the United States
last week.
We are also concerned about reports of protesters storming the presidential
palace in Aden today and reports of security forces firing on protesters in Seyoun
yesterday. We call for restraint from protesters and security forces alike.
We also remain deeply concerned by the grave threat posed by the FSO SAFER
oil tanker. The Houthis most urgently implement the multiple Security Council calls
on them to facilitate the United Nations assessment and repair mission.
We also call on the Houthis to ensure a transparent and independent
investigation into the Houthi-run migrant centre fire in Sana’a, including the
involvement of the Houthi Preventive Security Service. Scores may have died.
International agencies must have unrestricted access to the site and to those injured.
The Houthis’ treatment of migrants must improve.
Humanitarian aid must not be used as a political tool. In line with resolutions
2451 (2018) and 2417 (2018), we call on all parties to facilitate unhindered
humanitarian access and to ensure that humanitarian workers are able to continue
their work safely and without harm. It is also critical that imports flow into the
port of Al-Hudaydah and that vital onward supply routes remain open. We call
on the Government of Yemen to immediately approve fuel ships to enter northern
ports. Significant external financial assistance is also needed to enable affordable
food imports.
The United Kingdom continues to be a leading donor to Yemen. We have so
far pledged $120 million to the 2021 appeal. This will feed an additional 240,000
of the most vulnerable Yemenis every month and provide clean water for 1.6
million people.

26/32

21-03775

S/2021/266

Annex XVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Linda Thomas-Greenfield
Let me start by thanking Special Envoy Griffiths and Under-SecretaryGeneral Lowcock for their briefings. We are also grateful for Ms. Shawky’s insight
from the field. We thank you and all of the aid workers you represent here today
for the critical, life-saving work you do under the most difficult and desperate
of circumstances.
I started out my first full day as United States Ambassador to the United
Nations hearing from humanitarian non-governmental organizations working on the
ground in Yemen. I am committed to ensuring that we as a Council hear from those
voices in the field, particularly the voices of women.
For our part, the United States is stepping up our diplomacy to end the war.
Special Envoy Lenderking recently met key leaders in Saudi Arabia, Oman, the
United Arab Emirates, Kuwait, Qatar and Jordan. He has met multiple times with
the Republic of Yemen’s Government Foreign Minister and other key stakeholders,
including our European counterparts.
The United States is working tirelessly, in full coordination with Special
Envoy Griffiths, to create the conditions for the parties to reach a ceasefire and a
negotiated end to the conflict, one that incorporates the perspectives and experiences
of the Yemeni people.
First and foremost, all parties to this conflict must stop fighting. Peace is
the only path forward. All parties understand the steps necessary to move forward
towards a comprehensive, nationwide ceasefire and political talks, and we call on
them now to execute these steps.
But there can be no ceasefire and no peace in Yemen if the Houthis continue
their daily attacks against the Yemeni people, Saudi Arabia and other countries in
the region. Unfortunately, Houthi attacks have continued unabated since December,
when they attempted to assassinate the new Yemeni Cabinet. And today the Houthi
offensive in Ma’rib is taking the lives of more Yemeni men, women and children.
They are also cruelly detaining innocent people.
We grieve the lives lost in the fire on 7 March at a migrant facility in Sana’a,
which we heard from all of our speakers earlier. Dozens of migrants subjected to
inhumane conditions by the Houthis were needlessly killed.
The death and violence must stop. We call on the Houthis to accept an
immediate, comprehensive and nationwide ceasefire and to cease all attacks. In the
meantime, we will continue to hold the Houthi leadership to account.
The Houthis are now threatening irreversible catastrophe, delaying the United
Nations assessment and initial repair of the FSO SAFER oil tanker. It is well past
time for the Houthis to quit stalling. If they delay further, they could devastate not
just the environment but the lives and livelihoods of an estimated 4 million people.
We urge other nations to continue to press the Houthis to allow the assessment to
move forward immediately.
We also commend the Security Council’s decision to designate Sultan Zabin
under the United Nations sanctions regime for overseeing and carrying out detentions,
torture and sexual violence against politically active women who opposed the
Houthis. We will continue to work with the Yemen Sanctions Committee to identify
individuals and entities who meet the designation criteria.
21-0377527/32

S/2021/266

Finally, as we redouble our efforts to end this war, we cannot ignore Yemen’s
worsening humanitarian disaster. As Mark Lowcock reminded us, more than 14
million Yemeni people are on the brink of starvation. This includes 2.3 million
children under the age of 5. The World Food Programme’s Executive Director, David
Beasley, told us last week during the signature event of our presidency — the open
debate on conflict and food security (see S/2021/250) — that while we are sitting
here a child dies there every minute and a quarter. That is hell on Earth. These
numbers, frankly, are almost too difficult to imagine.
So I would like to end with a call — a plea, in fact — for funding a massive and
worthy humanitarian response, which we just heard about from our three briefers.
During the 1 March high-level pledging event, Secretary Blinken announced over
$190 million in additional United States humanitarian assistance, bringing the
total of United States financial assistance for Yemen to more than $350 million so
far this fiscal year. Unfortunately, the overall international fundraising effort of
this conference fell significantly short. We ask that regional donors in particular
contribute additional funding, and we encourage those that did make generous
pledges to fulfil their commitments promptly.
The United States is committing to doing its part, both to provide aid and to
help address the obstacles standing in the way of humanitarian assistance. But we
cannot do it alone. We urge all parties, in both the north and south of Yemen, to
open the gates, allow the unfettered importation and distribution of fuel and let the
neutral, life-saving humanitarians in. Not doing this means more deaths and, I dare
say, more blood on their hands.
As Ms. Shawky so shockingly described, millions of Yemeni people remain
in dire need. For them, the words that we say here in the Council can go only so
far. The important thing is that we act, and we act now, as we heard from all of our
briefers today.
To a person, all of us on this screen have expressed our shock at the situation.
We all called for an end to the violence. And we all declared our support for the
Yemeni people. Let us translate these statements into actions.

28/32

21-03775

S/2021/266

Annex XVII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to
the United Nations, Pham Hai Anh
We would like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen, Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, and Ms. Nirvana Shawky, CARE’s
Regional Director for the Middle East and North Africa, for their informative
briefings. We reiterate our full support for their valuable work in Yemen. We would
also like to welcome the Permanent Representative of Yemen to this meeting.
We are gravely concerned about the military escalation in parts of Yemen,
especially in Ma’rib and Taiz. That fighting has resulted in severe casualties,
including many deaths among civilians, children and migrants. We condemn acts of
violence and re-emphasize the urgent need for the parties concerned to stop fighting,
implement the Secretary-General’s call for a ceasefire and return to the negotiations
on a nationwide ceasefire.
On a positive note, we are pleased to see renewed diplomatic efforts and
dialogue with regional partners to end the war in Yemen. In this regard, we urge
all the parties concerned to take this opportunity to give a chance to the political
process in Yemen and peace and stability in the region.
It is distressing that more than 20 million Yemenis — that is, over 70 per
cent of the country’s population — especially women and children, are in desperate
need of assistance and protection. The price of fuel has increased two and even
three times in some areas in the last several months in Yemen. The coronavirus
disease pandemic and business disruptions have exacerbated the immense
humanitarian needs.
Moreover, the funding shortage remains one of Yemen’s most significant
obstacles to humanitarian operations. We welcome the committed contributions
made at the virtual high-level pledging event for the humanitarian situation in Yemen
held on 1 March. However, this amount falls far from expectations.
Against this backdrop, we call for continued support for the Yemeni people.
Without financial assistance, the world will fail to help Yemen deal with the imminent
threat of famine. The international community must act to protect Yemeni children
and avoid another crisis for Yemen’s future generations.
We also call upon relevant parties to fulfil their obligations under international
law, including international humanitarian law regarding the protection of civilians,
especially women and children, and civilian objects, as well as to ensure means
and infrastructure essential to the survival and livelihood of Yemeni people.
Humanitarian and health workers must be given access to support those in need and
provide treatment for those affected by the recent military operations.
The full implementation of the Stockholm Agreement and the Riyadh
agreement, with the United Nations mediation, should be carried out earnestly.
We reaffirm our support for Yemen’s sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity.
We support further strengthened participation by women and youth in Yemen’s
political process.
The inaccessibility of the FSO SAFER oil tanker remains our continued
concern. We reiterate our call on Ansar Allah to grant access to the United Nations
technical team without further conditions.
To conclude, we urge all the parties concerned to demonstrate further
restraint and create an environment conducive to Yemen’s political process, peace
and stability in the region.
21-0377529/32

S/2021/266

Annex XVIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Yemen to the
United Nations, Abdullah Ali Fadhel Al-Saadi
[Original: Arabic]
Allow me to begin by congratulating you, Ambassador, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this month, and by thanking your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, for her successful presidency in February.
The Government of Yemen, under the guidance and leadership of the President
of the Republic, His Excellency Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour, continues to
reach out to achieve a solution that will end the Yemeni crisis and fulfil the Yemeni
people’s aspiration for sustainable, comprehensive peace through a political process
based on the terms of reference of the political solution in Yemen, namely, the Gulf
Cooperation Council Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism, the outcomes of
the All-Inclusive National Dialogue Conference and the relevant Council resolutions,
in particular resolution 2216 (2015). The Government welcomes all efforts made by
the United Nations through the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
Martin Griffiths, to end the conflict by peaceful means, and the diplomatic track
announced by the new United States Administration through its Special Envoy for
Yemen, Timothy Lenderking. The Government reiterates its commitment to peace
and its willingness to engage positively with all calls and initiatives that might lead
to an end to the conflict.
The Houthi militias, in contrast, persist in their intransigence and their
rejection of all peace initiatives. They choose war and escalation, most recently
through the announcement by their official spokesperson that they reject the efforts
of the international community and the United States. What is happening today in
Ma’rib is a testament to the aggression and terrorism of these militias, which were
raised by the mullahs’ regime in Tehran. Ma’rib’s residential neighbourhoods and
camps for displaced persons are being bombarded, including with ballistic missiles,
in a brutal and criminal fashion. In February, the militias launched 25 ballistic
missiles into the safe haven of Ma’rib, which was sheltering more than 2 million
displaced persons who had fled the acts of terrorism and brutal repression carried
out by militias in the areas under their control, in the course of which hundreds
of civilians, including women and children, were killed and wounded. Dozens of
women and children were killed by the militias’ indiscriminate bombardment of
residential communities in Taiz and Al-Hudaydah.
The militias’ thirst for Yemeni blood has not been quenched, however. They have
carried out another dreadful crime whose victims’ blood is not yet dry, committing
mass murder by causing a fire at the detention centre in Sana’a, in which more than
170 Ethiopian migrants were killed or injured after refusing to obey the militias’
orders to serve on the front lines of the fighting in Ma’rib or else make monetary
payments to the militias — orders that were in flagrant violation of international
humanitarian law, human rights law and national laws. In an attempted cover-up,
the militias have prevented the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the International Organization for Migration from conducting a transparent
investigation into this heinous crime or gaining access to the injured. What the
Council and the international community need to understand clearly today is that
the military escalation by the militias comes at a time when calls have been made
for peace and a return to dialogue. This barbaric escalation threatens not only to
exacerbate the humanitarian crisis but also to completely eliminate the diplomatic
30/32

21-03775

S/2021/266

track and the political process as a whole. We therefore welcome the recent statement
in which the Governments of France, Germany, Italy, the United Kingdom and the
United States condemned the ongoing Houthi attacks on Ma’rib.
We call upon the Council to assume its responsibilities and take deterrent
measures against the militias and their backer, the rogue Iranian regime, so that they
cease their military escalation and participate in the peace efforts being conducted
by the United Nations.
On 11 March 2021, the Council discussed the relationship between conflict
and food insecurity (see S/2021/250). In view of the alarming data contained in
the Integrated Food Security Phase Classification, the underlying causes of the
severe food shortages and hunger suffered by the Yemeni people, especially in areas
controlled by the militias, must be identified and addressed. Despite the international
community’s contributions to the humanitarian response plan in Yemen, Yemenis
continue to suffer because of actions by the militias, which are using starvation as
a means of warfare, blocking humanitarian aid from reaching those in need and
instead redirecting it to the front lines of the fighting to prolong their senseless
war, and increasing the number of those in need by attacking cities and camps for
displaced persons, thereby creating fresh waves of displacement.
The militias are also attempting to deceive the international community about
their aggressive and brutal behaviour by fabricating a crisis related to oil derivatives
in areas under their control. They claim that fuel and oil derivatives are being
prevented from entering those areas either through the port of Al-Hudaydah or by
land. These allegations are clearly disproved by the statistics issued by the relevant
authorities in relation to the quantities of fuel that have entered those areas and have
been seized by the militias, which then sell the fuel on the black market at twice the
normal price to finance their war.
The technocratic Government is making every effort to meet the complex
challenges facing the Yemeni economy. It is making fundamental reforms to
increase State revenue, rationalize expenditure, improve services, enhance the
performance of institutions, increase the effectiveness of supervisory bodies,
and uphold the principles of transparency and integrity. We look forward to the
presentation and dissemination by the Council, in the near future, of the results of
the investigation conducted by the Panel of Experts on Yemen into the terrorist attack
on the Government at Aden International Airport, and to the perpetrators being held
to account.
The Yemeni economy is currently facing an acute crisis and major challenges
as a result of the war and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The fact
that inflation has exceeded 50 per cent and the currency has depreciated by 40 per
cent is clearly reflected every day in the humanitarian crisis. Without support for
the economy and currency stabilization, humanitarian intervention will not be able
to address or stop the current deterioration. In 2018, Saudi Arabia deposited $2
billion in the Central Bank; at the time, that generous intervention was the basis for
mitigating the humanitarian crisis, avoiding famine and stabilizing the currency.
Today, supporting the economy and currency stabilization should be an urgent
priority. Here I reiterate the Prime Minister’s call, at the donor conference at the start
of this month, for the establishment of a mechanism to ensure that funds provided
by donors for aid work in Yemen are handled by the Central Bank. The handling
of donor funds outside the framework of State institutions threatens to undermine
those institutions and bring about their collapse; it is a grave error that will lead to
chaos and long-term damage. We once again call on development partners, friendly
States and donor organizations to support the Government’s efforts to achieve
stability and economic recovery, and to support the national currency. We emphasize
21-0377531/32

S/2021/266

the need to work on the transition from aid to development in response to the
Government’s programme.
The Government of Yemen reiterates its stern condemnation of the repeated
terrorist attacks by the militias against Saudi Arabian territory, civilian objects and
oil facilities. The attacks represent a serious threat to the security and stability of the
region, and bear the hallmarks of the malicious scheme to sow chaos and destruction
in Yemen and the region. We call upon the Council to confront this aggressive
behaviour. Yemen will not be an arena for reckless attempts by the Iranian regime
to undermine the stability of neighbouring countries, international security and the
global economy.
The United Nations has reached deadlock with the militias over the status of
the oil tanker FSO SAFER. The Government of Yemen has repeatedly pointed out
that the militias pay no heed to warnings about, or the potential consequences of, the
leakage of the tanker’s cargo of more than 1 million barrels of crude oil. The militias
are manipulating the issue, which they are using to bargain with and extort the
international community. The Council must take strict deterrent measures against
the militias and force them to allow the United Nations technical team access to
the tanker urgently and unconditionally, in order to carry out the initial assessment
and maintenance in preparation for the unloading of the oil, and to avoid a serious
environmental, economic and humanitarian disaster for Yemen, the countries of the
region and international shipping.

32/32

21-03775
