United Nations

S/PV.6068

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6068th meeting
Friday, 16 January 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ripert . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Tiendrébéogo
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Weisleder
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Heller
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Çorman
Mr. Butagira
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Khalilzad
Mr. Bui The Giang

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Letter dated 19 December 2008 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2008/804)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-21124 (E)

*0921124*

S/PV.6068

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Expression of farewell to Mr. Zalmay Khalilzad,
Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations
The President (spoke in French): As I am aware
that this is the last meeting of the Security Council in
which our colleague Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad,
Permanent Representative of the United States of
America, will participate, I should like, on behalf of
the Security Council, to say how much we regret to see
his departure as a colleague, but above all as a friend.
Zalmay Khalilzad is a man of conviction, and of
commitment, and, above all a man of talent. I think that
none of us will forget the warmth of his personality,
and I am sure that we will long remember his
resounding laughter echoing in and around the
corridors of the Security Council. I know that we will
miss it.
The role of Permanent Representative of the
United States to the United Nations is not an easy one.
He has the privileges of status and power, but the
reality is that he also often has the privilege of
solitude. In this role, Zalmay Khalilzad has always
acted with great dignity and grace, as a great diplomat
and a tough negotiator. He always applied the old
saying: always dialogue; always negotiate; never turn
away.
We all know his curriculum vitae, which clearly
embodies the American miracle of integration and
personal success. But also in a way, it powerfully
embodies the United Nations and the cultural diversity
of the world: Afghanistan, where he came from;
Lebanon, where he grew up; and then the United
States, which both gave him opportunities and
benefited by his talent.
I would like to stress, in particular, after a
difficult period, how Zalmay Khalilzad has brought the
United States of America closer to the United Nations.
We all know how our common Organization needs the
support and active commitment of all of its Members,
and in particular of the United States.
So, my dear Zal, we all wish you every success in
your journey through life. And in order to help you
improve your French, I will tell you we are not saying
adieu, but au revoir.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Letter dated 19 December 2008 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2008/804)
The President (spoke in French): I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite the representatives
of Burundi, Italy and Somalia to participate in the
consideration of the item of the agenda, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Duale
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): The Council
will now begin its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Security Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/37, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Burkina Faso, Burundi, Italy,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Turkey, Uganda and the
United States of America.
Members of the Council also have before them
the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Somalia contained in document S/2008/709. I should
also like to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to documents S/2008/804 and S/2008/846,
containing letters dated 19 December 2008 and
31 December 2008 from the Secretary-General
respectively.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

2

09-21124

S/PV.6068

In favour:
Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Japan, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mexico, Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Viet Nam
The President (spoke in French): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1863 (2009).
I shall now give the floor to members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): First,
merci beaucoup for the very nice, warm and kind
statement that you made about me, Mr. President. It
has been a great honour for me to represent the United
States in the United Nations and in the Council. I thank
you all, fellow members, for the work that we have
done together, and I thank you also for the friendship,
for the spirit and for the relationship that we have
developed and through which we have worked in
dealing with the many challenges that we have faced in
the course of my service here. I shall miss you all, and
I wish you all the best as the Council continues to deal
with many challenges that affect the future of the
world. I shall remember fondly my service here. I
believe that the United States needs the United Nations
and the United Nations needs an active participant in
the United States. So, thank you again, Sir, for your
kind remarks and your personal leadership, as well as
for the work that you and I have done together.
I would like also to thank my colleagues for
unanimously supporting our resolution on Somalia
today. I take pride in the role that the United States has
played in helping move the issue of Somalia to the
forefront of the Council’s attention.
Somalia is one of the most complex challenges
faced by the international community. One of the
symptoms of its instability — the scourge of piracy —
was debated earlier this week in this building as 24
countries met to agree on a mechanism to coordinate
international efforts to address this problem. We cannot
afford, however, to address Somalia only through the
lens of piracy. We need a comprehensive approach that
addresses the root causes of instability in Somalia,
which include political, economic, humanitarian and
security issues.

09-21124

The resolution adopted today attempts to address
those root causes by making a clear commitment that
the Security Council will assume its responsibilities
with regard to Somalia. The resolution also provides
for the United Nations to back up this commitment
with concrete logistical support for the forces of the
African Union. We intend this support for the African
Union Mission in Somalia to allow it to continue to
provide security for key humanitarian infrastructure in
Mogadishu until 1 June, by which date the Council will
make a decision on movement towards a United
Nations peacekeeping force.
As we shoulder our responsibility, this resolution
makes clear that the ultimate responsibility for national
reconciliation and stabilization lies with the Somalis
themselves. The United States strongly supports the
political process, led by Mr. Ahmedou Ould-Abdallah,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
calls on all Somali stakeholders to renounce violence
and engage constructively in the formation of a unity
government in the interest of establishing lasting
peace, stability and effective governance in Somalia.
We also attach great importance to the establishment,
under the terms of the Djibouti peace agreement, of
joint Somali security forces, who ultimately will take
responsibility for ensuring security in the country.
Finally, I thank you once again, Mr. President, for
your courtesy and for all the work that you have done
and we that we have all done together. I wish you all
the best. Au revoir.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I should like to
speak in explanation of vote. Before doing so,
however, I should like to join other delegations in
paying tribute to Ambassador Khalilzad.
The question of the situation in Somalia has been
a genuinely difficult one for the Security Council to
address. Many factors — related to the political,
security and development areas — have needed to be
weighed in making a decision, along with the
imperative of building a peace to keep. I should like to
express the thanks of my Government and our Foreign
Secretary to the United States and Secretary Rice for
all the hard work that has gone into this resolution, in
particular their efforts to take into account the concerns
of others, including those of the United Kingdom. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for the
advice that he and his staff have provided to the

3

S/PV.6068

Council on this issue in helping us to reach a balanced
conclusion.
We believe that the current resolution offers a
good way forward that takes account of the key
relevant factors. Crucially, the resolution provides for
enhanced support for the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM). AMISOM troops are doing a
difficult job in difficult circumstances, and we salute
them for their work. This resolution authorizes a
United Nations logistics mission, including equipment
and services that will support the African Union (AU)
peacekeeping operation in Somalia, and it requests the
Secretary-General to establish a trust fund to ensure the
continuity of funding for AMISOM. As regards the
assessed contribution element, we believe that the
funding arrangement provided for in the resolution is
workable, but we will need to monitor it closely and
must not, of course, cut across General Assembly
prerogatives.
Secondly, the resolution provides for a second
decision on whether or not to mandate a United
Nations peacekeeping operation. That is an important
point for my Government, based on Brahimi best
practices and a comprehensive and realistic way
forward. When the time comes for the Council to take
that decision, my Government will look to weigh the
following factors: the situation on the ground,
particularly the political and security situation; the
question of whether there is a sustainable peace that
Blue Helmet troops can realistically keep; and what is
in the best interests of United Nations peacekeeping
overall. We will be looking to the Secretary-General’s
report to address those issues in full so that the Council
can take an informed decision at the right time.
Finally, the resolution provides for renewed
impetus for the implementation of the Djibouti
agreement, and the Secretary-General is asked to make
recommendations, including on the option of an
international conference to that end. To make sure that
there is absolutely no doubt, I wish to stress that the
intention of such implementation and such renewed
impetus is not to replace Djibouti, but to reinforce it.
For that, renewed efforts by the parties will also be
necessary.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): Before speaking in
explanation of vote, I would like to join others in
paying a warm tribute to our departing friend,
Ambassador Khalilzad, an extremely capable

4

representative of the United States. We are very
pleased and fortunate to have worked with him, albeit
briefly. I wish him every success in his future
endeavours.
Japan shares the serious concern over the
situation in Somalia: first, over the lack of political
stability and security; and secondly, over the
continuing piracy and armed robbery off its coast.
Concerted and intensified efforts by the international
community are essential to address those concerns.
With regard to bringing about peace and stability
in Somalia and the region, we appreciate the important
role played by the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and the States Members of the African
Union, and recognize the need to strengthen the
Mission.
Initially, in his latest relevant report (S/2008/709)
and in various letters, the Secretary-General
recommended that the establishment of a multinational
force would be an appropriate option in view of the
situation on the ground. Subsequently, in his most
recent letter, dated 19 December 2008 (S/2008/804),
the Secretary-General offered his assessment that
supporting AMISOM operations would pave the way
for the eventual deployment of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation, subject to progress in the
political process and an improvement in the security
situation.
Japan supports a two-stage approach to bringing
about peace and stability in Somalia. In the first stage,
AMISOM would be strengthened and then, as the
necessary conditions are developed, a United Nations
peacekeeping operation would be established in the
second. Therefore, we are pleased to join in the
unanimous adoption of resolution 1863 (2009), and we
appreciate the leadership role played by the United
States in particular. The Council has confirmed its
intention to establish a United Nations peacekeeping
operation in Somalia as a follow-up force to AMISOM,
subject to a further decision by 1 June, based on
consideration of the report of the Secretary-General to
be issued by 15 April.
On this occasion, I would like to emphasize two
principles that are important for my delegation,
concerning the establishment of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation and extending United Nations
support to an operation authorized but not necessarily
established by the Security Council.

09-21124

S/PV.6068

First, the United Nations has learned many
important lessons over the years in various
peacekeeping operations throughout the world. In
Somalia itself, the United Nations has learned hard
lessons from its previous engagement in authorizing a
multinational force and from earlier peacekeeping
missions. Among those many lessons, one is strikingly
important and cannot be overemphasized. When the
Council takes a decision to establish a new operation, it
must be not only desirable, but also effectively possible
to implement. It is the Council, not the SecretaryGeneral or the Secretariat, that should take the primary
responsibility for the consequences of the decision.
In resolution 1327 (2000), the Council confirmed
its determination to give peacekeeping operations
clear, credible and achievable mandates. The Council
has also undertaken to ensure that the mandated tasks
of peacekeeping operations are appropriate to the
situation on the ground, including such factors as the
prospects for success.
Japan will study most closely the assessment that
the Secretary-General will submit in his April report,
including with regard to developments in the political
and security situations in Somalia. We will actively
participate in the discussion in the Council aimed at
deciding on the possible deployment of a United
Nations peacekeeping operation in Somalia, fully
taking into account all relevant considerations. As a
responsible member of the Council, Japan believes that
it is of the utmost importance that such a decision be
made after careful consideration of the feasibility and
effectiveness of the proposed deployment, so that the
decision will be effectively implemented.
My second point concerns logistical support. I
would like to stress the importance of respecting the
established rules and mechanisms of the United
Nations, as clearly provided for in the Charter,
including in its Article 17. It is also important to
respect the competence of the General Assembly on the
financial and administrative aspects of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and other activities, such as
AMISOM, which are authorized by the United Nations
but implemented by non-United Nations entities. Japan
would have serious reservations about compromising
the principle of financing only the expenses of United
Nations activities through mandatory assessments,
particularly if that is done by the Security Council.

09-21124

In that regard, the resolution just adopted requests
the Secretary-General to provide a logistical support
package for AMISOM so that its forces can be
incorporated into a United Nations peacekeeping
operation. Japan considers it important that the
package, requested by the Security Council, be
carefully reviewed by the General Assembly in the
light of previous resolutions. Furthermore, the
proposed logistical support package should be
implemented in a transparent and accountable manner,
in accordance with the relevant United Nations rules
and regulations.
Lastly, I would like to reaffirm the importance of
promoting the political process, which is key to
bringing about peace and security. Japan supports the
Djibouti peace process, which should be given
additional impetus and facilitated in a more secure
environment. We hope that a strengthened AMISOM
will contribute to this political process. We expect the
United Nations to take a coherent approach, including
through the role of the United Nations Political Office
for Somalia.
It is also important to advance Somalian
ownership of the process by building the capacities of
the Transitional Federal Government at the federal and
local levels. The joint transitional security forces and
the police should be supported by the international
community.
We have recently contributed to the improvement
of the Somali security sector and the country’s border
control by providing $5 million through the
International Organization for Migration and the
United Nations Development Programme. With the
concrete support of the international community,
durable peace and stability should be promoted on the
ground.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, Mr. President, I should like to
second the eloquent words you spoke to our American
colleague, Ambassador Khalilzad. I fully agree with
what you said and I would like to express gratitude to
Ambassador Khalilzad for his contribution to the work
of the Security Council and to the United Nations as a
whole. We know that the geometry of working in the
Security Council is such that sometimes we sit across
from each other and sometimes we sit on the same side
of the table, and it seems to me that the work of the
Security Council has always won when we were on the

5

S/PV.6068

same side of the table. Every effort should be made to
that effect and I know that that was how Ambassador
Khalilzad acted. I wish him every success in all his
future endeavours. Since the President’s eloquent
words of farewell were not spoken in English, I shall
rely on the very good Russian analogue. We do not say
“farewell” — we say “until we meet again”.
Moving on to the item under discussion today —
the resolution we just adopted — I would like to make
the following remarks.
The Security Council has recently given focused
attention to the situation in Somalia, adopting a whole
set of resolutions and statements to support the
political settlement in that country, to combat piracy,
and to operationalize the mechanism of targeted
sanctions. Today, we have adopted a new important
resolution to strengthen the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM).
Russia supports the activities of AMISOM. The
purpose of the resolution is to promote the full
deployment of the Mission and to prepare for its
possible transformation into a United Nations
peacekeeping operation. A future decision of the
Security Council on the deployment in Somalia of a
United Nations peacekeeping operation will depend, to
a large extent, on the commitment to peace of the
Somalis themselves, a significant improvement in the
security situation in their country and the achievement
of serious progress in the political settlement. In that
respect, we believe that the established budgetary
procedures for the transfer to AMISOM of United
Nations assets will be fully respected through the
division of the competencies of the Security Council
and the General Assembly.
Moscow sincerely welcomed the signing of the
Djibouti agreement. We call upon all parties to the
Somali conflict to scrupulously abide by the
agreements
reached
and
to
work
together
constructively to advance the process of consolidating
their society, restoring statehood and restoring longterm peace in the country.
Without doubt the main responsibility for
overcoming this protracted crisis lies primarily with
the Somalis themselves. The Russian Federation
supports the efforts of the Transitional Federal
Government to restore law and order, achieve national
reconciliation and provide for State sovereignty and the
territorial integrity of the country.

6

The resolution we have just adopted provides for
increased assistance in support of the Somali peace
process. The achievement of progress in this area will
help to resolve the entire set of problems, including the
eradication of piracy off the coast of Somalia. Russia
was a co-founder of the contact group on piracy around
Somalia, the activities of which will take place in the
general context of international efforts to stabilize the
situation in that country.
We look forward to the full and effective
implementation of this resolution with the constructive
cooperation of all parties with the African Union and
the United Nations.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, first of all, I would like to echo your
words today regarding this being Ambassador
Khalilzad’s last meeting as the Permanent
Representative of the United States to the United
Nations. I would like to highlight his contributions to
the work at the Organization and the humility and
respect that he has always shown towards his
counterparts from all States Members of the United
Nations, regardless of whether they were in agreement
or disagreement. I wish him every success in his future
endeavours.
Mexico supports resolution 1863 (2009), aware
of the urgent need for the Security Council to adopt
measures to address the deteriorating situation in all
areas on the ground and the challenges they represent,
after so many years and frustrating attempts to achieve
the stabilization of Somalia and its viability as an
independent State.
We firmly believe that only through a
comprehensive approach to the conflict will we be able
to establish the conditions for peace in Somalia, end
the widespread violence and return hundreds of
thousands of internally displaced persons and refugees
to their homes.
Mexico acknowledges the important contribution
of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
to peace and stability in the country and the
commitment shown by the Governments of Uganda
and Burundi.
The security situation of international personnel
and the Organization in Somalia has worsened
significantly. Mexico condemns the attacks against
them, which unfortunately have led to many deaths.

09-21124

S/PV.6068

Mexico expresses its deep concern over the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation and over the
very serious crimes that have been committed against
civilians, and reaffirms the importance of the fight
against impunity.
We urgently appeal to all the parties to respect
international humanitarian law, human rights and the
rights of refugees. We also urge the parties to
contribute to strengthening the political process and to
honour the commitments agreed upon in the Djibouti
agreement, which forms the basis for a settlement of
the conflict.
Today’s resolution is an initial step towards the
possible establishment of a peacekeeping operation to
replace AMISOM. In that regard, we look forward to
the report of the Secretary-General requested through
the resolution on progress in the political situation and
events on the ground as the minimal conditions
necessary for the deployment of a peacekeeping
operation. We will also be awaiting the information to
be provided by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and other relevant authorities to the
Security Council on those aspects that are crucial to the
implementation of the mandate of a future
peacekeeping operation that might genuinely promote
stability in Somalia.
Mexico
highlights
the
importance
for
neighbouring countries and countries of the region, in
coordination with the United Nations, to step up their
efforts to fight the illicit trafficking of weapons and
munitions to armed groups in Somalia. In this respect, I
reiterate the commitment of my country to the peace
process, which will certainly be reflected through
Mexico’s work as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 751
(1992) concerning Somalia, a fundamental element of
the efforts of the Organization to achieve a climate of
peace and lasting security.
Mr. Çorman (Turkey): Mr. President, before
coming to Turkey’s explanation of vote, I would like to
join you and others in paying tribute to Ambassador
Khalilzad. We knew him as the United States
Ambassador to Baghdad. We worked closely with him
to overcome some of the great challenges faced by Iraq
at that time. We have had the honour to work with him
here. We can only regret that it was a very short period
of time that we could share membership in this Council

09-21124

with him. We will cherish him as a man who combines
the wisdom of the East and the West.
Turkey attaches great importance to the
comprehensive and lasting settlement of the situation
in Somalia; hence our sponsorship of today’s
resolution. We welcome the Djibouti peace agreement.
It presents the basis for the resolution of the conflict.
Yet more needs to be done by the Somalis themselves.
We commend the contribution of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) to lasting peace
and stability in Somalia. We appreciate the
commitments of the Governments of Uganda and
Burundi. We are concerned about the worsening
humanitarian situation in Somalia. It is crucial that
AMISOM remain in Somalia, but for AMISOM to
carry out its mandate in a more efficient manner, it has
to be reinforced.
Today’s resolution reflects the determination of
the Council to establish a United Nations peacekeeping
operation in Somalia as a follow-on force to AMISOM.
Progress in the political process and security
conditions on the ground will no doubt have an impact
on the decision that the Security Council is expected to
adopt by 1 June 2009. We welcome the call made in
this resolution to the Secretary-General to establish a
trust fund to provide financial support to AMISOM
until a United Nations peacekeeping operation is
deployed. Turkey will participate in the donor
conference to be convened by the Secretary-General,
and it will make an announcement on its financial
contribution.
In line with the provisions of this resolution, the
Turkish armed forces are prepared to give training to
prospective peacekeepers within AMISOM in Turkey,
as outlined in the letter of His Excellency Abdullah
Gül, President of the Republic of Turkey, to His
Excellency Ban Ki-moon, dated 29 December 2008.
By adopting today’s resolution, the Council did
what is necessary on its part. Now is the time for the
parties to the Djibouti process to seize this opportunity
to create conditions that will be conducive to the
deployment of the United Nations peacekeeping
operation as early as possible. In that regard, I would
like to express our appreciation for the tireless efforts
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
to continue to make progress on the political process.

7

S/PV.6068

Mr. Butagira (Uganda): Allow me to also join
those who have paid tribute to Ambassador Khalilzad.
One may wonder if somebody who has just joined the
Council has the qualifications to pay such tribute. But I
can assure my colleagues that, although I am new to
the Council, I have been around the United Nations for
a while, and during my work I have come across the
Ambassador. We have interacted insofar as some of the
work of the Security Council touches on our interests.
So when I pay tribute, I mean it. I know him. Lastly on
this point, I would like to place on the record his active
encouragement and support for our bid for Security
Council membership. As he can see, it was successful,
and I would like to thank him on that score.
On the resolution just adopted, Uganda welcomes
its adoption and would like to thank the United States
and all of those who have put in a lot of work to see to
it that this resolution was before us today. For a while
now, whenever the occasion arose for us to take part as
outsiders in the open debates in this Council on matters
concerning peacekeeping, Uganda and the African
Union have almost invariably urged the United Nations
to shoulder its responsibility and establish a United
Nations peacekeeping force in Somalia. We are thus
very happy that we have reached this stage. I would
like therefore to thank the Council for this unanimous
decision.
The resolution envisages two stages; one is
support for the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM). As Council members know, Uganda is
playing a leading part in AMISOM, along with
Burundi. Without shirking our responsibilities on the
maintenance of international peace and security, we
have stayed the course in Somalia despite the
difficulties and the lack of reinforcement from other
countries. We did so because we believe that the cause
of Somali peace is just and very crucial. Therefore, we
stayed in the hope that the international community
would come in and reinforce us. That is why we
welcome this resolution: it envisages not only
strengthening AMISOM as it is, but also, at the
appropriate stage, within six months, considering the
establishment of a United Nations peacekeeping force
in Somalia.
Since there are some misgivings about when that
stage will arise, I would like to emphasize that the
situation in Somalia is so unique and challenging that
if we have to wait for a complete restoration of peace
as the sine qua non for deployment of a United Nations

8

peacekeeping force, we may never achieve that goal.
What I am saying is that the United Nations and the
Security Council should sometimes engage in
peacemaking as well. The presence of United Nations
peacekeepers can be a catalyst for peace. We should
therefore not be timid and wait for when the situation
is completely peaceful. In fact, when it is peaceful,
why would the United Nations be required there? I
would like therefore to flag that issue, so that when the
time comes, we will also bear it in mind.
Lastly, Uganda welcomes the guiding principles
agreed by the parties in the Djibouti peace agreement
on 26 November 2008, in particular the importance of
broad-based and representative institutions reached
through a political process that is ultimately inclusive.
The responsibility for peace in Somalia is ultimately
that of the Somali people. Therefore this is a challenge
to them. The Council has given encouragement and has
spoken, but the challenge is for the Somali people to
move fast and unify themselves, putting such
institutions in place. Then the international community
can come to their support.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): Mr. President, you have expressed all of our
feelings for Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad with such
eloquence, that I can only support what you said. I
wish Ambassador Khalilzad every success in the
future.
With regard to the adoption of resolution 1863
(2009), on Somalia, this is an important step forward
for the restoration of peace and stability to this country
which has suffered through more than two decades of
war. We believe that the resolution we have just
adopted provides a basis for practical efforts by the
Council to restore real peace to Somalia.
For many months now, we have been calling for
support for the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and for the establishment of a United
Nations peacekeeping operation to follow on from
AMISOM in the future. We are delighted to see that the
Council is now convinced of the validity of that
proposal. The resolution we have just adopted is a
practical step forward in that direction.
The present absence of stability in Somalia
should not prevent certain members of the Council
from supporting a resolution with regard, inter alia, to
the deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation in Somalia. We need to remember that the

09-21124

S/PV.6068

United Nations has deployed peacekeeping operations
to other regions of the world that were not stable, and
that those operations did a great job and made it
possible to restore peace to those regions.
We believe that the Council should not stop at the
adoption
of
resolution
1863
(2009).
The
implementation of the resolution has to be followed up
in a timely manner. We need to move forward on that
basis to advance the political process in Somalia
through a comprehensive dialogue that includes Somali
parties without exception with the aim of establishing a
national unity Government and creating a unified
national army. We must seize the opportunity we now
have and begin without further ado to implement the
resolution. We must also support Mr. Ould-Abdallah,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, to
ensure that the political process in Somalia continues
to move forward on the basis of the Djibouti
agreement.
Mr. Tiendrébéogo (Burkina Faso) (spoke in
French): We should like to join you, Mr. President, in
paying tribute to Ambassador Khalilzad and in
expressing our good wishes for his future endeavours.
With respect to the resolution that we have just
adopted, we would like to thank the delegation of the
United States of America for its leadership in the
preparation and negotiation of the draft. Burkina Faso
would also like to thank the members of the Security
Council, who agreed to adopt the resolution
unanimously.
For some time now the Council has been facing a
dilemma in Somalia: how to act effectively in a
situation of chaos. At the same time, is it not precisely
because there is chaos that our action is necessary?
With the present resolution, the Council is laying an
important milestone on the road to establishing a
peacekeeping operation. Burkina Faso chose to support
the resolution even though we had hoped it would
express a firmer commitment on the part of the Council
beyond the intention currently expressed in the text.
We believe nonetheless that the resolution will make it
possible to support more fully the dynamic of the
political process under way, because it takes into
account certain recommendations of the African Union,
specifically those related to strengthening the African
Union Mission to Somalia (AMISOM) and the
deployment of a peacekeeping operation.

09-21124

We look forward to studying the report of the
Secretary-General and also hope that the Council can
quickly come to a firm decision to establish an
operation. For the time being, we invite donors to
contribute to the special trust fund created to support
the efforts of AMISOM.
We take this opportunity to reiterate our gratitude
to the troops of Uganda and Burundi involved in
AMISOM and our support for the mission of
Mr. Ahmedou Ould-Abdallah, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Somalia.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make an explanation of vote in my capacity as the
representative of France.
France fully supports resolution 1863 (2009) and
welcomes its unanimous adoption by the Security
Council. I should also like to thank Ambassador
Khalilzad for the decisive role he played in the
negotiation of the text.
Inaction is not an option given the tragedy facing
the Somali people. We are thinking in particular of
those millions of people who are currently dependent
on international aid and of those waves of displaced
persons fleeing the violence who find themselves in the
most precarious of conditions on the Afgoye road.
On the other hand, to decide to establish a
peacekeeping operation when the necessary political
and security conditions are not in place would be to
destine the Blue Helmets to failure and to give false
hope to one of the most traumatized populations of
Africa. It would also have been wrong for us to commit
blindly to deploying a peacekeeping operation at an
arbitrary date.
The approach spelled out in resolution 1863
(2009) allows us both to send a strong political signal
and to begin to take concrete action in Somalia itself.
The resolution sends the new and realistic political
message that the Security Council is ready in principle
to establish a peacekeeping operation once the
necessary conditions have been met. The resolution is
very clear on this point. It is also very clear in setting
out that, once those conditions are met, a subsequent
decision will need to be taken by the Council.
Naturally, that decision will be taken in response to
political and security developments in the situation. In
that respect, we look forward to the SecretaryGeneral’s delivery in April of a detailed report that will

9

S/PV.6068

equip the Security Council to take a decision at that
point.
Major events are taking place. The Ethiopian
army has now withdrawn from Mogadishu. Following
the resignation of President Yusuf on 29 December
2008, presidential elections are being planned for
26 January. The risks are great, but it is crucial that the
Somali parties seize the political opportunities before
them to implement fully the Djibouti agreement, make
it completely inclusive, pursue political dialogue and
start the work to improve security in certain areas.
Resolution 1863 (2009) enables the Security
Council to act right now to support the African Union
Mission to Somalia (AMISOM). We wish here to pay
tribute in particular to Uganda and to Burundi for their
efforts. It also makes it possible to support the joint
security force created following the Djibouti agreement.
The resolution calls on the Secretary-General to
establish a trust fund and to organize a donors
conference to find additional resources, as well as to
establish a logistics support package for AMISOM, as
he proposed on 19 December. All of this can and
should be done quickly, in a spirit of transparency and,
of course, in full respect of the budgetary principles of
the United Nations.
The Security Council has chosen to act in and off
the coast of Somalia. On the sea, through resolutions
1846 (2008) and 1851 (2008), the fight against piracy
is now actively under way, with the notable
participation of members of the European Union and of
many other nations. On land, resolution 1863 (2008)
provides for a number of steps that have to be
translated into reality. Whether we are talking about the
financial measures that I have just mentioned or the
assignment to Somalia of a special representative of
the Secretary-General, these are all tools to help the
Somalis to live up to the promise of the Djibouti
agreement to restore peace finally to Somalia.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Somalia.
Mr. Duale (Somalia): Let me first and foremost
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of

10

the presidency and to congratulate you on resolution
1863 (2009), which has been adopted unanimously
under your presidency. I also express our gratitude to
all the members of the Security Council for having
voted unanimously in favour of the resolution.
We believe that the resolution is a step in the
right direction for the time being in trying to address
the complex situation in Somalia, bearing in mind that
that complex situation requires measures that are not
only active but also urgent. A comprehensive holistic
approach is required to address the root causes of the
crisis in Somalia, which has been ongoing for almost
20 years and now includes acts of piracy off the Somali
coast, on which the Security Council has already taken
necessary action, again in unanimity.
I am also grateful for the very wise statements
made by the members of the Council, starting with my
colleague from the Untied States. I should like to
congratulate him and to express my regret that he is
leaving us.
I should also like to thank all the others who have
mentioned on a positive note that it is essential that a
United Nations peacekeeping force deploy as soon as
possible — time and other factors allowing. However, I
think that, as my colleagues from Uganda and Turkey
have mentioned, if we establish the sine qua non
condition that there must be peace and stability before
a United Nations operation can start, that may take
more than another 10 years.
Somalis are trying to implement the Djibouti
agreement. As usual, there are always problems when
such a complex agreement has to be implemented. If
we wait until everything is in place, I believe that we
will miss the boat and Somalia will be forever absent
from the international community.
I would very much like to thank the Council for
this resolution, which we believe is a good one that
gives us hope for the future.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council
will remain seized of the matter.
The meeting rose at 11.10 a.m.

09-21124
