S/PV.8274

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8274th meeting

Friday, 1 June 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Djédjé
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-16710 (E)
*1816710*

S/PV.8274

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 3.55 p.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to take this opportunity, on behalf of the Security
Council, to pay tribute to Her Excellency Ambassador
Joanna Wronecka, Permanent Representative of Poland
to the United Nations, for her service as President of
the Council for the month of May. I am sure I speak for
all members of the Security Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Wronecka and her team for
the great diplomatic skill with which they conducted
the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Israel to
participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2018/516, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Kuwait. The Council is ready to proceed
to the vote on the draft resolution.
I shall first give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of June. We wish you every
success. I would also like to join you in expressing our
thanks to Her Excellency Ambassador Joanna Wronecka
of Poland for the outstanding professionalism she
demonstrated in presiding over the Security Council
last month, which was a very busy one.
2/17

01/06/2018

In the past two weeks we have had two rounds of
negotiations at the expert level with the participation of
all the members of the Council, as well as meetings with
all Member States, all of which have been extremely
transparent, comprehensive and inclusive. We have
listened to every proposed amendment and suggestion
and have worked hard to take into account all the issues
raised. We would like to thank all the members of the
Council for their positive attitude and constructive
participation in the preparation of draft resolution
S/2018/516, which we are submitting for a vote today.
We urge all members to vote in favour of the
draft resolution, the text of which has been agreed
on and includes wording from previous resolutions
and presidential statements. It calls on all the relevant
parties to respect international humanitarian law
and international human rights law, including with
regard to the protection of civilians, and reaffirms
the importance of taking the necessary measures to
save and protect civilians and hold all perpetrators of
violations accountable. It highlights the need to respect
international humanitarian law in all circumstances in
line with common article 1 to the Geneva Conventions.
It also calls upon the Secretary-General to investigate
the recent events in the occupied territories and to
submit a written report as soon as possible within
60 days from the adoption of the draft resolution,
which should include, inter alia, proposals on the
ways and means to ensure the safety and protection
of the Palestinian civilian population under Israeli
occupation, including recommendations on international
protection mechanism.
In these critical circumstances, we again call upon
Member States to vote in favour of the draft resolution.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I
congratulate the Russian Federation on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
June. I want to thank the Polish Mission for what it did
last to help make everything go smoothly. Before I get
started, I would like to clarify for my Kuwaiti colleague
that they did not take into account everyone’s edits,
because we had quite a few, and there were concerns
in the Security Council at the fact that Hamas was not
mentioned in the draft resolution (S/2018/516).
The draft resolution presented by Kuwait represents
a grossly one-sided view of what has taken place in
Gaza in recent weeks. Anyone who cares about the
peace process should vote against it. But make no
18-16710

01/06/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

mistake: regardless of how others choose to vote, the
United States will oppose the draft resolution and we
will veto it if we must.
The terrorist group Hamas bears primary
responsibility for the awful living conditions in Gaza. It
is Hamas that has served as the de facto Government of
Gaza for last 11 years. It is Hamas that has consistently
diverted humanitarian assistance into military
infrastructure, building rockets instead of schools and
terror tunnels instead of hospitals. It is Hamas that
has attacked the very humanitarian access points into
Gaza that are lifelines for the Palestinian people. It is
Hamas and its allies that fired rockets — at least 70 of
them this week alone, indiscriminately — into Israeli
communities. It is Hamas that has incited violent acts at
the boundary fence, purposely infiltrating its terrorist
fighters among civilians and deliberately using innocent
people as human shields. It is Hamas that openly calls
for the destruction of the State of Israel. It is Hamas
that refuses to cooperate with the Palestinian Authority
to unite in the pursuit of peace. And yet Kuwait’s draft
resolution makes no mention of Hamas, none at all.
Instead the draft resolution places all the blame on
Israel. Kuwait actually blames Israel for Hamas firing
rockets onto a kindergarten playground in Israel. It
conveniently ignores the fact that there is not one single
Israeli settlement or soldier in Gaza — there have not
been any since 2005. It ignores the fact that, according
to Hamas officials themselves, the majority of those
killed by Israeli Defence Forces in recent weeks were
members of the Hamas terrorist group, not peaceful
civilians. Finally, the draft resolution perpetuates the
bias towards Israel that has long been the hallmark of
the United Nations.
It is draft resolutions like this one that undermine
the credibility of the United Nations in dealing with
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Because this draft
resolution is wildly inaccurate in its characterization
of recent events in Gaza and because it would harm
any efforts aimed at achieving peace, the United States
will oppose it and will veto it if necessary. But there is
an alternative.
For those who are able to bring themselves
to recognize the reality that Hamas terrorism is a
considerable factor in the recent unrest and for the
terrible conditions in Gaza, we are offering a separate
draft resolution (S/2018/520). This draft resolution
rightly places responsibility where it belongs. It

S/PV. 8274

includes many features that Kuwait’s draft resolution
lacks. It condemns the indiscriminate firing of rockets
by Hamas against Israeli civilian communities. It
condemns Hamas diversion of resources into military
infrastructure. It demands that Hamas stop its deliberate
efforts to put Palestinian civilians at risk at the boundary
fence. By offering this draft resolution, we are giving
members of the Security Council additional options.
They can choose to condemn the terrorists who are
responsible for inciting violence in Gaza and against
condemning a country for acting in self-defence, just as
any of us would do. They can choose to cast their votes
in ways that condemn both parties or neither party.
Finally, they can make the choice to vote in favour of
the Kuwaiti draft resolution and against the American
draft resolution. In doing that, they would make it clear
that they believe that all responsibility lies with Israel
and none lies with the Hamas terrorist group.
The situation in Gaza is truly tragic. No one should
have to live in such conditions. The United States
remains fully determined to pursue a long-term peace
agreement between the Palestinians and the Israelis.
Such an agreement would benefit the entire Middle
East region, and most especially the Palestinian and
Israeli peoples. But a necessary precondition for peace
is recognition of reality. One of those realities is that
Hamas is a major impediment to peace. It is in charge
of Gaza and it uses its resources not to help the people
of Gaza but to wage war against Israel.
Another reality is when the United Nations sides
with terrorists over Israel, as the Kuwaiti draft resolution
does, it only makes a peaceful resolution of this conflict
harder to reach. We strongly encourage the Security
Council to vote against Kuwait’s draft resolution and
to acknowledge the concerns about Hamas by voting in
favour of the United States draft resolution. Everyone
at this table has a choice — either to support Hamas or
not. This vote will tell the story.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall first put
to the vote the draft resolution contained in document
S/2018/516, submitted by Kuwait.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Côte
d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, France, Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Peru, Russian Federation, Sweden

18-167103/17

S/PV.8274

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Against:
United States of America
Abstaining:
Ethiopia, Netherlands, Poland, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland
The President (spoke in Russian): The draft
resolution received 10 votes in favour, one against and
four abstentions. The draft resolution has not been
adopted, owing to the negative vote of a permanent
member of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of
the Council who wish to make statements following
the voting.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): The draft
resolution (S/2018/516), which was not adopted by
the Security Council owing to the veto by the United
States, was submitted by us on behalf of the Group
of Arab States, as Kuwait is the Arab member of the
Council at present. This draft resolution was also
supported by the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
at its extraordinary emergency summit, held recently
in Istanbul. We deplore that the Council failed to adopt
the draft resolution, which stipulated that international
protection should be provided to the Palestinian people.
The past few days have shown that the Palestinian
people, as a result of the tragic situation in which
they live, are in dire need of swaying our conscience
to provide them with the protection they require in
the face of the massacres perpetrated against them by
Israel, the occupying Power.
Not only in the light of the most recent protests,
but also over the past five decades, international
humanitarian law, international human rights law and
relevant Security Council resolutions have not been
taken into consideration. We would like to thank all
countries that voted in favour of the draft resolution for
their principled and supportive positions towards the
Charter of the United Nations and the international law.
The message sent by the Security Council today in
voting against the draft resolution is that the occupying
Power is not subject to international law and Security
Council resolutions, that it is exempt from accountability
and condemnation, and that the Palestinian people, even
after repeated Israeli aggressions and violations against
their basic rights, do not even deserve a mechanism to
provide them with international protection, despite the
Council’s affirmation and commitment that it protects
4/17

01/06/2018

civilians, in line with many of its resolutions. The
message is also that the most recent events, which
claimed the lives of hundreds of civilians and thousands
of injured people, including women and children, do not
deserve an independent and transparent investigation
in order to identify the perpetrator, even though we
all know who the aggressor is and who is responsible
for that.
The Council’s failure to assume its responsibilities
and to compel the occupying Power to implement
Security Council resolutions will exacerbate the
situation in the occupying territories and increase the
feeling of frustration and despair among Palestinians,
which will undoubtedly fuel further violence,
instability, hatred and extremism.
I would like in this regard to quote the questions
posed to the entire world by the Amir of Kuwait, His
Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah,
in his address to the seventh extraordinary Summit of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation which was
held in Istanbul on 18 May. He asked,
“Why must the Palestinians continue to suffer?
Why do we ignore Security Council resolutions and
fail to implement them? Why does the international
community fail to act and resolve the situation?
Why does Israel enjoy impunity? Why are all those
lives lost? Why is all that blood shed while the
entire world remains silent?”
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, and I join colleagues in welcoming you to
the presidency for this month and saying that the United
Kingdom looks forward to working with Russia. I also
thank Poland for its very distinguished presidency of
the Council.
The United Kingdom remains extremely concerned
by the situation in Gaza. We condemn the violent
activities of Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad and
other terrorist organisations, and we condemn them
unreservedly. We have recently witnessed unacceptable
mortar and rocket attacks from Gaza into Israel. Such
acts of terror are destructive to peace efforts, and
they need to stop. In the past weeks, we have seen
violence, Hamas’ exploitation of peaceful protests and
a disturbing volume of live fire. Hamas’ military wing
has been proscribed as a terrorist organization by the
United Kingdom since 2001, and the United Kingdom
has sanctions in place against senior Hamas officials.
18-16710

01/06/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The recent violence has led to the tragic loss of life
of over 100 Palestinians, and we reiterate that there is
an urgent need to establish the facts surrounding past
weeks’ events. The deteriorating situation in Gaza
should concentrate our minds on how we can work
urgently towards a resolution of the long-standing
issues between Israel and the Palestinian people.
The United Kingdom has long supported United
Nations action on Israeli-Palestinian issues. It is
therefore regrettable that today’s draft resolutions
S/2018/516 and S/2018/520 contain elements that are
either imbalanced or too vague to be viable. For example,
the Kuwaiti text fails to name terrorist actors, including
Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad, and its suggestion
of an international protection mechanism risks raising
unrealistic expectations. We condemn Hamas, but at
the same time we regret that the American text does
not adequately reference Israel’s responsibilities and
obligations with regard to Gaza. Therefore, the United
Kingdom will abstain in the voting on both draft
resolutions today.
I have set out our principled rationale and nothing
more should be construed.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate Poland on its
excellent Security Council presidency in May. I also
congratulate Russia on assuming the presidency and
wish it every success.
We regret that the Security Council has not been
able to achieve consensus on a text. On behalf of realism
and pragmatism, and independent of the differences
that may exist between us on the content, who could
argue that the gravity of the situation in Gaza and the
threats to regional stability that result from it do not
demand a strong message from the Council?

S/PV. 8274

in which the risk of an escalation of the situation in
Gaza has never been higher since 2014, as we have seen
by the dozens of rockets launched from Gaza into Israeli
territory during recent days, the Council is silent. The
Council’s heavy silence is increasingly deafening. This
silence is neither acceptable nor understandable. It is not
acceptable to the Palestinian and Israeli people, who are
the first victims of the conflict. It is not understandable
to the world, which looks to us and harshly judges our
inaction in the face of a new conflict in the Middle
East. Lastly, it is disastrous for the very credibility
of the Council and, more broadly, of multilateralism,
which we believe in more than ever.
We have been ready to commit to a constructive
discussion on all draft texts presented to Council
members over the past few months without exception.
There may be difficulties with certain texts, but we
believe precisely in the possibility of overcoming
those difficulties through discussion. We believe in
the possibility of patiently and pragmatically reaching
consensus. After all, that is the very heart of our
responsibility under the terms of the Charter of the
United Nations.
A new opportunity was given to us to overcome
this silence by engaging in a discussion on the draft
resolution as presented by Kuwait (S/2018/516). The
text that was initially presented did present some
difficulties. Alongside other members of the Council,
we are committed to a rigorous discussion in order to
distinctly improve the text and that was the condition
that we set in order to provide our support to the text.

We are touching on the heart of the Council’s
responsibility — both its role as recognized by the
Charter of the United Nations with regard to peace and
security and its historic role in the conflict between
Israel and Palestine. It is the Council that, over a
number of decades, has defined the main parameters
for resolving that conflict, and those same parameters
have been rendered fragile by unilateral initiatives. If
the Council fails to fulfil its responsibilities today, who
will assume them?

The final text is certainly not perfect. We would
have liked it to clearly establish Hamas’ responsibility
and condemn the rocket launches against Israel,
for example, but the in-depth consultations carried
out over the past two weeks have led to significant
improvements. The text that we support today responds
to a situation in which, over the past few weeks and in
particular on 14 May, when 60 people lost their lives,
we have seen a disproportionate and indiscriminate use
of force. The text deplores that situation and calls for
the right to respect for peaceful protest. It also calls
for protection measures to be taken in the Palestinian
territories and in particular in Gaza. It requests that
the Secretary-General report on the subject within
two months.

After two months in which 120 people have been
killed and 4,000 have been left with bullet wounds, and

But the text does not stop there. It responds, at least
in part, to the concerns we have voiced. For example,

18-167105/17

S/PV.8274

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the text condemns all acts of violence — including
terrorist acts — against civilians. It calls on all parties
to respect international humanitarian law and human
rights. It also condemns any action that could endanger
the lives of civilians and calls upon all actors to ensure
that protests remain peaceful. It is no longer silent on
rocket attacks targeting civilians on Israeli territory. It
also recalls that the lifting of the blockade on Gaza,
which must take place, should take into account the
security concerns of all. As the Council knows, France
will never compromise on Israel’s security. Finally,
the text encourages initiatives that seek long-term
improvements to the humanitarian situation in Gaza,
pursuant to the proposals of the Special Coordinator of
the United Nations, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, as well as
tangible progress in inter-Palestinian reconciliation.
The text ends with a call for relaunching the peace
process in order to reach an agreement between the
parties within the framework of the two-State solution.
All of these elements, like our readiness to allow the
Security Council to assume its responsibilities have led
us to vote in favour of the draft resolution. The meaning
of our work, the very purpose of the Council is to work
towards a common understanding and response to
threats to peace and security. We once again call on all
parties to embark upon this path in good faith and with
perseverance. The credibility of the Council and our
collective action depend on it.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): The delegation of
Kazakhstan congratulates the Russian Federation on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council. We
wish our colleagues every success in chairing the work
of the Council in the month of June. We also commend
Ms. Wronecka, her team and Poland, as a whole, for
their excellent and professional stewardship of the
Council’s activities last month.
Kazakhstan voted in favour of the Kuwaiti draft
resolution S/2018/516 today because we believe that any
type of violence against civilians — including acts of
terror, provocation, incitement and destruction — must
be stopped. Lives were lost and we cannot remain silent.
In addressing the Palestinian-Israeli conflict,
the draft resolution calls on the good offices of
the Secretary-General and the use of peacemaking
mechanisms of the United Nations in this context. At the
same time, the document calls on all parties to refrain
from any actions that might aggravate tensions further
or lead to a spiralling of conflict from which we could
6/17

01/06/2018

not recover. As a supporter of the draft resolution, we
would also like to reiterate our principled position in
favour of resolving disputes through peaceful dialogue,
confidence-building measures and constructive
negotiations between States on the basis of equal
responsibility for peace and security.
Astana calls on the world community and conflicting
parties to make renewed and urgent efforts to create
conditions necessary to relaunch credible negotiations
and to achieve, without delay, the establishment of
an independent Palestinian State, living side by side
in peace and harmony with Israel within secure and
recognized borders. That goal should be reached on the
basis of relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
terms of reference, including the principle of land for
peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road
map, as called for in resolution 2334 (2016) and other
relevant resolutions.
I conclude by calling on all sides to find common
ground as peace and security are the only possible
solution to this difficult issue.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this month. I believe that, under your leadership, the
work of the Council will make new progress. I would
like to thank Poland for its important contribution to
the Council in its capacity as President of the Council
last month.
At present, the world’s attention is focused on the
tense situation in Palestine. China expresses its serious
concern over the violent conflict in the border area of
Gaza, which has caused heavy casualties. We oppose
any acts of violence against civilians and call on Israel
and Palestine, particularly Israel, to exercise restraint
and to help defuse tensions in order to avoid casualties.
The issue of Palestine is at the heart of the Middle East
question. Seven decades have passed but the legitimate
rights and interests of the Palestinian people are still
subject to unfair treatment. Such historical injustices
must be redressed. The Council and the international
community should uphold justice by taking swift action
to respond to the legitimate aspirations of the people
of Palestine and the Arab people, intensifying efforts
to promote peace and negotiation and facilitating the
early resumption of talks between the two sides in order
to achieve the two-State solution that will bring about
peaceful coexistence between the two countries.
18-16710

01/06/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8274

The draft resolution submitted by Kuwait objectively
reflects the current situation. It helps protect Palestinian
civilians from harm and de-escalates tensions between
the two sides. China appreciates Kuwait’s efforts to
seek the widest possible consensus in an open and
constructive manner. China voted in favour of the draft
resolution submitted by Kuwait.

actors must comply strictly with their obligations under
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
We call for an end to all actions that make a resumption
of negotiations more difficult and reiterate our call for a
comprehensive peace between Israelis and Palestinians
based on a political settlement and bilateral dialogue
leading to a two-State solution.

I would like to reiterate here that China welcomes
and supports all efforts to help ease the situation between
the two sides and facilitate the early achievement of the
two-State solution and peaceful coexistence between
the two countries. China will continue to follow the
four-point proposal by Chinese President Xi Jinping for
the political settlement of the Palestinian issue, and we
will work with the international community and play
an active and constructive role in promoting peace in
the Middle East.

Finally, let me reiterate what I have already said
in the Chamber: there is no justification under any
circumstances for deliberate acts of violence against the
civilian population, and both Israelis and Palestinians
have the right to live in peace and safety.

Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Allow me, at the outset,
to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency
this month. I wish you good luck and all the success in
your endeavours. I also thank you for your kind words.
Allow me now to refer to the topic of today’s
discussion. Let me express our appreciation for
Kuwait’s transparency in conducting the negotiations
on this draft resolution. We would like to thank the
Kuwaiti Ambassador and our colleagues from the
Kuwaiti delegation for their tremendous efforts to
accommodate all comments made by the members of
the Security Council. While recognizing those efforts,
we were unfortunately not in a position to support the
text, as we would have preferred a more balanced result.
We stress that it is the responsibility of Hamas,
Palestinian Islamic Jihad and other militant groups
in Gaza to ensure that no protests are used to inspire
violence. All acts of violence against civilians,
including terrorist rocket attacks, acts of terror and
all acts of provocation, incitement and destruction, are
unacceptable and must stop.
At the same time, while we recognize Israel’s right
to protect its border and defend its civilian population,
we call on Israel to respect the rights of Palestinian
civilians to peaceful protests and to the principle of
proportionality in the use of force when defending its
legitimate security interests. We call for respect for
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law, particularly with regard to the prohibition
of the deliberate targeting of civilians and other
protected persons in situations of armed conflict. All

Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): At the outset, Mr. President, allow
me to wish you and your delegation every success
during the Russian presidency of the Security Council
in June. I should also like to express my gratitude and
appreciation for the excellent work of Poland during its
presidency of the Council in May.
We regret the fact that the draft resolution submitted
today by the delegation of Kuwait (S/2018/516) was not
adopted owing to a negative vote by one of the permanent
members of the Security Council. The draft had been
subject to extensive negotiations by the members
of the Council and was the outcome of broad-based
discussions in which, I reiterate, we all participated,
and a balanced text had been achieved in which primacy
was accorded to safeguarding the lives of civilians,
whether Palestinian or Israeli. The fact that the draft
was blocked makes it clear that despite the existence of
agreement on the protection of civilians in situations
of armed conflict, that agreement is insufficient in the
face of a veto by a permanent member.
Bolivia, on the basis of its policy of pacifism,
reaffirms its strong condemnation of any kind of
attack on civilians or on civilian health or education
infrastructure in any form, as these are unjustifiable
whatever the reason and wherever, whenever and by
whomsoever committed, given that they are breaches of
the most basic tenets of international law. However, we
feel compelled to recall the underlying structural cause
of the dreadful situation of the Palestinian people, which
is the illegal Israeli occupation. The main threat to both
Palestinian and Israeli civilians is Israel’s occupation
of Palestinian territory. We deplore the fact that once
again the Security Council has also become a kind of
occupied territory, as a result of the negative vote and
veto of one of its permanent members.

18-167107/17

S/PV.8274

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The situation is much more critical for the
Palestinian civilian population, whose right to
protection was denied today. For 70 years they have
been living under the yoke of the occupying Power,
Israel, and the Israel Defense Forces. Who sets up
and runs the checkpoints on Palestinian territory?
Israel. Who built an annexationist wall? Israel. Who is
responsible for the construction of illegal settlements
in Palestinian territory? Israel. Who is responsible for
preventing the return of more than 6 million Palestinian
refugees to their homes? Israel. Who is responsible for
the detention of hundreds of children? Israel. Who is
responsible for Gaza being besieged and blockaded by
air and sea and lacking the basic services of water and
electricity? Israel. And, ultimately, who is responsible
for the illegal occupation of territories that do not
belong to it? Israel.
Bolivia firmly believes that the only long-term
solution to the occupation situation facing the Palestinian
people is a two-State solution, leading at long last to
a free, sovereign and independent Palestinian State,
within the internationally recognized pre-1967 borders
and with East Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance
with the relevant resolutions of the Council and the
General Assembly.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
The Russian Federation voted in favour of the
draft resolution submitted by Kuwait (S/2018/516), on
the protection of civilians in the occupied Palestinian
territories, because its provisions corresponded to
the Russian Federation’s principled approach to a
settlement in the Middle East. The international
community must of course deal with the important
questions reflected in the draft resolution, including the
humanitarian situation in Gaza, the re-establishment
of Palestinian unity and the return of control over
the sector to the Palestinian authorities. We must not
slack off our efforts in support of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East, whose work significantly eases the burden
on Palestinian refugees. But all of these steps should
be subordinate to a resolution of the main strategic
objective of achieving a Palestinian-Israel settlement
based on the international legal foundation that we
are all familiar with. That settlement presupposes the
implementation of a two-State solution based on the
8/17

01/06/2018

relevant Security Council resolutions, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the decisions of the Middle East Quartet.
We reiterate that imposing a solution through force
and a rejection of direct dialogue is not a viable choice.
Such an approach would only exacerbate mistrust and
make the prospects for relaunching the negotiation
process ever more distant. We firmly condemn the
indiscriminate attacks on civilians that have resulted in
significant numbers of victims, as well as the firing of
rockets into residential areas of Israel.
For our part, as a permanent member of the Security
Council and a member of the Quartet, we will continue
to encourage both sides to resume direct negotiations
as soon as possible, since it is their absence that is the
reason for the current problematic situation regarding
a Palestinian-Israeli settlement. Russia has repeatedly
proposed its services as a mediator and offered to host
a summit between the leaders of Palestine and Israel in
order to relaunch a direct dialogue, and our proposal still
stands. We are ready to work sincerely and energetically
with every partner interested in achieving a speedy end
to the current impasse on a Middle East settlement.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution contained in document S/2018/520,
submitted by the United States of America. I shall put
the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
United States of America
Against:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Kuwait, Russian
Federation
Abstaining:
China, Côte d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia,
France, Kazakhstan, Netherlands, Peru, Poland,
Sweden, United Kingdom
The President (spoke in Russian): The draft
resolution received 1 vote in favour, 3 against and
11 abstentions. The draft resolution has not been
adopted, having failed to obtain the required number
of votes.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements after the voting.
18-16710

01/06/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): We regret
having had to abstain in the voting on draft resolution
S/2018/520, submitted by the United States. That
decision was reached after considering the method by
which the draft was immediately put to the vote without
prior negotiations. It was also reached after considering
its substance. The text does not reflect a balanced and
impartial view of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict within
the framework of internationally agreed parameters
of international law and of Council resolutions. The
text reflects but one of the many causes of the crisis in
the Gaza and does not provide a response or solution
to the tragedy afflicting Palestinian and Israeli
civilian populations.
That said, we share the concerns expressed in the
text, given the activities of Hamas and other armed
groups on the Gaza strip. We firmly condemned the
firing of rockets into Israeli territory on 29 May and
hope that the Security Council also condemns such
activity. More generally, France was ready to support
several paragraphs of the draft submitted by the United
States, starting with those that condemn the firing of
rockets from Gaza, which call on Hamas to refrain from
committing violent acts, in particular those targeting
civilians, and demand that it cease all activities that
harm civilian populations close to the separation barrier
between Israel and Gaza. I can also list other examples.
As we have already underscored with regard to other
draft texts, we believe that the Council’s responsibility
is to provide a general response to the crisis in Gaza,
which is not reflected in the text we have before us.
Despite the discord I just mentioned with regard
to the overall imbalance of the amendments presented,
once again we stood ready to engage in constructive
discussions with a view to sharing our opinions and, if
possible, drafting one text on which we could vote. But,
as I explained earlier, because of the method by which
the text was put to the vote and its substance, we had no
other option but to abstain in the voting.
All in all, today’s meeting is another missed
opportunity for the Council. It is regrettable, of course,
but the Council can count on France, as a friend of
Israelis and Palestinians, to never give up.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I would like to congratulate the delegation of the
Russian Federation on having assumed the presidency
of the Security Council and wish it every success in
its work.

S/PV. 8274

Secondly, I would like to thank the Ambassador of
Poland for the excellent manner in which she steered
the work of the Council in May.
We deplore the fact that, despite the efforts of
the facilitator and other members of the Council, we
were unable to reach a substantive agreement. We
would like to underscore that Peru agrees with some
of the proposals the United States included in its draft
resolution (S/2018/520). We believe in particular that
all terrorist acts committed against the Israeli civilian
population and perpetrated by organizations such as
Hamas and the Islamic Jihad, in particular the recent
firing of rockets, must be firmly condemned.
We would have liked to have been able to consider
and discuss such proposals during our consultations so
that they could be reflected in a text to which everyone
was wholly committed. To that end, we also believed that
it was important to reaffirm our continued recognition
of Israel’s right to guarantee its security and legitimate
defence. Nonetheless, we abstained in the voting on the
draft resolution submitted the United States because
serious developments on the ground must be assessed
holistically and impartially.
Peru has made a constructive and positive
contribution to the negotiations facilitated by the
delegation of Kuwait, as it attempted to reach a
consensus-based and balanced final document that
reflected the legitimate concerns of Council members,
with regard to the current deteriorating situation. In
that regard, in addition to highlighting the role of its
delegation, we would like to thank Kuwait for its draft
text (S/2018/516) because it reflects many of the concerns
conveyed by our delegation during negotiations, which
is why we voted in favour of it.
Our action on that and other items on the Security
Council agenda is primarily geared towards building
consensus that would enable the protection of civilians,
in line with international humanitarian law, and
addressing the root causes of conflicts, in particular
in the case of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, which
has serious implications for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Lastly, we believe that it is urgent that the parties
resume negotiations towards a two-State solution with
safe and internationally recognized borders.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I congratulate Russia on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council. We

18-167109/17

S/PV.8274

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

deeply admire and thank Poland for the manner in
which it conducted business as president of the Council
in May.
It is highly regrettable that the Council was unable
to find unity around a meaningful decision in response
to the situation in and around Gaza over the past few
months. Sweden voted in favour of the draft resolution
presented by Kuwait (S/2018/516) for a number
of reasons.
First, it calls for full respect by all parties of
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, including with regard to the protection
of the civilian population. The draft resolution requests
that the Security-General recommend a mechanism for
that purpose.
Secondly, the text condemns all acts of violence,
including acts of terrorism. It deplores both excessive
disproportionate and indiscriminate force by Israeli
forces against civilians in Palestine and the firing of
rockets from Gaza into civilian areas in Israel.
Thirdly, it calls for immediate steps to end the
closure of Gaza. While fully understanding the
legitimate security concerns of Israel, Palestine and
Egypt, we have repeatedly called for the lifting of
restrictions and full and sustained access for all donors.
Fourthly, the text welcomes and urges further
engagement by the Secretary-General and the Special
Coordinator to assist in immediate efforts to de-escalate
the situation on the ground. We urge all parties to act
with utmost restraint to avoid the loss of life, break the
cycle of violence and prevent a new conflict.
I would like to pay tribute to the Kuwaiti delegation
for facilitating the draft resolution. We all know that
the matter is sensitive, but our Kuwaiti colleagues have
displayed good faith, inclusiveness, flexibility and
transparency during the negotiations process.
With regard to the draft resolution proposed by the
United States, we believe that the language does not
address the full reality or context of the situation in Gaza,
including the violence and tragic loss of life we have
witnessed since last March. In addition, the proposal
does not contain important language on international
humanitarian law and humanitarian access, which are
of fundamental importance to the people on the ground.
The draft resolution does not address the end result of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict for which the Council
has been striving for many years — a negotiated two10/17

01/06/2018

State solution based on international law, previous
agreements, relevant United Nations resolutions and
known parameters. Furthermore, the draft resolution
was not presented for negotiations or consultations
among the members of the Council, in accordance
with established procedure. For those reasons, while
sympathetic to many aspects of the draft, we abstained
in the voting on the text.
While the Council could not agree today, we must
not abdicate our responsibility under the Charter. On
Wednesday, the Special Coordinator clearly warned
us of how close to the brink of war we currently are
and of the pressing humanitarian situation in Gaza (see
S/PV.8272). The Council must come together to address
the crisis and the tension. Otherwise, we risk sliding
into another devastating conflict like we did four years
ago. This is indeed about conflict prevention.
The Special Coordinator presented a plan last
week that included the urgent implementation of
already approved projects for Gaza, which would have
immediate benefits for the daily lives of people, revive
efforts to empower the Palestinian Authority to take
up its responsibilities in Gaza, and sustain the 2014
ceasefire understandings on the ground, including
halting the militant build-up.
Sweden stands ready to contribute to efforts in the
Security Council to take such measures forward with
renewed urgency and determination.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): We would like to
commend Ambassador Joanna Wronecka and her team
for an excellent presidency of the Security Council in
the month of May.
My statement relates to both draft resolutions.
First of all, we thank Kuwait for taking the initiative
to present a draft resolution that addresses the recent
crisis in Gaza (S/2018/516). We are thankful for the
transparent process and extensive efforts undertaken
by the delegation to accommodate the concerns of
Council members. We highly appreciate the continuous
engagement by Kuwait with Council members in
drawing up its draft resolution.
As we have said before, the Security Council
should be able to unite and formulate a joint response to
the developments of the past weeks. We regret that we
have failed to do so today. We witnessed the repeated
protests in Gaza and the heavy-handed Israeli response
that led to the death of 110 Palestinians and many more
18-16710

01/06/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

injured. This was the highest number of casualties
recorded since the end of the 2014 hostilities. The firing
of rockets and mortars by Palestinian militant groups on
29 May and the following counterattacks were the most
serious escalation since 2014. As we also discussed in
the Security Council yesterday, this again shows that
the risk of escalation and the violence spiralling out of
control is very high.
Protection of civilians is crucial, as both
Palestinian and Israeli civilians should not have to
live in fear, Regrettably, the Kuwaiti draft resolution
that was put to a vote today did not fully reflect our
concerns with regard to addressing the needs of all
civilians nor the negative role of Palestinian militant
groups in Gaza specifically, nor remaining questions
on the international protection mechanism. We
welcome the fact that the draft resolution submitted
by the United States (S/2018/520) condemns the role
of Hamas, but it does not cover the broader context or
Israel’s responsibilities and obligations. That is why we
abstained in the voting on both draft resolutions.
We repeat our call on all parties to exercise restraint
in order to avoid escalation and prevent incidents that
put the lives of both Palestinian and Israeli civilians
at risk. We confirm our firm support for the work
and proposals of Mr. Mladenov. It is of the utmost
importance that the efforts to address the crisis in Gaza
continue, in order to bring humanitarian relief to those
in need and to prevent further escalation. We call on all
parties to engage constructively.
In conclusion, we confirm our strong commitment
to the peace process — a process that must result in the
two-State solution, which is the only way to bring about
a sustainable solution to the crisis in Gaza. It is the only
way to fulfil the aspirations of both sides and to put an
end to the conflict. It is the only way to achieve the just
and lasting peace that Israelis and Palestinians long for
and deserve.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakstan): Kazakhstan regrets
that we cannot achieve unity in the Security Council
on the two draft resolutions that were submitted today
(S/2018/516 and S/2018/520). My delegation notes the
importance of continuing to strive towards achieving
a well-balanced draft and welcomes all efforts to that
end. We appreciate the efforts of the Kuwaiti and United
States delegations in trying to reach the desired result
in the draft resolutions upon which we have just voted.

S/PV. 8274

My delegation abstained in the voting on the United
States draft resolution because we still would have liked
to see a more balanced and all-embracing draft as well as
a more thorough preparatory process for consideration
and elaboration of a proposed text. Unfortunately, that
was not the case today. Moreover, we would prefer a
draft that contributes to finding common ground and
bring parties to work together towards a peaceful future.
As we always say in the Council, the only possible way
is through direct dialogue, political and diplomatic
means and confidence-building measures. To our
regret, references to peaceful means and credible and
direct negotiations were omitted in the United States
draft resolution.
Upon consideration and careful review, we believe
that the best course of action is one that avoids greater
divisiveness between the two sides and thereby further
impedes the peace process.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): In my statement today,
I would like to address both failed draft resolutions
(S/2018/516 and S/2018/520), as each has failed in a
different ways. I would like to thank and express our
appreciation to Ambassador Joanna Wronecka and
her colleagues in the Polish mission for the excellent
leadership they provided to the Security Council
until yesterday. We look forward to a very successful
Russian presidency this month. Of course, we count on
your wisdom, Mr. President.
Ethiopia is a friend to both the Israelis and the
Palestinians, and the ties we have with both peoples
have deep sociological and historical roots. Our
position on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict has always
been consistent and principled.
With regard to the recent developments surrounding
the escalation of violence in the occupied Palestinian
territory and the events that took place in Gaza, we
have had the opportunity to express our position on the
matter a number of times recently. We have called on
Israel to show maximum restraint and expressed our
deepest sorry and sympathy for the loss of lives. As we
said last time (see S/PV.8272), we believe that Israel’s
right to self-defence is a right that carries with it the
responsibility to ensure proportionality.
On the other hand, we are also deeply concerned
by the indiscriminate firing of rockets by Palestinian
militants from Gaza towards southern Israel and
underscored that Hamas and the leaders of the
demonstrations have the responsibility to prevent all

18-1671011/17

S/PV.8274

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

violent actions and provocations. We know — and
everyone knows — that these rockets did not cause
much damage, either in terms of lives lost or property
destroyed, but they compromise the clarity of the
Palestinians’ legitimate protest for justice, which we
support wholeheartedly. We are second to none in
this regard.
These latest developments undoubtedly undermine
the serious efforts by the international community
to improve the situation in Gaza. We have engaged
constructively in the negotiation process on the Kuwaiti
draft that was vetoed earlier, and we have presented
input that we thought was important to balance the text.
We thank and appreciate all of Kuwait’s efforts to
address most, if not all, of our concerns. That said, we
still feel it would have been appropriate to explicitly
condemn recent actions by Hamas, particularly in the
light of the most recent developments. Unlike Sweden,
we felt that more should have been done to balance
the draft resolution in that regard. This is what has led
to the situation we find ourselves in today, having to
vote on two competing draft resolutions. Our proposal
would have helped to avoid this situation. The draft
resolution submitted by the United States was circulated
yesterday, and was put in blue without giving us the
opportunity to provide the necessary input with a view
to maintaining the right balance. While it certainly
addresses the concerns we had with regard to Hamas, it
shifts the whole narrative in another direction that we
do not believe is proper, fair or helpful. As we said the
day before yesterday (see S/PV.8272), it is crucial to get
the narrative right. If we miss that, we miss everything.
What matters is the narrative.
In that regard, it is absolutely critical to stress that
the Palestinians’ quest to assert their rights and ensure
their self-determination by establishing an independent
State must not be overshadowed by a narrative that
seeks to focus on terrorism. We trust that the Council
is aware of that and will not lose sight of that very
critical point, which is more important than supporting
a draft resolution that ends up being vetoed. That
partly explains why we abstained in the voting on both
draft resolutions.
We believe that it would have been better to narrow
the differences and enable the Council to send the right
message by adopting a consensus resolution in response
to the most recent developments in Gaza. There is no
denying the fact that those developments have once
again brought the Israeli-Palestinian dispute back to
12/17

01/06/2018

the fore, underscoring the urgency of reinvigorating
the peace process without further delay. It remains
absolutely imperative to work towards de-escalating
this dangerous situation in order to protect civilians,
break the cycle of violence and resume the much-needed
peace process so as to save the two-State formula,
which is a long-held position of the United Nations and
the international community.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): Kuwait
voted against draft resolution S/2018/520. At the
outset, I would like to underscore that our vote does
not mean that we do not condemn all acts of violence
targeting civilians. We have stressed that in our
previous statements in meetings on the situation in the
occupied territories, including the Palestinian question.
We condemn all acts of violence targeting civilians
committed by anyone, anywhere and at any time.
However, the draft resolution submitted by the
United States that we have voted against is simply
biased in favour of the Israeli occupying Power. It
justifies its illegal and illegitimate practices and
policies in the occupied territories. It turns a blind eye
to the recent tragic events and massacres perpetrated
by the occupation forces against dozens of civilians and
peaceful protesters. It encourages the occupying Power
to continue its illegitimate practices and violations of
the relevant international law and Security Council
resolutions. It includes no reference to protecting
Palestinian civilians, lifting the blockade on Gaza
or even reducing the restrictions on the movement of
goods and people. Moreover, the right to self-defence
should not apply to the aggressor and occupier. The
draft resolution should therefore call for an end to the
occupation. For those reasons, we voted against the
draft resolution.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
The Russian Federation voted against draft
resolution S/2018/520, submitted by the United States,
on the situation in the Palestinian occupied territories,
although we would be ready to agree with some of its
provisions. We certainly recognize Israel’s right to
security. Our vote is connected to the fact the document
represents the latest attempt by the United States to
revise the international legal basis for a settlement in
the Middle East. Not only that, it also included elements
that do not correspond to Russia’s position. The United
18-16710

01/06/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

States has repeatedly urged the members of the Security
Council to maintain a balanced view when considering
crisis situations in the Middle East. However, it upset
that balance in its own draft resolution.
We are concerned about the fact that the draft
resolution of the United States did not include any
calls for creating conditions conducive to resuming
talks on final status issues, with the aim of finding a
path to a lasting settlement on the basis of a two-State
solution for both Israel and Palestine, which would
exist in security within internationally recognized
borders. Even references to the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Middle East Quartet, which remains the
unique mediation mechanism approved by the Security
Council, were removed.
We encourage the commencement of practical
work aimed at launching direct PalestinianIsraeli negotiations.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the Permanent Observer of the
Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): We congratulate the
Russian Federation on its presidency of the Security
Council and would like to sincerely thank you,
Mr. President, for your ready response to the request to
convene today’s meeting. We would also like to recognize
Poland for its skilled leadership of the Security Council
last month, including the meetings held to address
the Palestinian question and the important debates on
international law and the protection of civilians, which
are so relevant to the grave crisis we are facing right
now. We will never forget the Permanent Representative
of Poland’s humane gesture when she asked Security
Council members to stand for a minute of silence in
honour of the Palestinian innocents killed by Israeli
forces (see S/PV.8256). We appreciate that and will
never forget it.
We would like to express our deep appreciation
to our brother country of Kuwait for submitting draft
resolution S/2018/516, which the Security Council
just voted on, and for the Kuwaiti delegation’s tireless
efforts to ensure the Council’s serious consideration of
our repeated calls for international protection for the
Palestinian people. We commend the Kuwaiti delegation
for the comprehensive and transparent process it and
other Council members undertook to advance the issue.

S/PV. 8274

We regret, however, the extremely evil intent aimed at
undermining that process and the Council’s credibility
and authority.
We are grateful to all the countries that voted
in favour of the draft resolution, despite the veto
cast today by the United States, which regrettably
prevented its adoption, and despite the ensuing
tensions and confusion. We would like to convey our
deep appreciation to Kuwait, Bolivia, China, Côte
d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, France, Kazakhstan,
Peru, Sweden and the Russian Federation for standing
firmly on principle, responding to the urgency of the
situation and standing unequivocally on the side of
international law with regard to Palestine, including on
the protection of civilians. Indeed, today’s vote sends
important messages that must be recognized, including
the following.
First, there is a severe protection crisis in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including in East
Jerusalem and particularly in the Gaza Strip, due to
Israel’s illegal policies and practices, such as its use of
force against Palestinian civilians conducting peaceful
protests and its blockade of Gaza, among other
oppressive and punitive measures against our people.
Secondly, Israel’s killing and injuring of Palestinian
civilians will not be tolerated and cannot be excused.
The occupying Power must fully abide by its obligations
under international law.
Thirdly, the Palestinian people are entitled to
protection in accordance with international law,
including humanitarian and human rights law, and the
Security Council’s obligations and commitments to
protecting civilians in armed conflict.
Fourthly, immediate steps must be taken to end
Israel’s closure and restrictions on Gaza, and ensure
the sustained opening of the crossing points for the
normal movement and access of persons and goods.
This entirely illegal, inhumane and suffocating Israeli
blockade must end.
Fifthly, maximum restraint is required on the part
of all parties, as are immediate steps to stabilize the
situation and reverse the negative trends on the ground.
Sixthly, it is time to seriously consider measures to
guarantee the safety, protection and well-being of the
Palestinian people, including through the establishment
of an international protection mechanism. The
Palestinian leadership, including President Mahmoud

18-1671013/17

S/PV.8274

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Abbas, has long called for such measures, and we are
grateful that despite all of the pressures, this issue has
been given due consideration by the Security Council and
enjoys the majority support of the Council’s members.
Their votes today refute the premise that the Palestinian
people are the exception to the rules and principles of
international law, reaffirming instead that they are
entitled to the rights and legal protections to which all
peoples are entitled — reinforcing the universality of
the law and its application to this conflict. They have
rejected the might-over-right strategy, sending a clear
message that no one is exempt from the law — not even
Israel, regardless of the exceptionalism it has for too
long enjoyed.
Of course, the final outcome of today’s vote
is extremely disappointing but, unfortunately, not
surprising. While we had sincerely hoped and exerted
all efforts to ensure that the Security Council would
uphold its duties pursuant to the Charter of the United
Nations and act responsibly to address the protection
crisis being endured by the Palestinian people, we have
never underestimated the obstacles in that regard. We
deeply regret the Council’s continued paralysis on our
issue due to the recurrent negative and biased position
of one permanent member of the Security Council.
We deplore the use of the veto to continue shielding
Israel from censure and accountability for its crimes
against our people and to wrongly prevent the Council
from upholding its Charter duties in the maintenance of
international peace and security, including by actions
aimed at saving civilian lives.
Moreover, we strongly reject the cynical attempts
to delay, undermine and thwart action on this initiative
in a manner that denigrates the Council’s work and
the serious efforts to address these critical matters
in accordance with international law and relevant
resolutions. We also firmly reject the renewed attempt
today to classify our situation as one of terrorism. It is
not. We reject that classification. It is about the denial
of an entire people’s human rights and their oppression
and dehumanization every single day and for decades.
This is a political, territorial rights and justice issue
and we cannot accept the lecturing accusations that the
draft presented by Kuwait was in any way biased.
The draft, which was negotiated for more than
two weeks realistically, addresses all of the factors of
the current crisis, including violence on both sides. If
anything, the draft does not go far enough in addressing
the nightmare the Palestinian people are living under
14/17

01/06/2018

this criminal Israeli occupation. What we are facing
can be described in just a few words declared this
week by the Israeli Minister Yuval Steinitz, who said:
“I do not exclude the possibility of conquering Gaza
and eliminating it once and for all”. This is the reality
of the constant aggression, threats and existential
crisis the Palestinian people are enduring under
Israeli occupation, which the current United States
Administration refuses to see, refuses to understand,
or, in any way properly address.
We will continue our calls and efforts to secure
protection for the Palestinian people to ensure their
safety and well-being. We will continue to seek
accountability and to pursue justice for the victims
through all available legal means, including through
the International Criminal Court. We await the dispatch
of the commission of inquiry established by the Human
Rights Council and the findings following a thorough,
independent and transparent investigation, as requested
by the Secretary-General himself. We will not relent
in pressing for answers, including why Palestinian
children, women and men were killed and injured so
wantonly and wilfully by the Israeli occupying forces
under the direct command of Israel’s highest political
and military leaders and who is to be held responsible.
In spite of today’s outcome and the paralysis
gripping the Security Council, we will not stop calling
for Council action and the implementation of all of its
relevant resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016),
because it is its duty and obligation to act and to address
such gross violations and threats to international peace
and security and to ultimately contribute to bringing
an end to this injustice and ensuring a just, lasting and
peaceful solution to this conflict.
Allow me now to end my statement with a message
to our people in Arabic.
(spoke in Arabic)
We will continue, on behalf of our steadfast people
in the occupied Palestinian territory and the great
people of Palestine, to make every effort to raise their
voice — the voice of reason and justice — and to end
their painful plight. We will spare no effort in calling
for respect for our inalienable rights and to achieve our
legitimate national aspirations. The result of the voting
today will only make us more committed and persistent
in working in the Security Council with the sisterly
State of Kuwait and all friendly countries, and with the
support of our brothers and sisters in the Group of Arab
18-16710

01/06/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

States; the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries; all of our friends
and free, peace-loving States in Africa, Asia, Europe
and Latin America; the General Assembly and every
other international forum to end the Israeli occupation
of our territory in order to achieve the freedom, dignity
and independence of our people. There is no force
in this world, however great, that is greater than the
determination of our Palestinian people, which has
lasted for more than seven decades. There can be nothing
more deep-rooted than our history and civilization,
which is all about steadfastness and challenge. We will
continue to resolutely defend our just cause so that we
can live in peace and security in our own independent
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
To all those who accuse the tens of thousands of
Palestinian civilians peacefully protesting against the
occupation of being terrorists — and those accusers
got nothing but their own vote in the Security Council
on their failed draft resolution — we say that the
entire Palestinian people, in their millions, are against
occupation and the terrorism practiced by the State of
Israel, whose latest victim, on this very day, was Razan
Ashraf Al-Najjar, a martyr at 21 years of age. She was
a paramedic carrying out her humanitarian duties when
she was shot in the back by the Israeli enemy. The bullet
pierced her heart and ended her life.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Danon (Israel): Before I begin, I would like to
congratulate the Russian Federation on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council. I would also like to
thank the Polish Ambassador for her presidency.
On 15 May the Security Council began its meeting
with a moment of silence for the 61 Palestinians killed
in Gaza the day before (see S/PV.8256). As members
stood and paid their respects in mourning, Hamas
revealed that nearly 90 per cent of those who had
died had been identified as Hamas terrorists. Hamas
bragged about it. In an interview, Dr. Salah Bardawil,
a Hamas leader, confirmed it. He said, “I am giving
you an official figure. Fifty of the martyrs in the recent
battle were from Hamas”.
On that day, Security Council members stood in
solidarity with the terrorists of Hamas. One would
think that the absurdity would end there, but it did not.
Moments later, at the same meeting, the Ambassador
of Bolivia listed some of the names of the people who

S/PV. 8274

had died in Gaza, even as Hamas took pride in the fact
that the vast majority of them were its own. In the eyes
of the Ambassador of Bolivia, Anas Hamdan Salim
Qadee, a 21-year-old confirmed member of Hamas’s
military wing, did not count as a terrorist. He must have
forgotten that this wing is the same one that is listed
as a terrorist organization by Australia, New Zealand,
Canada, the European Union, Japan, the United
Kingdom, Egypt and the United States.
On 18 May the Human Rights Council adopted
resolution S-28/1 on the recent events in Gaza. The
resolution did not even mention Hamas. Despite
Hamas’s deadly activities and attacks, its attempts
to breach the security fence and infiltrate Israel, its
incitement of the people of Gaza, its use of innocent
Palestinian women and children as human shields,
the Human Rights Council chose to turn a blind eye.
Today, too, the Security Council attempted to adopt a
similar draft resolution (S/2018/516). We acknowledge
the United States and all who did not support the draft
for their moral clarity. The Security Council also had
the opportunity to adopt a draft resolution proposed by
the United States (S/2018/520), which rightly named
Hamas and the other terrorist groups as the root cause
of the conflict. It recognized that peace and stability
will never come to our region until the international
community is brave enough to call out the terrorists
by name. We thank the Americans for taking the right
stand. Ambassador Haley made it clear today that the
rules of the game are changing here in the Council and
that this double standard against Israel will not stand.
Despite the rockets fired by Hamas and Islamic
Jihad at our civilians, despite the missile that landed in
the yard of a kindergarten, despite the endless mortar
shells striking our southern communities, the draft
resolution submitted by Kuwait tried to give Hamas
a free pass. This was a text born in sin. It tried to
continue an alarming trend of absolving Hamas of all
responsibility for the violence and death it has caused. It
mentioned Israel five times. I do not know who drafted
it; many worked actively on it. Five times it mentioned
Israel, yet its drafters could not bring themselves to
mention Hamas even once. Do they not know how
to spell it? This empowers Hamas by granting it the
Security Council’s stamp of approval. Hamas has ruled
Gaza with malice and brutality for 12 years. It has paid
its civilians to storm the fence with the explicit goal of
increasing the death toll. It has deprived the people of
Gaza of their basic human rights. It uses Israel to create

18-1671015/17

S/PV.8274

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

a scapegoat for its own failures. Hamas has launched
more than 10,000 rockets into Israeli communities and
constructed nearly 40 terror tunnels in order to kidnap
and kill Israelis.
It is true that the residents of Gaza need
protection; they need protection from Hamas, the same
organization that the Council cannot name. I must ask
Council members, who are educated people and should
understand facts when they see them, if they have not
read the news. Have they not heard of the missiles that
Hamas fired at Israeli schools or the explosives they
placed at the fence? I ask them — I ask the Ambassador
of France and the Ambassador of Sweden, who promoted
this draft resolution — why did they omit Hamas from
the draft resolution? What was the problem with adding
it to the text? They had hours of negotiations. I am
waiting for an answer. The residents of southern Israel
are waiting for an answer.
Did they forget that the European Union has
designated Hamas as a terrorist organization since
2003? Does that mean nothing to them? Maybe they
can show us what happened at the back door when
they drafted the text. I can go over the paragraph in
which they speak about rockets flying from Gaza
into Israel. They could have added “from Hamas”.
Maybe they want to explain to us why, when Paris was
attacked by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS), the international community stood with Paris,
but when Israel is attacked by Hamas, they blame us,
the victim. There is no difference between the evil of
Hamas and the barbarity of ISIS, Al-Qaida or Boko
Haram. Those organizations are no different in their
mission to terrorize innocent people. They are all the
same. The only draft resolution that the Council should
adopt is one that condemns Hamas and designates it a
terrorist organization.
When the Palestinians are concerned, the
international community never misses an opportunity
to blame Israel, but when it is about Palestinians
living in danger in other countries, the international
community is silent. Looking back at history, in 1991
200,000 Palestinians were expelled from Kuwait after
the Gulf War. Many were abused or killed during
that expulsion. Kuwaiti officials, and even members
of Kuwait’s royal family, called for the cleansing of
Palestinian neighbourhoods. Today, thousands of
Palestinians living in Lebanon are treated like thirdclass citizens. In Syria, the Yarmouk refugee camp has
faced a siege, starvation and Government shelling for
16/17

01/06/2018

the past seven years. What was the world’s reaction
to Kuwait’s abuse of Palestinians in the 1990s?
Silence. What about its reaction to Lebanon’s years
of maltreatment of Palestinians? Silence. And to the
situation of the Palestinians in Yarmouk camp in
Syria? Silence once again. It seems that there are some
in the United Nations who speak for the Palestinians
only when Israel is involved. If the world truly wanted
to help Palestinians, it would adopt a resolution on
their situation in Kuwait, Lebanon or Syria. If it truly
wanted to help Palestinians, it would adopt a resolution
condemning Hamas, here, today.
Let me make myself clear. Israel will always
protect its civilians. We will not allow our citizens to
die for the world’s distorted sense of fairness. When it
comes to the Palestinian civilians who are put in harm’s
way by the terrorists in Gaza, it is Israel that acts with
greater care and respect for human life than almost any
other country, especially those that claim to stand in
solidarity with the Palestinians.
Thankfully, the biased and hypocritical draft
resolution submitted today was not adopted. But the
Security Council’s moment of silence, the Human
Rights Council’s resolution S-28/1, adopted on 18 May,
and the draft resolution that was introduced today only
empower Hamas. They convey the notion that some in
the international community actually support Hamas,
and confirm to Hamas that its violence and terrorism
will surely go unnoticed. They grant Hamas full
immunity. The only way to protect the Palestinians
in Gaza is by holding Hamas responsible. Those who
supported today’s draft resolution chose not to protect
the Palestinians. Those who did not support it voted for
the protection of Israelis and Palestinians.
The President (spoke in Russian): The representative
of Bolivia has asked to make a further statement.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I did not intend to take the
floor again, but the assertions by the representative of
Israel leave me no alternative. What I cannot permit
is his questioning of Bolivia’s position with regard
to terrorism. Bolivia will always condemn any act of
terrorism, whatever the circumstances and wherever
it may occur. But now that it is an issue — I am
referring to Israel’s occupation of the Palestinian
territories — on the Security Council’s agenda, it is
also our duty, as members of the Council, elected by
the membership of the General Assembly, to condemn
18-16710

01/06/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

State terrorism, terrorism that is conducted through
Israel’s Government institutions and that is designed to
benefit the Government of Israel, not the Israeli people,
for whom we have the greatest respect and concern.
It seemed extremely strange that the representative
of Israel should cite the situation of Palestinian
refugees in Lebanon, Jordan and Syria as an example,
considering that those refugees’ right of return to their
homes has gone unacknowledged for the past 70 years.
Those 6 million refugees are living far from their
own homes because of Israeli policy. That is not what
Bolivia says; it is what international law says. How long
will they continue to prevent those millions of refugees
from returning home? The Ambassador of Palestine
recalled that today a Palestinian paramedic was killed
by a sniper. Is she also a member of Hamas? Are the
five-, six- and seven-year-old children who have died in
various attacks on Gaza also members of Hamas?
We commend the Human Rights Council’s adoption
on 18 May of resolution S-28/1, providing for the
urgent establishment of an independent commission of
inquiry so that the presumed violations of international
humanitarian and international human rights law can
be investigated. We hope that this will happen and that
Israel will allow the commission to enter Israel and
the occupied territories, with every assurance that it
will be able to conduct an independent and impartial
investigation, because, if I may say so, we do not trust
the occupying Power’s version, which attempts to cover
up the essential underlying reason for the situation,
which is Israel’s illegal occupation of Palestinian
territories. That is what lies at the heart of the matter.
When the occupation comes to an end, the refugees can
return and the wall of annexation is dismantled, then,
and only then, will the Security Council’s resolutions
be implemented.
The President (spoke in Russian): The representative
of Kuwait has asked to make a further statement.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I will
be brief. I would have preferred not to respond to the
statement by the representative of Israel. Israel is a State
Member of the United Nations, and when it became a
member it pledged to respect the Charter of the United
Nations. Article 25 of the Charter states that the Members
of the United Nations agree to accept and carry out the

S/PV. 8274

decisions of the Security Council. I must therefore ask
why Israel does not abide by its commitments. Why
does it not implement the Council’s resolutions that it is
committed to? Why does it not uphold international law
and its pledges pursuant to the Geneva Conventions and
other international conventions?
With regard to what the representative of Israel said
about what he called the events of 1990, I would prefer
not to comment because they have no basis in fact.
They also have nothing to do with the subject under
discussion today.
The President (spoke in Russian): The representative
of Israel has asked to make a further statement. I now
give him the floor.
Mr. Danon (Israel): With regard to the statement
by the representative of Bolivia, he speaks very
passionately, but he should check the facts of the names
he mentions in the Security Council. We fact-checked
the names he mentioned and found that they were the
names of members of Hamas. Every time he mentions
a name in the Council, we will check to see if it is the
name of a member of Hamas. But I would like to ask
him today if he is willing to condemn Hamas for its acts
of terror. He speaks very passionately about everything,
but we want to hear that condemnation directed at
Hamas. Is he able to do that? Is the Kuwaiti Ambassador
even able to pronounce the word “Hamas”? We expect
him to be brave enough to condemn Hamas here today.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. However,
before closing the meeting, I should like to say a
few words.
First, I would like to thank all of those who offered
words of support for the Russian presidency of the
Council for the month of June. We hope to have that
support throughout the course of our presidency.
Secondly, I should like to recall that in our
discussion, we neglected to mention that 1 June is the
International Day for Protection of Children. Most of us
have children, and I would like to congratulate everyone
on this holiday. We are all big children to one degree or
another, and it is therefore a holiday for all of us.
The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m.

18-1671017/17
