S/2001/910

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 September 2001
English
Original: French

Letter dated 25 September 2001 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), I have the honour to
transmit herewith a report on the international security presence in Kosovo during
the period from 1 to 31 August 2001 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring this report to the attention of the
members of the Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

01-55363 (E) 270901 270901

*0155363*

S/2001/910

Annex
[Original: English]

Monthly report to the United Nations on the operations
of the Kosovo Force
1.
Over the reporting period (1-31 August 2001) there were just over 42,000
troops of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) in theatre, with no major changes in
deployment since the last report.
2.
The overall situation in Kosovo during the month of August remained calm.
Acts of inter-ethnic violence and intimidation continued, mostly in Mitrovica, and a
few demonstrations were held across the province. The most significant
demonstration was in Prizren, where 2,000 Kosovo Albanians protested against the
decision by the local authorities not to authorize a UCK memorial ceremony.
UNMIK police had to use tear gas to disperse the crowd.
Security
3.
During the reporting period, there were relatively few incidents reported. On 6
August, KFOR had to rescue the Kosovo Albanian occupants of a car which had
been stoned by some Kosovo Serbs. KFOR troops had to fire shots in the air when
the group turned on them. On 7 August, in Lipljan, north of Pristina, three Kosovo
Serbs were wounded when their vehicles were shot at. The incident is under
investigation. On 15 August, KFOR and UNMIK police had to separate some 20
Kosovo Serbs and Kosovo Albanians in Gojbulja fighting over cattle-grazing rights.
4.
On 19 August, in the north of Mitrovica, KFOR and UNMIK police had to
intervene to disperse a crowd which had gathered after a road traffic accident. Four
KFOR soldiers were injured after stones were thrown by the crowd. On 30 August, a
group of Kosovo Serbs gathered as KFOR troops were escorting two Kosovo
Albanians and three Kosovo Serbs home. The two KFOR soldiers were attacked in
this incident. There have also been reports of harassment of Roma and of Kosovo
Serbs by Kosovo Albanians in Mali-Alas and Lipljan — UNMIK police are holding
suspects; and in Gomja Godance a Kosovo Serb died after being shot 15 times.
5.
A KFOR-UNMIK working group prepared and released a paper1 in August
advocating a wide range of measures to tackle problems in the town, covering
security, politics, confidence-building measures, return of displaced persons,
economic development and job creation. Specific security measures include the
establishment of an UNMIK inter-ethnic crime investigation unit, and aim at
improving UNMIK and KFOR coordination and intensifying joint patrols.
6.
During this reporting period, 250 weapons were destroyed, bringing the total
of weapons destroyed under the weapons destruction programme to 8,011.

__________________
1 UNMIK and KFOR Joint Strategy for Mitrovica.

2

S/2001/910

Border/boundary security
7.
KFOR continued to reinforce its presence along the border with the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia2 and to deter members of the National Liberation
Army (NLA) from using Kosovo as a supply route and from illegally crossing the
border. During the reporting period, 384 suspected NLA members were detained and
handed over to the UNMIK police. Some 2,150 weapons, 1,557 grenades and mines,
and 154,000 rounds of ammunition have been seized since June.
8.
At the end of August, KFOR established mobile weapon collection teams close
to the border with the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to collect weapons,
screen suspected members of NLA, and detain or release them in accordance with
KFOR and UNMIK policy. Collection points will be established after a request has
been made by NLA, and will be coordinated with Task Force Harvest. Any weapons
collected will be destroyed in Kosovo by KFOR according to established
procedures, and will be reported daily to Task Force Harvest headquarters.
9.
Blockades of KFOR supply routes in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, particularly south of Blace, started around 19 August and continued
until the end of the month, affecting the delivery of fresh food, bottled water and
critical spare parts. KFOR developed a plan for resupply by train which in turn was
disrupted towards the end of the reporting period.
10. The number of refugees making their way into Kosovo from the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia since February is estimated to be 81,802, with
4,089 entering Kosovo during the reporting period.
11. The security situation in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia resulted
in some violent incidents directed against KFOR, mostly involving the stoning of
vehicles.
12. KFOR activities to prevent illegal entry into Kosovo from Albania, and vice
versa, resulted in approximately 20 detentions and the prevention of another 20
attempted crossings. These incidents included some suspected smuggling activities.
Situation in the Ground Safety Zone
13. On 17 August, the KFOR Commander signed temporary operating procedures
with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, setting out the conditions for future
cooperation and coordination and ending conflict in the Ground Safety Zone,
following the decision of the North Atlantic Council on the relaxation of the Zone.
The temporary operating procedures replace the four notices of intent and
documents on tactical operations which governed the phased re-entry of the forces
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia into the Ground Safety Zone, and refer to the
whole Zone as defined in the Military Technical Agreement. As a result of this
agreement, the Yugoslav army is now authorized to be in the Ground Safety Zone
without any restrictions on equipment and weapon systems. The KFOR Commander
retains authority to revoke the temporary operating procedures. The Military
Technical Agreement and the provisions of the Air Safety Zone remain in force.
14. On 3 August, a suspected ethnic Albanian armed group attacked an MUP post
near Muhovac and killed two MUP officers and injured two others. On 26 August,
__________________
2 Turkey recognizes the Republic of Macedonia with its constitutional name.

3

S/2001/910

three Serb police sites in Kitka, Beli Kamen and Breznica were attacked by small
arms fire.
Security Council resolution 1160 (1999)
15. Although KFOR operations continue to result in weapons seizures, there have
been no reported violations of Security Council resolution 1160 (1999).3
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
16. With regard to the Kosovo Protection Corps, 13 cases of non-compliance were
reported during August, for the most part related to criminal acts, unauthorized
participation in ceremonies, and celebratory firing or illegal possession of weapons.
Five cases for dismissal relating to absenteeism, lack of discipline and participation
in criminal activities were brought forward in August.
17. The Kosovo Protection Corps continued to carry out a variety of humanitarian
projects throughout the province. One complex project to clean up the battery
factory in Gnjilane will be carried out in September in conjunction with KFOR — a
risk assessment of the level of hazardous materials accumulated at the site is under
way.
18. Security forces of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia remain in general
compliance with the terms of the Military Technical Agreement.
Cooperation with international organizations
19. KFOR continues to provide daily assistance to international organizations and
non-governmental organizations throughout Kosovo, on request, and to provide
security assistance in support of UNMIK police operations.
20. KFOR continues to be involved in the preparations for the Assembly elections
scheduled for 17 November.
Return of refugees and displaced persons
21. The planned resettlement of 83 Kosovo Serbs4 in the Osojane Valley, in a
predominantly Kosovo Albanian area south of Istok, was carried out on 23 August
despite a demonstration of 500 people.
Outlook
22. The security situation in Kosovo continues to be generally calm and stable.
Ethnic tension, particularly in Mitrovica and in Serb enclaves, continues to pose a
risk to KFOR personnel. Violence in the northern part of the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia diminished with the implementation of Operation Essential
Harvest, and consequently has decreased the risk to KFOR personnel.
__________________
3 The Security Council rescinded resolution 1160 (1999) on 10 September 2001 by adopting

resolution 1367 (2001) terminating the prohibition on arms sales to the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia.
4 Fourteen persons of this group have since returned to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, citing
lack of financial support for rebuilding houses and supporting their families as the main reasons
for leaving.

4
