S/2017/1079

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
20 December 2017
Original: English

Letter dated 15 December 2017 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
As requested by the Security Council in paragraph 10 of its resolution 2378
(2017), I have the honour to submit my recommendations on a mechanism to fill
capability gaps, including through more effective and efficient training and capacitybuilding with respect to peacekeeping operations. Please find enclosed my
recommendations on filling those gaps (see annex).
I would be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

17-23005 (E)

271217

*1723005*

S/2017/1079

Annex to the letter dated 15 December 2017 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Introduction
1.
The present annex is being issued pursuant to Security Council resolution 2378
(2017), in which the Council requested the Secretary-General to provide updates to
the Security Council on the continuous efforts made in filling the existing gaps in
terms of force generation and capabilities as well as other relevant aspects necessary
for peacekeeping to effectively and appropriately respond to peace and security
challenges and to provide recommendations to the Security Council on a mechanism
to fill those gaps, including through more effective and efficient training and capacitybuilding. As it falls in the midst of our ongoing discussions with Member States
related to my reform proposals, particularly with respect to the peace and security
architecture and management reforms, adjustments will be made if necessary to the
initiatives and recommendations contained herein to take into account the decisions
of Member States on my larger reform proposals.
2.
The United Nations is fortunate to be able to count on uniformed contributions
from more than 120 Member States to its peacekeeping missions. Member States
select, vet, train and deploy their officers, soldiers and police to participate in
peacekeeping and strive to meet the requirements we set for equipmen t, training and
overall performance. Despite those efforts, however, gaps in capacities and
capabilities persist in some missions. To address them, the Secretariat, in cooperation
with Member States, has undertaken a number of initiatives to improve the fo rce
generation processes and to better support the training efforts of troop and police
contributors. Specific measures, including guidance on military and police unit
standards, new training materials and enhanced targeted training support, are
described in greater detail below, followed by a set of recommendations to further
consolidate and increase the impact of the progress that those activities have made in
improving the overall performance of the uniformed component of our peacekeeping
missions.

Existing gaps
Force generation and capabilities
3.
United Nations peacekeeping missions perform multiple, interdependent and
sometimes new tasks in often harsh and remote operating environments that require
secure camps, good air and ground mobility, appropriate medical support, strong and
secure supply chains, durable equipment and self-sustainability. As the Security
Council has pointed out, United Nations peacekeeping missions must be provided
with the right capabilities, delivered at the right time in order to fully implement
mandates and meet the challenges they confront today and those that lie ahead. We
can no longer rely heavily on a small number of overburdened contributors of police
and military personnel, but must continue to strive to ensure a diverse mix of
contributors that provides the right capabilities to and increases the flexibility of
peacekeeping, while retaining the legitimacy drawn from having a wide range of
contributors.
4.
In order to adapt to the evolving operational realities and address the versatility
of threats, missions require different capabilities at different periods in their life cycle.
Mission concepts of operations will be reassessed continually, and force compositions
and operational plans will need to be adjusted. In this context, it is indispensable that
troop- and police-contributing countries remain flexible and adaptable in the
2/9

17-23005

S/2017/1079

capabilities they provide and the time frame in which they provide them. The
generation of capabilities for United Nations peacekeeping cannot focus solely on the
type of equipment or the number of personnel being sought. Rather, it focuses
increasingly on all of the factors that lead to effective performance, including agility,
training, equipment, technology, doctrine, leadership, discip line, interoperability,
welfare and mindset, and gender balance, as well as the absence of operational
caveats. More complex and sometimes more dangerous operations require
strengthened communications, situational awareness, interoperability between units
and force protection.
5.
What is needed are the right capabilities, not only the available ones.
Specialized and high-performing capabilities are in short supply, particularly
helicopters and enablers in such areas as medical services, specialized enginee ring
tasks, intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance and efforts to counter improvised
explosive devices; rapidly deployable capabilities; women; and French -speaking
peacekeepers. Likewise, well-targeted and sustained training and capacity-building
programmes that meet our standards are as important as ever.
6.
While all missions have capabilities that can and should be strengthened, two
missions continue to experience specific gaps. The United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) is lacking one medium armed
utility helicopter unit and one medium utility helicopter unit and the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) has not yet deployed a transport company and a
special forces company for the regional protection force. Challenges relating to the
timely deployment of capabilities, particularly for such missions as UNMISS, are also
associated with the consent and capacity of the host government. It is critical that the
members of the Security Council engage collectively and individually to ensure that
host governments comply fully with status-of-mission agreements and that the
Council act accordingly when host governments fail to do so.
Key capability areas
7.
Despite the new pledges made at recent high-level meetings and the engagement
of Member States, some areas of critical capability will require the sustained support
and contributions of Member States:
• High-mobility units, which are agile and offer greater flexibility to the Force
Commander and Police Commissioner, are increasingly required for the
protection of civilians and mission personnel.
• Improved situational awareness, through both assets and qualified, expert
personnel, is a necessity in our missions given the dangerous environments we
operate in, and will only become more important.
• High-quality enabling units for tasks in such areas as airfield support,
explosive ordnance, transport, specialized engineering, medical services and
aviation are particularly necessary given that the areas of operation for
peacekeeping missions are frequently underdeveloped, with limited
transportation and infrastructure and scarce local resources.
• Force protection, along with defensive measures and assets to safeguard
camps, is needed in such missions as MINUSMA, where we need measures to
counter improvised explosive devices and indirect fire attacks. Better training
is required in this area, both before deployment and in-mission.
• The ability to deploy rapidly during the most critical window of opportunity
has traditionally been one of the most vexing operational challenges for United
Nations peacekeeping.

17-23005

3/9

S/2017/1079

• French-speaking troops and police are needed, as most peacekeepers are
deployed in francophone environments. In those environments, the United
Nations lacks the capability to deploy a sufficient number of uniformed
contingents who can adequately interact with the local population, a criti cal
element of civilian protection and early peacebuilding.
• The deployment of women in 15 per cent of our staff officer and military
observer positions was established as a goal in 2016. We also established the
goal of doubling the number of female police and military peacekeepers by
2020. With the strong and sustained support of Member States, we hope to
ultimately be able to reach those figures, particularly through the contribution
of female engagement teams and enhanced training programmes targeting
women officers.
Training and capacity-building challenges
8.
Deploying forces that meet our performance and conduct standards is a critical
component of filling capability gaps. This begins with proper training. Member States
have consistently maintained that training is the primary responsibility of Member
States. Moreover, with 128 troop- and police-contributing countries, more than 15
missions and around 110,000 personnel that rotate at a rate of approximately 95,000
per year, there are limitations to the support the Secretariat can provide, in terms of
the direct provision of training as well as the coordination of targeted training. In
general, the needs of troop- and police-contributing countries are varied, as the
approaches, resources and capacities of national military and police institutions differ
vastly from one country to another.
9.
Knowledge and skills learned in training need to be refreshed regularly.
Equipment, as well, cannot be sustained without appropriate systems for maintenance,
repair and the acquisition of spare parts. However, training and capacity -building
activities are often viewed as one-off activities rather than as sustainable and
specialized tools to enhance operational effectiveness throughout the mission life
cycle. Consequently, training peacekeepers just before deployment and providing
equipment for their tour will not deliver self-sufficient training capacities.
10. Previous attempts to create a centralized mechanism to coordinate and
strengthen training and capacity-building, for example the Group of Eight Africa
Clearing House, have not met with success, with challenges having been encountered
by both the providers and the recipients of the training. Some troop - and policecontributing countries are reluctant to provide broadly comprehensive assessments of
their training needs. Equally, providers of bilateral training support can also be
reluctant to share information or entertain requests to deviate from their planned
activities to further United Nations priorities.
11. United Nations core predeployment peacekeeping training provides important
generic knowledge and skills, but mission-specific and specialist training has become
more important, especially as more units require local knowledge and situational
awareness to effectively achieve their mandated tasks. Opportunities for successful
matchmaking between providers and recipients to fill such capability gaps are instead
best realized through targeted engagement to develop partnerships around specific
missions and/or countries or to address specific capabilities. This approach is
consistent with the more strategic approach to force generation that the Secretariat
has adopted in the past three years. However, those needs can be met only if troop and police-contributing countries provide accurate and timely assessments of their
existing military and police capabilities and gaps in training for both mission -specific
professional skills and United Nations-specific skills.

4/9

17-23005

S/2017/1079

12. Despite the progress made in filling gaps, the scale of the capacity, training and
conduct challenges that face many of our troop- and police-contributing countries is
too great to be addressed through the resources of the Secretariat. At present, most of
the Secretariat’s capacity-building activities related to peacekeeping, including those
by the Integrated Training Service of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
the Department of Field Support and the Strategic Force Generation and Capability
Planning Cell, are funded through extrabudgetary support. The support account for
peacekeeping operations continues to be under downward pressure, and the lack of
sustainable resources continues to curtail our efforts to support training and capacity building. Since 2009/10, the training budget of the Integrated Training Service has
been reduced from $2,697,950 to $1,221,418, or 55 per cent, and one military training
post has been cut. The reduction in funding has removed all institutionalized support
for peacekeeping leadership training, which is now funded by voluntary Member
State contributions or levies on peacekeeping missions. It has also reduced the
capacity of the Service to provide support to Member States and field missions. At
the same time, Member States are asking the United Nations to do more to coordinate
capacity-building, develop training materials, ensure conduct and discipline standards
and deliver training to troop- and police-contributing countries. Thus, the increasing
requirements on the part of both financial contributors and uni formed peacekeepers
are not matched by increasing resources for the support account. While we have had
some success in raising voluntary contributions to support capacity -building, those
contributions have been focused on tightly defined initiatives, such as the senior
mission leaders course, the Regional Training and Conference Centre in Entebbe,
Uganda, or triangular partnerships.

Continuous efforts in filling existing gaps
Strategic force generation
13. A critical element of our consistent strategic engagement has been the integral
role of Security Council members in defining and helping us to meet the capability
requirements of our missions. Several members of the Council have hosted high -level
meetings, pledged and prepared new capabilities, offered training and capacitybuilding support and provided financial and political support to our strategic force
generation efforts. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department
of Field Support have collaborated closely with Member States to organize the
Leaders’ Summit on Peacekeeping in 2015 and subsequent ministerial -level meetings
in 2016 and 2017. Those high-level meetings focused attention on peacekeeping
capability gaps at the highest political levels and produced positive global mom entum
for the peacekeeping partnership. The recent United Nations Peacekeeping Defence
Ministerial, held in Canada in November, resulted in 46 Member States making new
military and police pledges to United Nations peacekeeping, including some that fill
key capability gaps of such enablers as aviation resources, quick-reaction forces and
medical capabilities. Some Member States also announced contributions of rapidly
deployable military and police units.
14. The high-level meetings enable us to generate a large pool of potential military
and police capabilities that can subsequently be prepared for deployment through a
new mechanism called the Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System. The System
replaced the defunct United Nations Standby Arrangements Syste m in July 2015 to
ensure a higher degree of readiness and more timely deployment of quality
peacekeeping capabilities. The Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System now
serves as a central component of the United Nations strategic force generation efforts
and enables systematic verification and assessment to enhance the operational
readiness of pledged capabilities before consideration for deployment. Together, the
17-23005

5/9

S/2017/1079

high-level events and the System have given the United Nations a repository of
known, available military and police capabilities that can be called on to fill gaps in
missions as they arise and field a new peacekeeping mission more quickly. As it
relates to the work of the Security Council, the System can give greater visibility on
current capability reserves as mandates are being drafted or renewed. Clear,
prioritized mandates that reflect the available capabilities will also enable us to better
assess the performance of uniformed capabilities and strengthen the dialogue among
the Security Council, troop- and police-contributing countries and the Secretariat.
15. Assessment and advisory visits, a component of the Peacekeeping Capability
Readiness System, improve the Secretariat’s understanding of Member State
capabilities and troop- and police-contributing countries’ understanding of
requirements. Assessment and advisory visits enable the United Nations to select
peacekeeping units that best meet the needs of specific operating environments. Since
March 2016, 39 such visits have been conducted to assess 105 units registered in the
Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System. During those visits, teams have held
discussions with military and political officials, leading to the pledging of several
new capabilities, such as attack helicopters. Such visits also enhance constructive
engagement with troop- and police-contributing countries at the national capital level
on performance and conduct expectations.
16. The Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System and the assessment and
advisory visits can uncover capability shortfalls in pledged units, allowing the
Secretariat to coordinate and target training and capacity-building support, including
with bilateral capacity-building providers. The System has also served as a vehicle
for the Secretariat to plan co-deployment partnerships in which Member States team
up to provide a specific capability, such as a multinational rotation system, to provide
a high-value enabler on a continuous basis. The C-130 aircraft rotation in MINUSMA
has been a successful test case for this approach, and it is being built on to develop
rotation options for other high-value enablers in limited supply, such as helicopters.
17. MINUSMA also illustrates the importance of complementing high-level
meetings with mission-specific force generation events for missions with persistent
capability gaps. The MINUSMA force generation conference held in May 2017
enabled a more interactive and longer-term approach to force generation to fill
persistent capability gaps in the mission. Member States were able to plan future
contributions to Mali, encourage further discussion on joint partnerships and enable
a more collaborative approach to related key issues, such as the provision of qualified
staff officers and addressing training gaps and equipment need s.
18. Central to the Secretariat’s efforts is the Strategic Force Generation and
Capability Planning Cell. It was established in March 2015 in response to the need
for a more forward-looking, coordinated and sustained approach to the generation of
important uniformed capabilities for peacekeeping operations, including with respect
to training. This need was highlighted as well in the 2015 report of the High -level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations (A/70/95-S/2015/446). The main objectives
of the Cell are to ensure strategic Secretariat engagement with Member States on their
potential peacekeeping contributions and to support systematic planning for future
peacekeeping capability needs. This includes close engage ment with the Integrated
Training Service, which plays a leading role in Member State engagement on training
standards, delivery of training and the provision of expertise and internal coordination
on training standards for United Nations peacekeeping.
Targeted training engagement
19. Our targeted training takes several different forms, depending on the topic and
the most suitable mode of delivery. The Integrated Training Service provides targeted
6/9

17-23005

S/2017/1079

training for troop- and police-contributing countries to institutionalize United Nations
training standards into their national institutions. Those efforts focus primarily on the
training of trainers, including through mobile training team visits. A pilot centre for
the training of trainers, supported solely by voluntary contributions, was established
in Entebbe in 2016. It focuses on training those who conduct the United Nations staff
officer course and was established following the receipt of feedback from force
commanders revealing deficiencies in military staff officer performance. The centre
has also conducted training-of-trainers programmes on the design of in-mission
exercises, the protection of civilians, training materials to complement military unit
manuals, a course for military gender advisers, a course for military sector
commanders and courses for United Nations police.
20. Targeted training support is being provided through triangular partnership
projects in the areas of engineering and signals, financed by extrabudgetary
contributions. In the area of engineering, the partnership arrangement has trained
more than 170 personnel from African countries with the help of 91 trainers from
various Member States. Over 75 per cent of the graduates of the 2016 engineering
course are already conducting training in their home countries. The United Nations
Signals Academy project is enhancing the preparedness of military and police signals
personnel to be deployed to peacekeeping missions through the provision of
standardized, mission-specific hands-on training on United Nations-owned
information and communications technology equipment and standard operating
procedures. So far, more than 2,000 United Nations signals experts have been trained,
including 113 women, some of whom have already been deployed.
21. Another targeted training initiative that has proven its effectiveness is the
eLearning programme on the prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse, with one
course aimed at all United Nations personnel (civilian and uniformed) and a second
course at managers and commanders. The programme has been mandatory for all
Secretariat staff at headquarters duty stations and field locations as from May 2017.
More than 7,400 personnel had completed the course by October. The courses were
also made available for predeployment training. Early feedback has been positive,
with personnel commending the clarity and usefulness of the content and visuals.

Recommendations
Force generation and capabilities
22. Enhanced strategic force generation is one of the ways that we can achieve my
reform vision to help ensure that the United Nations is more nimble, pragmatic and
flexible in its ability to plan, launch and manage a range of operations. Blending the
right skills and capabilities for a timely response to specific needs on the ground is
critical for ensuring that United Nations peacekeeping remains a tailored, agile and
adaptable tool. Despite the substantial progress made in recent years to strengthen our
approach and develop partnerships with Member States to fill capa bility gaps, there
are inevitable limitations and some capability gaps that remain to be filled. Chiefly,
the United Nations is dependent on the capabilities that Member States are willing to
provide to it, and the domestic political will to contribute tho se capabilities is not
easily influenced by the Secretariat or the Security Council. Therefore, we will need
to continue to enhance our collective efforts and be creative to fill some of our widest
gaps. This will of course involve troop- and police-contributing countries themselves
investing in more training and better equipment to maintain United Nations standards
and adapt to new operating environments.
23. Forward-looking mission-specific force generation events for missions with
persistent capability gaps will continue and evolve on the basis of the lessons learned
17-23005

7/9

S/2017/1079

so far. Coordination between the providers and recipients of training in filling those
gaps has been achieved through targeted engagement in developing partnerships for
specific missions and/or countries or to address specific gaps. This is vital to the
success of critical missions and new and creative ways of generating and sustaining
the required capabilities are needed.
24. In the area of aviation, a working group has been established as p art of the
Uniformed Capabilities Development Steering Group to better define the exact
challenges troop-contributing countries face with regard to contributing helicopters
and to look for new and innovate ways to generate helicopter capacity.
Training and capacity-building
25. There is a need to improve the coordination of training and capacity-building to
further enhance the outcome of our strategic force generation efforts. Such efforts
should also be more closely linked to the force generation proc ess under the
Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System so that trained troop - and policecontributing country contingents and personnel with the right capabilities and
equipment are deployed to peacekeeping missions. To this end, I propose the
establishment of a light coordination mechanism that would bring together Secretariat
entities involved in training, capacity-building and force generation, potential troopand police-contributing countries that would benefit from training and capacity building, and Member States that can provide the necessary support, resulting in the
deployment of pre-trained units and personnel to peacekeeping operations. This
coordination mechanism would be limited to matching troop - and police-contributing
countries registered in the Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System with Member
States willing to provide support for further bilateral, or where relevant, trilateral,
engagement.
26. To support a wider range of initiatives, meet multiple and sometimes unforeseen
capacity-building and training needs and make training and capacity-building support
sustainable for the longer term, I propose to establish another mechanism to
supplement the recommendation described above: a pooled, multi -donor grant as part
of the existing Department of Peacekeeping Operations trust fund. The grant would
augment existing resources for the coordination and delivery of additional targeted
and sustained training support for troop- and police-contributing countries and
increase our flexibility in responding quickly to priority emerging issues. It would
also support more sustainable strategic engagement with troop - and policecontributing countries, including capability- and mission-specific force generation
and assessment and advisory visits. An additional more flexible and responsive
mechanism may be required to support a wider range of initiatives and meet multiple
and sometimes unforeseen capacity-building and training needs.
27. Targeted capacity-building efforts must also continue, with the recognition that
some types of capabilities are more urgent priorities than others. Triangular
partnership arrangements should be expanded by identifying other capacities that may
be needed, as encouraged by the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. The
triangular partnership projects should be expanded to include additional geographical
regions, additional enabling capabilities and francophone countries. Ongoing work
on medical standards is being buoyed through a partnership of interested Member
States. Coordinated by the Secretariat, those Member States provide funding,
expertise, convening capacity and training to help improve the medical capabilities
deployed to peacekeeping missions.
28. The constant turnover of personnel should be addressed by directing both United
Nations and bilateral training support as far “upstream” as possible, for example by
conducting training-of-trainers courses to build self-sustaining national capacity and
8/9

17-23005

S/2017/1079

including United Nations-specific training in the normal professional training
curriculum for commissioned and non-commissioned officers.
29. With Member States being the primary provider of training and capacity building resources, I recommend that bilateral training support provided to troop - and
police-contributing countries be focused on building national training capacity and
ideally be delivered in the troop- or police-contributing country itself. Fortunately,
several Member States have already undertaken, or have pledged to undertake, such
activities in support of countries contributing troops or police to specific missions.
Those offers were developed with input from the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Field Support and circulated to Member States by
the Integrated Training Service. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support will continue to provide technical support to Member
States and advice on where to provide support. I also encourage Member States to
continue to provide voluntary contributions to triangular partnerships in the areas of
engineering and signals, to sexual exploitation and abuse training programmes and to
the training-of-trainers centre, in support of either the centre itself or specific
programmes. Lastly, I urge Member States to either make voluntary contributions to
support translation or to undertake translations for the United Nations using national
resources.
30. With regard to conduct and discipline and the prevention of sexual exploitation
and abuse, there is a need to build on existing initiatives and address gaps in the
training of troop- and police-contributing country personnel. Based on a draft training
programme for National Investigation Officers being developed by the Office of
Internal Oversight Services and the Department o f Field Support, support is sought
to complete the development, piloting and roll-out of the programme.
31. Strengthening dialogue with troop- and police-contributing countries on
performance will also be critical. We must fully implement our performance and
conduct requirements, including through enforcement of appropriate training,
equipment and performance standards. The leadership of the Security Council is
essential in this regard. In instances where action must be taken to address
underperformance or misconduct, we rely on the consistent support of the Council,
the General Assembly and Member States. Our collective goal must be to achieve a
virtuous performance loop in which we collectively strive for excellence in newly
generated capabilities, current contributions and future rotations. Underpinning this
effort is a partnership among the Secretariat and troop - and police-contributing
countries based on frank dialogue and supported by real -time information and
quantifiable data analysis. Accordingly, troop- and police-contributing countries must
proactively seek to implement systematic corrective measures in a timely fashion.
32. Ensuring that every United Nations peacekeeping mission is supported by troops
and police who are properly trained, equipped, led and motivated, rotation after
rotation, is a significant challenge that will require more partnerships, resources and
time to overcome. Much progress has been made over the past few years, but much
work remains to be done. The Secretariat, for its part, will further enhance its ongoing
work on strategic force generation and targeted training support. I look to Member
States to partner with us, inter alia, through bilateral training efforts and triangular
partnerships with the Secretariat, to redouble efforts to ensure that every troop- and
police-contributing country that needs support and capacity-building for
peacekeeping receives it. I look forward to hearing feedback and more ideas from
Security Council members, troop- and police-contributing countries and other
Member States in the days and weeks ahead as to how we can jointly ensure that our
peacekeeping operations are effective.

17-23005

9/9
