S/2021/941

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 November 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 10 November 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefing provided by
the Deputy Secretary-General, Her Excellency Ms. Amina Mohammed, as well as
the statements delivered by Their Excellencies Mr. Uhuru Kenyatta, President of
Kenya; Mr. Kaïs Saïed, President of Tunisia; Mr. Nguyen Xuan Phuc, President
of Viet Nam; Mr. Ralph E. Gonsalves, Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign
Affairs, National Security, Legal Affairs and Information of Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines; Mr. Jonas Gahr Støre, Prime Minister of Norway; Mr. Subrahmanyam
Jaishankar, Minister for External Affairs of India; Mr. Simon Coveney, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Defence of Ireland; Ms. Vicky Ford, Minister for Africa
at the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland; Mr. Andres Rundu, Deputy Foreign Minister
of Estonia; and by the representatives of China, France, Mexico and the Russian
Federation, in connection with the video-teleconference on “Cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security”, convened on Thursday, 28 October 2021. A
statement was also delivered by His Excellency Mr. Nana Addo Dankwa AkufoAddo, President of Ghana.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, this
briefing and these statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez
President of the Security Council

21-16524 (E) 171121 060122

*2116524*

S/2021/941

Annex I
Statement by the Deputy Secretary-General, Amina Mohammed
Regrettably, the Secretary-General could not join us today. He asked me to
convey his regards and to provide this briefing on his behalf.
As Kenya concludes a prolific month as President of the Security Council,
let me begin by congratulating His Excellency President Uhuru Kenyatta. I also
salute Mr. Donald Kaberuka, African Union High Representative for Financing of
the Union and the African Union Peace Fund, who joins us today.
I also thank the members of the Security Council for helping us shine a
spotlight on the vital importance of peace and security in Africa and on how the
United Nations — and all Member States — can join forces with the African Union
(AU) and other regional and subregional groups to achieve that vision.
This discussion takes place in the context of a number of worrisome trends
across the continent. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has created
additional socioeconomic burdens on countries’ efforts to implement the Sustainable
Development Goals.
In too many places, we are seeing a rise in seizures of power by force. Earlier
this week, a military coup d’état took place in the Sudan, posing a major threat to the
political transition taking place since the signing of the Constitutional Declaration
in August 2019. The conflict in northern Ethiopia continues unabated, despite
appeals by the African Union and the United Nations for a permanent ceasefire and
unhindered humanitarian access to the Tigray region. In the Sahel and throughout
the Lake Chad basin region, we face persistent threats of terrorism and violent
extremism from groups affiliated with Al-Qaida, Da’esh and Boko Haram, and we
are seeing a proliferation of militias. Across Africa, the COVID-19 pandemic has
exacerbated poverty, inequalities and all the drivers of conflict. It has undercut the
provision of public services, disrupted supply chains, slowed economic activity and
hampered peace agreements and conflict resolution.
Despite those worrisome developments, the people of Africa are determined
to work relentlessly for a more prosperous, sustainable and peaceful continent — one
based on shared values and the universal principles of human rights.
The Secretary-General’s annual report (S/2021/763) on the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union contains a number of hopeful
developments, including a peaceful and inclusive election in Burkina Faso and
peaceful transfers of power in the Niger and Zambia following presidential elections.
Throughout, we are seeing growing cooperation between the United Nations,
the African Union and subregional organizations on sustainable development,
elections and peace processes. In Libya, for example, the United Nations is working
closely with the African Union, the League of Arab States and the European Union
to support the ceasefire agreement and to prepare for the upcoming elections.
The African Union has played a particularly active role in the International
Follow-up Committee on Libya of the Berlin process, including as a co-Chair of
its Security Working Group. I also welcome the African Union’s efforts to lead
international support for the Libyan reconciliation process. The United Nations
stands ready to work with the AU in support of Libyan authorities and a rights-based
reconciliation process.
We are also working closely with the African Union and subregional
organizations to support the countries of the Sahel and beyond. That includes efforts
to address the return of mercenaries and foreign fighters to their countries of origin.
2/33

21-16524

S/2021/941

Moreover, we are committed to continuing our support for the African Union-led
negotiations on the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam.
The Organization’s special political missions, peacekeeping missions and
country teams in Africa continue to provide comprehensive support to other peace
initiatives and political transitions, including in Cameroon, Chad, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Somalia, South Sudan and
the Sudan.
We work closely with the African Union on regular joint consultations and
analyses through our cooperation frameworks for peace and security, humanitarian
aid and sustainable development — our blueprint for joint integrated action. The
United Nations Office to the African Union plays a key role in that regard.
Once the ongoing discussions on the division of responsibilities between
the African Union and the regional economic communities/regional mechanisms
are concluded, the United Nations looks forward to continuing to harness the
opportunities and strengths of each organization and build effective conflict
prevention and resolution strategies as the COVID-19 pandemic and climate change
continue to affect the continent, particularly women and youth.
While our partnership with the African Union and subregional organizations is
a necessary precondition for peace, security, humanitarian assistance, development
and justice in Africa, we also recognize that all Member States need to support
these efforts.
In the Secretary-General’s Our Common Agenda (A/75/982), he underlines the
need to re-embrace global solidarity to find new ways to work together for the good
of all people in every country, on the basis of human rights and through a stronger,
more connected and inclusive multilateral system.
In that context, I would like to add three urgent actions that require global
solidarity and support.
First, we need to prioritize our response to the COVID-19 pandemic in Africa
through accelerated vaccine distribution, more robust national health systems and
much-needed investments in preparedness. Only about 5 per cent of the population
in Africa today is fully vaccinated against COVID-19. We urgently require universal
access to COVID-19 vaccines, support for domestic manufacturing of vaccines and
financing to alleviate the socioeconomic challenges caused by the pandemic.
Secondly, we need to reaffirm our focus on sustainable development, with the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the African Union’s Agenda 2063 at
the heart of our common efforts. Ultimately, sustainable and inclusive development
is our best chance to address the root causes of conflict and achieve a future of peace
and prosperity for all.
Despite the pandemic, African countries have shown remarkable resilience.
According to estimates by the International Monetary Fund, economic growth will
expand at 3.4 per cent in 2021. But African countries are in urgent need of liquidity
and debt relief to create jobs, expand social protection and reverse poverty trends.
Their recovery must be grounded in advancing just transitions in key areas such as
energy, food systems, digital connectivity and infrastructure. Urgent action is needed
to speed up the re-channelling of special drawing rights and increase fiscal space.
Spurring those transitions and implementing the African Continental Free
Trade Area — a major achievement for the region — will facilitate trade, help reduce
emissions, support those who are shifting away from the brown economy and create
new jobs geared towards the economy of tomorrow for Africa’s burgeoning youth
21-165243/33

S/2021/941

population. It could also boost the region’s combined gross domestic product by
$44 billion and create millions of jobs. In addition, digital transformation offers the
potential to considerably accelerate trade, job creation and access to services.
As we look to a sustainable and green recovery from COVID-19, and in order
to meet the promises of the 2030 Agenda, we should redouble our commitment to
strengthening our institutions to respond to the needs of all people — especially
women, youth and minorities. One powerful litmus test will be ensuring the full
representation of women as countries make the journey to peace and stability.
Thirdly, we need to continue securing adequate, predictable and sustainable
resources that will bring to life development, peace and security mandates across
Africa. In that regard, I would like to highlight the centrality of ensuring coherent
action across peace, development and humanitarian objectives in the continent
by establishing a common vision, promoting complementarity and safeguarding
investments.
The African Union Peace Fund is an inspiring example. I call on the members
of the Security Council to work with the African Union’s Peace and Security Council
to strengthen financing mechanisms for African Union-led peace support operations
authorized by the Security Council.
In the Sahel, together with the African Union, the United Nations stands ready
to convene an international forum with the States of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel) and their partners to bolster peace and development efforts across the
Sahel in support of the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.
Under the guidance of Member States, we will spare no effort to make our
partnerships more effective in order to help all Africans build a more inclusive,
prosperous, integrated and peaceful continent, as envisaged in Agenda 2063 and the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

4/33

21-16524

S/2021/941

Annex II
Statement by the President of Kenya, Uhuru Kenyatta
I thank Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Ms. Amina Mohammed and Mr. Donald
Kaberuka, for their informative briefings.
Today’s debate comes at a time when the African continent is at a crossroads.
On one hand, Africa is poised to reap from its demographic dividend and
the bold economic reforms in intra-African trade and investment. Our integration
agenda is marching forward, and our political solidarity is finding expression in our
collective responses to insecurity.
On the other hand, terrorism and insurgency are spreading and fundamentally
challenging almost every nation on the continent. The aftermath of the 2011 Libyan
invasion, the rise of Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, the
proliferation of illicit firearms, insurgency and the emergence of domestic terror
groups funded by international actors all pose grave socioeconomic challenges
for Africa. The recent upsurge in coups, which we thought were behind us, have
exacerbated those negative situations.
Following two decades of rapid economic growth, the coronavirus disease
pandemic has reversed the economic gains and plunged large numbers of Africans back
into the poverty they had escaped from. Furthermore, the effects of climate change are
increasing social and economic fragility and escalating conflicts over resources.
The vacuum resulting from those negative situations has led new external
actors to intervene, which has further deepened the crisis and drawn in geopolitical
rivals. As was the case during the Cold War, those rivalries come at the cost of
African lives and our stability.
Africa is not facing its problems passively. It has developed an architecture
for conflict prevention, conflict management, conflict resolution and post-conflict
reconstruction. That architecture has delivered multiple peace agreements and
pushed back against terrorist groups.
Africa’s mediators and peacekeepers have been heroic. I pay tribute to them
and honour the sacrifices they have made for the sake of our common peace, stability
and security.
Nonetheless, I am sure that everybody will agree with me that, given the
current challenges, that architecture is strained. Rarely in the past have multiple
crisis situations interacted as they are doing now, or produced effects that may lead
to a state of continental emergency.
This is not just a challenge of and for Africa. Globally, multilateral responses
are falling short in overcoming the pandemic, climate change, economic crisis and
terrorism.
As the Secretary-General reminded us in his recent call to action, we must,
“break through or break down”. This moment calls for bold and visionary action that
rises above narrow self- interest and drives concerted and sustainable multilateral
responses.
I propose that we start a conversation on how to renew Africa’s security
architecture through cooperation among the United Nations, the African Union
(AU) and the regional economic blocs. Our efforts could show the world that global
leadership can rise to the challenge.
Together, we can enable African States and regions to overcome insecurity in
the Sahel, the Horn of Africa, Central Africa and countries dealing with dangerous
21-165245/33

S/2021/941

insurgent and terrorist groups. The way forward has three strategic orientations,
which I would like to share with the Security Council.
First, the Council should appreciate that peacekeeping in Africa has
fundamentally changed. The Council field trip to Mali and the Niger this month,
under the Kenyan presidency, made that abundantly clear. The missions of both
the United Nations and the AU are increasingly contending with sophisticated
international terrorist groups, in addition to overseeing peace agreements. They
need greater military capacity and resources to respond effectively to the complex
environment they face.
Often, the first responders to those terrorist groups are African-led. The
Multinational Joint Task Force, anchored and funded by Nigeria, is an example
of clear and telling success. Similarly, the interventions by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and the African Union in Somalia are yielding results.
But Africa-led responses are handicapped by insufficient financial and technological
resources to overcome the terrorist groups that have become entrenched in fragile
States.
United Nations peacekeeping missions, which are better resourced, are then
deployed to support African first-responders. However, their mandates are not fit for
purpose. Effective peacekeeping requires better alignment between the Africa-led
responders and United Nations peacekeeping missions.
My second strategic recommendation is that inclusivity is an essential
component of sustainable peacekeeping. That is not just the case in Africa. Indeed,
based on identity differences that are politicized and sometimes weaponized in
political competitions, the world is becoming even more divided. Technology and
social media adding disinformation and toxic narratives to conversations are the
main drivers. Even the wealthiest and most stable democracies are discovering that
dangerous divisions, a product of identity, can threaten the constitutional foundations
of a State.
We will successfully overcome our insecurity when we combine military
action with fundamental governance reforms that deliver inclusivity for every race,
ethnicity, gender, religion and economic status. Inclusivity in service delivery,
competent and non-partisan civil services, fair policies and legislation are key. We
should also embrace a political culture that discourages winner-take-all outcomes in
divided societies. The peaceful and inclusive management of diversity must become
the core of nation-building and State stabilization.
My third recommendation is that this partnership must enable the production
of plentiful jobs that harness the energy and skills of African youth. A State that
is unable to deliver jobs will be under constant threat of instability, driven by
frustration and anti-establishment sentiments. Our partnership with the United
Nations has produced a number of initiatives and reforms under the broad umbrella
of good governance. We need to add competencies that make inclusion a key
dimension of State-building and the pursuit of peace, as well as the ability to deliver
sustainable economic growth and create jobs in countries considered high-risk by
global investors.
We are in a do-or-die moment. If the green agenda does not deliver green
growth and green jobs to Africa, then it will fail globally. The rapidly growing
population of Africa will eventually contribute to climate change, which we must
confront to save Africa. In that context, the forthcoming twenty-sixth session of the
Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, in Glasgow, needs to produce tangible and transformative investments in
climate adaptation that will enable strong green growth in Africa.
6/33

21-16524

S/2021/941

We must also leverage Africa’s emerging investments in climate change
adaptation, including in renewable energy, in order to boost responsible green
investment. That should be the way forward, as it will provide Africa ample
resources, while delivering jobs and services to Africans in a sustainable manner.
Those economic and investment reforms would contribute significantly to peace
and security.
My three broad points are obvious on many levels. However, the simple
can often be difficult to see and grasp as we grapple with the complex issues we
navigate daily.
I will finish my statement by proposing immediate actions we can take to
bring those reforms to life in the context of cooperation between the United Nations,
the AU and the regional economic blocs.
Let us act based on the simple fact that African multinational peace enforcement
missions, whether the Group of Five for the Sahel or the African Union Mission
in Somalia, are delivering a critical service to international peace and security.
They cannot take action to stop global terrorist groups from overwhelming States
without adequate, predictable and sustainable financing, as well as force enablers
and multipliers.
Let us undertake a structured dialogue on how to make missions in the Sahel,
the Horn of Africa and Central Africa fit for purpose. For the sake of peace, we should
discuss assessed contributions and the reforms that States and regional organizations
need to undertake in order to secure inclusivity and sustainable socioeconomic
development and jobs.
I look forward to participating in this conversation so that we can cooperate
more effectively in the pursuit of peace, security, political stability and economic
prosperity for Africa and its peoples.

21-165247/33

S/2021/941

Annex III
Statement by the President of Tunisia, Kaïs Saïed
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I should like to congratulate the Republic of Kenya on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council and wish it every success in addressing the
important issues that it has included among the Council’s priorities, particularly
those related to the African continent and cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union.
I thank the Deputy Secretary-General for her valuable briefing and once again
express the appreciation of Tunisia for the Secretariat’s efforts to serve international
peace and security and enhance the role of the United Nations and multilateral action.
I welcome the High Representative for the Peace Fund of the African Union,
Mr. Donald Kaberuka, and express my appreciation for the Union’s efforts to serve
African causes and promote peace and security on the continent.
A few days ago, the international community celebrated United Nations Day
on the 76th anniversary of the founding of the United Nations. That makes this a
good occasion to call to mind the circumstances that inspired the establishment of
this international edifice, the goals set for it and the hopes placed on it for promoting
joint action, upholding the values of solidarity and cooperation among the various
peoples of the world, resolving disputes peacefully and building the foundations of
inclusive and sustainable development.
Those same objectives and aspirations inspire many regional organizations
that share the vision, philosophy and mission of the United Nations. It is therefore
natural that bridges of cooperation and complementarity should connect those two
sides in the pursuit of common goals.
The African Union is one such regional organization. Its operational
mechanisms and overarching goals are aligned with those of the United Nations. For
that reason, cooperation between the two organizations has all the factors that can
make it a successful and effective model for concerted efforts to realize the common
aspirations of peoples for security, peace and prosperity.
However, those ambitions often come up against various obstacles and
impediments. Despite international and regional efforts, the African continent
continues to be the scene of numerous armed conflicts, tensions and instability,
resulting in forced displacement, civilian suffering and violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
Our continent also faces structural challenges that will stand between it
and lasting peace and security if their underlying causes are not addressed. Those
causes include exclusion, marginalization, an absence of State authority in some
regions and weak governance. Those vulnerabilities have been exacerbated by
emerging and pervasive threats, most notably the coronavirus disease pandemic and
the repercussions of climate change. Those threats highlight clearly the need for a
broader concept of peace and security and a new approach rooted in solidarity and
cooperation among nations and peoples.
Stepping up cooperation, partnership and complementarity between the
United Nations and the African Union to manage conflicts and push forward their
settlement through new mechanisms and ideas should, in our view, be a strategic
priority. It can be an effective tool for meeting challenges to peace and security
throughout the continent and mitigating their repercussions for the rest of the world.
8/33

21-16524

S/2021/941

In that connection, we note with satisfaction joint efforts by the two
organizations to advance the political settlement track in several African countries,
including Libya, the Sudan, Mali, the Central African Republic, South Sudan and
Somalia, as well as in the Sahel region.
While we also express our satisfaction with the development of consultation
mechanisms between the two organizations — including the periodic meetings
between the United Nations Security Council and the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union — we stress here today the need to raise the level of that
coordination to bring about a quantum leap in cooperative relations between the two
organizations to higher levels of integration and role-sharing in managing conflicts
and addressing their underlying causes.
The African Union, African organizations and regional economic groups
have consistently affirmed their readiness to play major roles in addressing crises
in the African arena. Their familiarity with African reality and their ability to
handle its specificities should perhaps give them a preferential advantage when it
comes to assuming greater responsibilities in this area. We support giving priority
to intervention by such organizations whenever feasible and supporting their efforts
and initiatives to resolve conflicts and maintain international peace and security, in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
We call on members of the Security Council, especially penholders, to
coordinate more extensively with African representatives on the Council when it
comes to the various African issues on its agenda.
We also believe that reinforcing coordination between the SecretaryGeneral’s special envoys and the African Union would create more effective tools
for mediating and promoting peaceful settlement of conflicts. African envoys would
have extensive knowledge of the local culture in which relations between the various
parties to conflicts are grounded.
We reiterate the call to provide support for African Union peace support
operations being conducted under the aegis of the Security Council through United
Nations assessed contributions.
Lastly, we reiterate our conviction that addressing conflict-related challenges
and instability in the African continent requires continued cooperation, coordination
and integration among the various United Nations, regional and international
organizations as part of a comprehensive approach to peace that addresses not only
the security aspect, but also the developmental, social and environmental dimensions,
in line with implementation of the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and Agenda 2063 of the African Union: The Africa We Want.

21-165249/33

S/2021/941

Annex IV
Statement by the President of Viet Nam, Nguyen Xuan Phuc
It is such a great pleasure for me to virtually meet again with The Honourable
Uhuru Kenyatta, President of Kenya. I appreciate the highly relevant theme of
our debate today. Allow me to thank the Secretary-General and other speakers for
sharing with us important information and recommendations.
A majestic Africa full of vitality has long been an integral part of the origin
of human history, a cradle of numerous civilizations of humankind and a gateway
for the world’s robust trade. With rich and diverse natural resources, that continent
is endowed with enormous potential for well-being and to contribute to the world’s
prosperity. In fact, Africa has become increasingly connected to other regions
across all dimensions of political, economic and trade links and of cultural and
people-to-people exchange. And the continent has attained numerous encouraging
achievements in development and integration. With the central and leading role of
the African Union (AU) and subregional organizations, the seeds of peace have
grown robustly on the land once ravaged by war.
Nonetheless, over the past decades, many African countries have suffered
from the enduring consequences of colonialism and slavery. Unrest, conflicts,
terrorism and extreme violence, transnational crime, climate change and food and
water insecurity continue to undergo complicated developments, hindering the
continent’s momentum for growth. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
is an additional burden, further exposing the shortcomings of the global governance
system. The fact that 90 per cent of the African population has yet to receive the first
vaccine injection is a sad reality.
In a globalized world, and given the wide spread of COVID-19, if Africa is
unable to enjoy peace, security and stability or to get the pandemic under control, the
world will be unsafe and unable to keep the peace or uphold sustainable development.
Conscience and responsibility demand that the international community join hands
in assisting African countries in gaining access to vaccines, containing the pandemic
and fostering sustainable recovery and development.
To accompany African countries in these endeavours, I wish to share the
following recommendations.
First, with the philosophy of “African solutions for African problems”, all
countries in the region need to fully harness their capacity for self-reliance and
promote trust-building, dialogue and national reconciliation to eliminate the root
causes of conflict, such as poverty, inequality and social friction. The participation
and empowerment of women and youth should be encouraged.
Secondly, all African countries need to further cultivate friendship, step
up cooperation and integration, strengthen multilateralism and uphold respect for
international law and the Charter of the United Nations. This is the vital foundation
of enduring peace, security and sustainable development in the region and the world
at large.
Thirdly, the United Nations and the African Union need to be the vanguards
in jointly implementing the Silencing the Guns in Africa initiative, the Africa Union
Agenda 2063 and the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The strategic partnership between the United Nations Security Council and the AU
Peace and Security Council needs to be promoted in a comprehensive and effective
manner, particularly in enhancing the early-warning capacity of traditional and nontraditional security risks for peacekeeping missions in Africa.
10/33

21-16524

S/2021/941

Fourthly, expanding cooperation among regional organizations will help
elevate their overarching capacity in preventing and resolving conflicts and
responding to regional and global challenges. Viet Nam supports the promotion
of comprehensive exchange and cooperation between the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations and the African Union.
Fifthly, ensuring food security is an important pillar in fostering socioeconomic
stability and enduring peace. In the framework of South-South cooperation, Viet
Nam is a leading partner of many African countries in food production and trading of
agricultural goods. We will continue to uphold this strategic cooperation orientation.
African countries and Viet Nam are proud of the traditional friendship and
glorious history of struggles for national liberation and decolonization. Despite our
geographical distance, both sides always extend to each other mutual support and
the most sincere and beautiful sentiments. In his visit to African countries right after
Viet Nam’s national reunification, General Vo Nguyen Giap once said:
“I came here to you as brothers to brothers, as comrades in arms on the
same battle line, from heart to heart.”
Nowadays, in the spirit of partnership for sustainable peace, Viet Nam remains
committed to standing shoulder to shoulder with African countries in overcoming
challenges, effectively strengthening cooperation and aiming towards peace and
sustainable development. We stand ready to share our experience in pursuing
reconstruction, reform and development cooperation and to donate medical supplies
for COVID-19 prevention and control. At the moment, Vietnamese officers and
military doctors are working hard for the United Nations peacekeeping missions in
South Sudan and the Central African Republic, and they will continue to participate
in many other missions in this continent.
Viet Nam wishes to soon become an observer country at the African Union
and unite with African countries in upholding the voice and role of developing
countries at multilateral forums, particularly the United Nations.

21-1652411/33

S/2021/941

Annex V
Statement by the Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs,
National Security, Legal Affairs and Information of Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Ralph E Gonsalves
I thank my dear friend and brother, the President of the Republic of Kenya,
His Excellency Uhuru Kenyatta. I greet him in love, faith and hope. his contribution
this morning has been stellar. I endorse everything he outlined in his statement.
Permit me to express, on behalf of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, our
deepest appreciation to the Republic of Kenya for convening this important discussion.
We also thank our briefers for their insightful remarks. I am particularly moved, too,
by the presentation of another of my dear friend and brother, the President of Ghana,
His Excellency Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo.
A spate of complex and interconnecting challenges of the most arduous kind
bear upon peace and security globally. In fragile settings violent conflict, widespread
displacement, acute hunger, underdevelopment, the hazards of climate change and
environmental degradation permeate most profusely, with the most devastating
socioeconomic and political outcomes.
Across the African continent, the bellowing calls for fresh initiatives and
renewed commitments on the part of the international community at large are
unmistakeable. To be sure, the positions and priorities of the African Union, in
particular the Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want” and the Silencing the Guns
initiatives, provide the most practical blueprint for continental peace and stability.
And so, the historical injustices and contemporary contradictions of the present
multilateral order demand that homegrown solutions to problems on the African
continent be fully embraced, reinforced and advanced. During this International
Decade for People of African Descent, development and reparatory solutions for all
African peoples must be supported as vital priorities.
African countries have a vast wealth of experience in building peaceful,
orderly and viable States amidst their post-colonial struggles. The African Union’s
depth of expertise in regional diplomacy, mediation, reconciliation, transitional
justice, security sector governance and reform, and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration initiatives has delivered effective peace processes and political
transitions in many settings. Those efforts ought to be provided with greater
support — politically and financially — through all practical means.
The sustainable funding of AU-led peace operations and measures to ensure the
adequate, predictable and reliable financing of peacebuilding initiatives in African
countries should also be treated as urgent imperatives by the international community.
And major donors, in particular developed countries and the international financial
institutions, should ramp up their overseas development assistance commitments,
eliminate barriers to concessional financing and advance new pathways for African
countries to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals in line with their national
priorities and perspectives.
At the institutional level, the strategic partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union remains undeniably essential to building and maintaining
peace. That partnership should be further broadened with the systematic engagement
of subregional organizations and mechanisms, including the Economic Community
of West African States, the Economic Community of Central African States, the
Southern African Development Community, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and others. Conflict prevention, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
the entire spectrum of activities across the security, development and humanitarian
12/33

21-16524

S/2021/941

nexus are most effective when addressed by a broad and inclusive consortium of
stakeholders. The contributions of regional and subregional actors to these processes
are unparalleled.
The Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council should
continue to explore all modalities for information-sharing, particularly through joint
field visits. Joint institutional engagement should also be pursued, in a consultative
and pragmatic fashion, to address emerging and consequential challenges such as
climate change and environmental degradation. The effects of climate change on
peace and security across the continent are indisputable. Other areas for coordinated
action include mine action, terrorism, piracy and organized crime.
The conflict landscape is being profoundly altered and redefined by climate
change, technological advances and other compounding factors. Despite that
changing nature of conflict, however, ensuring security remains — at its very
core — a feat that can be accomplished only in terms of the collective. We must work
together, with renewed vigour and unyielding solidarity, to expand our multilateral
engagements, enhance cooperation at the regional and subregional levels and deliver
peace and security to all countries and peoples.

21-1652413/33

S/2021/941

Annex VI
Statement by the Prime Minister of Norway, Jonas Gahr Støre
Let me start by thanking you, Mr. President, and Kenya for convening this
timely debate. I would also like to thank the briefers. Through its peace operations
and efforts to prevent, mitigate and resolve conflicts, the African Union (AU) is an
important partner of the Security Council. In the past year, the AU and the Council
have encountered a number of unforeseen, complex and difficult situations, of which
Tigray is one.
We welcome the AU’s leadership in African conflicts, as demonstrated by
its Peace and Security Council’s firm actions in response to the ongoing military
coup in Sudan. The Security Council and the AU Peace and Security Council should
continue to work together to support the people of Sudan.
The global challenges we are facing have disproportionate effects in Africa.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic continues to batter the continent
with unrelenting force. There is glaring inequity in vaccine distribution. We must
work to ensure equitable access to vaccines, tests and treatment, both in solidarity
and in recognition of our mutual interdependence. We applaud the role of the Africa
Centres for Disease Control and Prevention in mobilizing Member States and leading
the response to the pandemic. The World Health Organization has been a key partner
in this work and a reminder of the importance of the partnership between the United
Nations and the AU. Norway will continue to work with partners on global health
issues, as we have done with South Africa in the Facilitation Council for the Access
to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator.
In two days’ time, world leaders will meet in Glasgow to discuss climate
change, the defining issue of our time. The links to security are clear. More than half
of the 20 countries considered most vulnerable to climate change are also affected by
armed conflict. I am grateful to Kenya, the Niger, Tunisia and Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines for their prominent role in putting the effects of climate change higher
on the Security Council’s agenda.
There is no doubt that strategic partnerships can help Africa to achieve its
ambitions and find solutions to pressing challenges. We are encouraged by the AU’s
Agenda 2063 and its Silencing the Guns initiative. The guns will not be silenced
without women’s full, equal and meaningful participation and leadership. That is
key to ensuring lasting peace. We commend the 30 AU member States that have
developed national action plans on women and peace and security, based on
resolutions adopted by the Council. The Panel of the Wise and FemWise Africa, the
network of African women mediators, play an important role in conflict prevention
and mediation.
Our shared goal is the prevention or containment of conflict. Effective
partnerships have been developed between United Nations envoys, AU representatives
and subregional organizations in pursuit of that goal. The protection of civilians
must be at the core of all our efforts. African countries play a vital role in peace
operations. A strong partnership with the AU is one of the keys to success. For its
part, Norway intends to continue to contribute to United Nations peace operations.
The United Nations and the AU Commission have made great strides in
promoting more structured and strategic cooperation. Norway is pleased to support
their efforts. We now need greater political support from Member States. It is our
shared responsibility to strengthen the cooperation between the Security Council
and the AU Peace and Security Council. Norway therefore recommends, first, that
they meet on a more regular basis; secondly, that they carry out more joint visits; and
14/33

21-16524

S/2021/941

thirdly, that the Security Council invite representatives from the AU and the regional
economic communities to provide more frequent briefings.
Africa is home to a young and growing population. The people of Africa yearn
for their continent to achieve stability and economic and social progress and to fulfil
its true promise. Peace and stability are their most important building blocks in
enabling them to realize that ambition. African countries provide critical insights,
and cooperation with them is paramount in dealing with security issues on the
continent. That is why Norway supports efforts to expand the Council and increase
the number of permanent and non-permanent seats on it for Africa.

21-1652415/33

S/2021/941

Annex VII
Statement by the Minister for External Affairs of India,
Subrahmanyam Jaishankar
At the outset, let me begin by congratulating President Kenyatta on his
outstanding leadership as President of the Security Council for the month of October.
His delegation has focused on some of the most pressing thematic issues, as well as
recently organizing an excellent visit of all Council members to the Central African
Republic and Mali, which was immensely useful for understanding the situation on
the ground.
I also congratulate you, Mr. President, on leading the discussions today,
especially on the important subject of cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations, with a specific focus on the African Union
(AU). Given the context of recent developments in the African continent, the topic of
renewing solidarity to successfully deliver peace and security in a changing conflict
environment is well timed and indeed most apt.
I would also like to thank Mr. Donald Kaberuka, the African Union’s High
Representative for the Peace Fund, for his valuable and insightful briefing.
The international community needs to pay close attention to Africa’s voice
and wisdom. No one can know Africa better than Africans themselves. History
has shown us that offering external solutions to African problems, without African
involvement, does not serve the interests of the African people. This skewed approach
needs to change.
That change should begin here, in the Security Council itself. Given the fact
that nearly 70 per cent of the mandate resolutions under Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations are on Africa, a strong and effective partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union has to be the foundational edifice. Although
we have existing mechanisms of cooperation broadly based on the principles
enshrined in the Chapter VIII of the Charter, it is a glaring fact that while African
States constitute more than one fourth of United Nations members, the continued
denial of their representation in the permanent membership category is a blot on
the Council’s collective credibility. While India has always supported the Ezulwini
Consensus and called for permanent African representation in an expanded Council,
those responsible for denial by delay and for perpetuating an historical injustice
must be called out.
In the Africa of today, democratic values are driving efforts to address the
challenges of peace and security effectively. That is clearly evident through the AU’s
increased role within the framework of the African Peace and Security Architecture
and in the success of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), as well as
through its mediation efforts in Libya. The African Union has been ably supported by
the preventive diplomacy and mediation efforts of the Economic Community of West
Africa, the Economic Community of Central African States, the Southern African
Development Community and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
which have all been critical in advancing peace efforts in their respective regions. We
need to be cognizant of this reality, and that spirit of burden-sharing must continue
to drive the peace and security agenda.
India’s own experience helps it to appreciate the fact that the root causes of
conflicts in Africa lie in its colonial history. In terms of the immediate issue at hand,
let me propose five points for consideration:
First, on matters related to peace and security, the Security Council should
respect the regional approach adopted by the countries involved and work in
collaboration with regional organizations to address these shared challenges.
16/33

21-16524

S/2021/941

Secondly, the spread of terrorism on the continent, as evident in the challenges
we face in the Sahel, Somalia and Central and East Africa, is a matter of serious
concern. The initiatives undertaken by AMISOM, the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel and the Multinational Joint Task Force need more robust support from
the Security Council and the international community. We endorse the SecretaryGeneral’s call for supporting African counter-terrorism operations with sustained
financing, including through assessed contributions.
Thirdly, United Nations peacekeeping operations and special political
missions should be sufficiently mandated and resourced to enable them to implement
their mandates. Our experience in peacekeeping in Africa shows that missions often
struggle to implement ambitious mandates. Peacekeeping missions should have a
clear and well-thought-out exit strategy.
Fourthly, while the United Nations-AU strategic partnership has grown over
the years, collective peacebuilding efforts still lag behind in other areas. A more
meaningful peacebuilding partnership between the United Nations and the AU is
needed, based on inter-institutional cooperation focused on harnessing comparative
strengths to complement one another in pursuing the ultimate goal of peace and
security in the region.
And lastly, in order to resolve the issues that divide the Security Council and
the AU Peace and Security Council, it is important to re-energize and strengthen
liaison mechanisms. The African members of the Security Council can play an
important role in that. When deciding the appointment of special envoys of the
Secretary-General or the drawdown of ongoing peacekeeping and political missions,
it is important to consider the views of the member States in the region.
India and Africa share a unique and historical relationship. In 2018 Prime
Minister Narendra Modi enunciated our approach to this partnership through our
10 guiding principles for India-Africa engagement. We have worked with Africa
based on Africa’s priorities, comfort and aspirations. We believe that Africa’s rise is
essential to true multipolarity in the global order and are committed to supporting
that. India’s support has always been free of conditionalities or hidden agendas, as
is clear in our 184 projects in 41 African countries, implemented under concessional
finance. It is expressed in the medicines, vaccines, health equipment, ambulances,
vehicles and food grains we have provided to many African nations. It is evident in
the vocational training and information-technology centres set up across Africa,
the 50,000 education and training slots provided over the past five years and the
digital education and health programmes with 19 African partners. Our trade and
technology exchanges are steadily growing, in line with closer political and peopleto-people ties.
With these words, I would like to conclude by reiterating India’s abiding and
steadfast commitment to an effective partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union. We believe that this partnership is crucial to responding collectively,
coherently and decisively in order to prevent, manage and resolve violent conflicts
and promote peace and development in Africa.

21-1652417/33

S/2021/941

Annex VIII
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Defence of
Ireland, Simon Coveney
We are very grateful to you, Mr. President, for organizing and leading this
important meeting today during your presidency of the Security Council.
Multilateralism has long been at the core of Ireland’s foreign policy. We
appreciate the importance and the power of cooperation between nations in meeting
our common challenges. We have been pleased to participate in discussions on
today’s presidential statement (S/PRST/2021/21) and support it fully. Today I will
make three points on the topic of cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union (AU) — on the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic; on
cooperation in times of crisis; and on the need for peace to be inclusive.
First, the COVID-19 pandemic highlighted the fact that coordinated action
is far more powerful and effective than unilateral action. At the regional level,
the African Union has been playing its part in coordinating Africa’s response to
COVID-19. At the international level, the multilateral system must deliver in
response to COVID-19 by building back better and greener. That means debt relief. It
means equitable access to vaccines and sustainable financing. And it means a green
recovery to meet the challenge of climate change. Peace and security in Africa, and
elsewhere, depend on it.
The COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX) Facility is a crucial aspect
of the multilateral response to a global threat. It has the potential to embody
multilateral solidarity at its best. However, further resources and greater access
to vaccine supplies are needed to enable COVAX to fulfil its mandate. We must
also work to strengthen health systems so that they have the capacity to roll out
COVID-19 vaccine programmes at scale as vaccine deliveries increase. Enhanced
partnerships with the AU have a vital role to play in these efforts.
Ireland participated in the ministerial meeting between the AU and the
European Union in Rwanda earlier this week. Peace, security, governance and
support for recovery from the pandemic were the focus of our discussions there.
The AU-EU partnership is an excellent example of how regional organizations can
work together to support the implementation of Security Council resolutions and the
broader objectives of the Charter of the United Nations.
Secondly, strengthened cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union is an essential tool in how we respond to crises. We see this in the
increasingly strategic engagement between the Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union. The AU and regional organizations in Africa
have an instrumental role in responding to crises and building lasting peace, not
least through encouraging good governance and democratic transitions.
Together, when faced with crises, the United Nations and the AU can make
a concerted push for peace. Just this week, the Security Council and the AU Peace
and Security Council both met urgently in response to the coup in the Sudan that is
threatening to derail its fragile democratic transition. Together, we must work hard to
get the transition, which promised so much to the people of the Sudan, back on track.
In Ethiopia, we are faced with a conflict which shows no signs of abating, almost
a year after it began. The result is a dire humanitarian crisis that Ireland and others
have consistently raised in the Security Council. We urgently need full, unimpeded
and safe humanitarian access — as required by international humanitarian law —
and an immediate and lasting ceasefire. These are among the key asks put forward
by Secretary-General Guterres. President Obasanjo, the AU High Representative for
18/33

21-16524

S/2021/941

the Horn of Africa, will play a critical role in helping to achieve them. He has our
full support, and must have the full support of the entire United Nations system. He
recognizes, as we do, that the countries of the region have a crucial role in delivering
the peace that we all desire.
The path to peace is rarely easy. It must be supported along the way to give it
the best possible chance of succeeding. Ireland recognizes the need for predictable
and sustainable financing for AU-led peace support operations.
Peacekeeping must also be linked to peacebuilding in order to end violence,
prevent conflict and sustain peace. The AU and the United Nations must deepen
and strengthen their cooperation to ensure that mission transitions take place in a
responsible, coordinated and graduated manner, responsive to needs on the ground
and respecting human rights, in line with resolution 2594 (2021). For more than
six decades, Irish women and men have served in United Nations peace operations
alongside African peacekeepers, and we will continue to play our part.
Finally, it is important to note that peacebuilding efforts are stronger when
they are inclusive. We know from our lived experience on the island of Ireland that
women have a pivotal role to play in both securing and sustaining peace. They simply
must be at the negotiating table. We know that the greater their participation in such
efforts, the more likely we are to see long-term, durable peace. Indeed, there are
countless examples globally of the extraordinary work of women and young people
in challenging circumstances. I thank them for their commitment and perseverance.
Last week the Council heard from Bineta Diop, the AU Special Envoy for Women,
Peace and Security (see S/PV.8886), who highlighted the impressive work going on in
Africa to drive forward the women and peace and security agenda. Investing in that
agenda is the responsibility of the entire international community, and cooperation
between the United Nations and the AU is essential to putting women and peace and
security at the heart of peace operations and crisis management.
The voices of young people, civil society, political actors and non-governmental
organizations are vital. We must ensure the protection of spaces for their voices to be
heard. They have spoken loudly and clearly on the impact of climate change, which is
worsening conflict and insecurity across the African continent, and we welcome the
African Union’s vital initiatives to address this. Ireland is proud to serve, with the
Niger, as co-Chair of the Informal Expert Group on Climate and Security. African
States on the front lines of climate change are calling for greater action to be taken,
and the Council must listen and must recognize its responsibility in this regard.
Ireland will continue to work with all Council members to advance this agenda.
The challenges we face are more complex and interconnected than ever. Only by
working together can we address them. Ireland looks forward to continuing to support
an ever-deepening relationship between the African Union and the United Nations.

21-1652419/33

S/2021/941

Annex IX
Statement by the Minister for Africa at the Foreign, Commonwealth
and Development Office of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, Vicky Ford
Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union (AU) is vital
to achieving a safer, greener, healthier, more open and more resilient continent. I
would like to make four key points in this respect.
First, I want to underline the importance of collaboration in promoting and
consolidating democracy, human rights, good governance and the rule of law. The
United Kingdom strongly condemns the military’s arrest of civilian members of
the Sudan’s transitional Government. We are deeply concerned about the reports of
protesters being shot. The United Kingdom has been a consistent and firm advocate
for democratic and peaceful transition in the Sudan. The recent acts of the military
represent an unacceptable betrayal of the Sudanese people and their journey to
democracy, and I welcome the AU’s robust response and its suspension of the Sudan.
Secondly, I want to emphasize the importance of United Nations-AU
coordination in promoting political solutions to conflicts. The situation in northern
Ethiopia is absolutely unacceptable. I am horrified by the humanitarian effects.
More than 5 million people in Tigray require urgent aid, but less than 10 per cent of
their humanitarian needs are being met. There are continuing credible reports of the
abhorrent use of sexual violence as a weapon of war, particularly targeting women
and girls. We are supporting life-saving efforts on the ground, and I reiterate our
calls for an immediate ceasefire, humanitarian access and dialogue. I welcome the
efforts of AU Special Envoy Obasanjo and others to promote dialogue between the
parties to the conflict in Tigray. We need to step these efforts up. It is absolutely vital
that they yield results.
Thirdly, let me emphasize the importance we attach to the AU’s role in peace
operations. I pay tribute to the efforts of the countries contributing police and troops
to the African Union Mission to Somalia, and we look forward to receiving the joint
United Nations-AU proposal for an AU-led successor mission. This must be based on
a model supported by all key stakeholders, including the Somalis.
Finally, I want to note the importance of the United Nations-AU partnership
in tackling global challenges to Africa’s peace and stability and working for a more
stable, prosperous future. On my recent visit to South Africa, Lesotho and Eswatini,
I saw first-hand the impacts of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and
climate change. The United Kingdom is supporting African responses to these
challenges. We have provided $27 million to the AU’s COVID-19 Response Fund.
We are one of the leading donors to the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX)
Facility, which has helped 47 African countries to access around 65 million vaccine
doses. We will continue supporting this vital work.
We are also working with the AU to support its Green Recovery Action Plan
and to showcase African climate action at the twenty-sixth Conference of the Parties
to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in Glasgow.
We are providing technical assistance for the African Continental Free Trade
Area. The United Kingdom was the first non-African country to sign a partnership
agreement. It offers huge opportunities — a common African market would have a
combined gross domestic product of $2.5 trillion and when fully implemented could
lead to a 33 per cent increase in intra-African trade. Through our presidency of
the Group of Seven, we are working with development finance institutions to boost
investment in African countries.
20/33

21-16524

S/2021/941

And we are supporting the empowerment of African women and girls,
including through education. Educating and empowering girls is absolutely essential
if countries are to realize their full potential. The Global Education Summit, which
Prime Minister Boris Johnson was honoured to co-host with you, Mr. President, in
July, raised a record $4 billion, including a United Kingdom pledge of $600 million.
That will enable 88 million more children to attend school by 2025, including many
millions of girls in Africa. The United Nations-AU partnership is a crucial platform
for all these efforts, and it is one that will continue to have the United Kingdom’s
full support.

21-1652421/33

S/2021/941

Annex X
Statement by the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Estonia,
Andres Rundu
It is a great honour for me to participate in this high-level debate organized
by Kenya. Now is the time to discuss the need to enhance our cooperation and
renew solidarity. Our world is becoming more and more complex, with challenges
such as the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and climate change having
clear implications for international peace and security. The debate on enhancing
cooperation with regional organizations and renewing solidarity is therefore very
timely and relevant. Cooperation between the United Nations and the African
Union is crucial to maintaining peace and security. Estonia believes that in order to
contribute to conflict prevention, we should focus on three priority areas.
First, more cooperation is needed on climate change. The negative effects of
climate change have already hit hard, especially in Africa. A new United Nations
report highlights Africa’s disproportionate vulnerability to food insecurity, poverty
and population displacement due to climate change. The focus of the cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union must be on tackling climate
change, as one of the greatest challenges of our time.
Secondly, respect for and the protection of human rights are fundamental
cornerstones of the efforts to achieve lasting peace and security in Africa. Weak
rule-of-law and judicial institutions are one of the primary underlying reasons
that safeguards for human rights are insufficiently developed. Building fair and
trustworthy accountability mechanisms for serious violations across the continent
should be one of our strategic priorities in the collaboration between the United
Nations and the African Union.
Thirdly, empowering women and youth must be at the core of our cooperation
efforts. Again, without the full, meaningful and effective participation of women
and young people, we cannot realistically expect to build sustainable societies and
lasting peace. More needs to be done in this area. Estonia believes that with genuine
effort and focus, we can do more within the cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union.
The objective of today’s debate is to raise awareness and share the assessment
of these trends. The situation is alarming, and we need to act together. The Sahel
region is especially vulnerable to these negative developments. Estonia contributes
in the region by participating in various missions in the Sahel. Yes, African solutions
are needed for African challenges, but at the same time, this is also our collective
responsibility, as no State should be left alone to fight global challenges. The
security architecture is there. The United Nations and the African Union are working
together. Africa is an important stakeholder in international peacebuilding efforts.
The Common African Position on the United Nations peacebuilding architecture
calls for enhanced efforts to implement Agenda 2063. That includes its flagship
programme, Silencing the Guns. While it is the job of Africa’s leaders to define how
to silence the guns, we as the international community are there to help them.
We encourage regional and subregional organizations to make full use of
their comparative advantage. We also welcome the continuing important efforts and
enhanced peacekeeping role of the African Union and subregional organizations.
The African Union Mission in Somalia and the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel are crucial contributors to the security of their respective countries
and regions. We need to ensure effective and orderly transitions to their renewed
mandates in order to consolidate peace and development gains and reduce the risk of
relapses and insurgencies.
22/33

21-16524

S/2021/941

To conclude my statement on Africa’s role in maintaining peace and security,
it is pertinent to recall the Secretary-General’s recent report Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982), which notes that the Security Council could be made more representative
for the twenty-first century through reforms such as enlargement, including better
representation for Africa. Estonia agrees with this assessment.

21-1652423/33

S/2021/941

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Zhang Jun
[Original: Chinese]
I welcome His Excellency President Kenyatta in presiding over today’s
meeting, and thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed and Mr. Donald
Kaberuka, African Union High Representative for the Peace Fund, for their briefings.
We also welcome President Akufo-Addo of Ghana to the meeting.
The United Nations and the African Union are close partners. In the context of
drastic changes in the political, economic, and social situations both globally and in
Africa, and in the face of various new challenges, the United Nations and the African
Union need to strengthen their cooperation more than ever. Kenya’s initiative to hold
this high-level meeting provides us with an important opportunity to discuss how
the United Nations and the African Union can adapt to the new situation and better
maintain peace and security in Africa. We believe the two sides should implement
in-depth cooperation in the following areas.
First, we must help Africa overcome the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic as soon as possible. That was the shared view expressed by the leaders
of African countries during the general debate of the General Assembly this year.
According to World Health Organization estimates, nearly 6 billion doses of
vaccines have been given worldwide, only 2 per cent of which are in Africa. The
African continent has a target of vaccinating 40 per cent of the population by the
end of the year, but it has a vaccine gap of as many as 500 million doses. We call
on developed countries to stop stockpiling vaccines, increase their assistance to
Africa and distribute safe and affordable vaccines in Africa as soon as possible. It
is essential to promote the exemption of developing countries, including African
countries, from intellectual property rights to vaccines, and to ensure the localized
production of vaccines. This is key to helping Africa overcome the pandemic and
respond to potential new epidemics in the future.
Since the outbreak first began, China has provided anti-epidemic materials that
have been distributed all over Africa. China’s COVID-19 vaccine has been shipped
to more than 40 African countries. With China’s assistance, the headquarters of the
Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention is speeding up construction. The
local vaccine plant in Egypt, supported by China, has been officially established and
has begun production. China will continue to help Africa with real action to win the
final victory in the fight against the pandemic.
Secondly, we must help Africa resolve its outstanding problems in the area
of peace and security. The African Union and subregional organizations have
geographical, historical and cultural advantages and can play a unique role in resolving
contentious issues in Africa. The African Union’s peace operations in Somalia and
the Sahel, aimed at actively responding to security challenges, are an important
part of solving African problems in Africa. The United Nations should encourage
international partners to increase their support in order to ensure predictable and
sustainable funding sources for autonomous peace operations in Africa. The Islamic
State and other terrorist groups are spreading in Africa.
We support the United Nations in increasing support for African countries
and helping them improve their independent counter-terrorism capabilities. The
situations in Mali, the Sudan and other countries have undergone new changes
recently. The African Union and the relevant African subregional organizations have
worked actively to ease those situations and played an important role. They should
24/33

21-16524

S/2021/941

continue to receive support and cooperation from the Security Council. In December,
the Security Council and the African Union will hold their annual consultations. We
must make good use of this mechanism, deepen our communication and inject new
impetus into peace and security in Africa.
Thirdly, we must work to end the root causes of conflicts in Africa. The
COVID-19 pandemic poses special challenges to Africa’s economic recovery. At
the same time, the post-pandemic recovery efforts also represent an opportunity
to promote inclusive development and eliminate the root causes of conflict. The
Secretary-General’s recent report Our Common Agenda (A/75/982) suggests that
peacebuilding efforts should be strengthened and crisis prevention emphasized.
We hope that the follow-up to the report will focus on supporting peacebuilding
in Africa and mobilizing more resources to help resolve African countries’ actual
difficulties. We must focus on helping African countries, especially those emerging
from conflict, strengthen Governments’ capacity-building, improve their governance
capabilities, promote sustainable development and encourage social inclusiveness
and cohesion. The United Nations Development Programme should vigorously
support Africa in implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
step up its efforts in the areas of poverty eradication, food security, infrastructure
construction, education and employment.
Fourthly, we must support the unity and self-reliance of African countries.
The colonial era is long past, but the legacy of colonialism is far from being resolved,
and it still has a negative impact on Africa’s prosperity and stability. Africa has
a tradition of independence and self-reliance, and the African Union is the flagbearer of Africa’s unity and self-improvement. We must respect the sovereignty and
dominance of African countries and support them in exploring development paths
that suit their national conditions. African people know best how to solve African
problems, and African countries should have the greatest say in how to govern
Africa. China is opposed to interfering in the internal affairs of African countries
and imposing governance models, instigating conflicts or creating divisions among
them, as well as to using aid and cooperation to attach political conditions for political
gain. Such practices have no market in Africa and are destined to be ineffective. The
Southern African Development Community has designated 25 October as a Counter
Sanctions Day. China supports the just calls of African countries in this regard and
urges the countries involved to lift unilateral sanctions on Zimbabwe, the Sudan and
other countries.
China has always been a good friend, brother and partner to Africa. We
have always maintained that the United Nations and the Security Council should
strengthen their dialogue and coordination with the African Union, increase their
support for the African Union and African countries as a priority and include them in
their daily work. The China-United Nations Peace and Development Fund has been
actively supporting projects in Africa such as capacity-building for peacekeeping,
counter-terrorism, combating violent extremism, and conflict prevention, and has
seen positive results. The eighth session of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation
will be held in Senegal in November. China sees this as an opportunity to achieve
peace and stability and post-pandemic recovery in Africa, and to play a greater role
in encouraging the international community to increase its support for Africa.

21-1652425/33

S/2021/941

Annex XII
Statement by the Chargée d’affaires of France to the United Nations,
Nathalie Broadhurst Estival
[Original: French]
I would like to thank Kenya and President Kenyatta for this opportunity to
highlight the importance of the ties between the United Nations and the African
Union (AU).
I would first like to stress the African Union’s central role in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts. There are many examples where its involvement has
made it possible to make progress in resolving crises — in Madagascar in 2018,
in the Sudan in 2019 and even with regard to the Grand Renaissance Dam, as well
as in the Central African Republic and the Sahel. However, these are efforts that
we have to keep undertaking over and over again, as the coup d’état in the Sudan
has unfortunately just shown us. I also want to acknowledge the commitment of
the Economic Community of West African States, under the leadership of Ghana’s
presidency, in supporting the transition in Mali.
In that context, the partnership between the United Nations and the African
Union is an essential tool for ensuring peace and security on the African continent in
accordance with the principles outlined in Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations. For the United Nations cannot forget what peacekeeping owes to African
countries. African contingents make up nearly 50 per cent of the Blue Helmets
deployed in peace operations. I am also thinking of African-led operations, from the
Multinational Joint Task Force in the Lake Chad basin to the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel. The progress that the Joint Force has made in recent years is
significant. As the Secretary-General has recommended and done so again recently,
a United Nations logistical support office funded from the regular peacekeeping
budget would be the best way to provide predictable and sustainable support in the
shortest amount of time. The Security Council cannot ignore this need any longer
and should assume its responsibilities in that regard.
For my second point, I would like to emphasize that cooperation with the
African Union is also essential in the areas of health and sustainable development.
Ensuring equitable and universal access to coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccines
must remain our priority. These vaccines must become new global public goods. As
the Council is aware, Africa is the main beneficiary of the Access to COVID-19 Tools
Accelerator initiative and the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX) Facility,
funded with more than $3 billion from the European Union and its member States,
which have enabled more than 102 million doses to be distributed to 52 African
States so far. And as of April we are proud to have been the first nation to give, in
addition to financial support, our own doses via COVAX, distributed according to
the equitable allocation framework defined by the World Health Organization. Our
goal now is to deliver 120 million doses by mid-2022, and 60 million of them by the
end of this year.
Turning to sustainable development, we cannot contemplate it without an
ambitious response to climate change and efforts in the field of environmental
protection, actions that the AU must be closely associated with. Sustainable
development also involves economic development. That was the purpose of the
Summit on Financing African Economies, organized by France in May, and of the
ambitious commitments made there.
Lastly, we must mobilize in order to deepen the cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union. The United Nations must continue to support
26/33

21-16524

S/2021/941

the Silencing the Guns in Africa initiative and achieving the objectives of the African
Union’s Agenda 2063, especially with regard to threats such as terrorism and violent
extremism.
We must also fight together against the resurgence of the scourge of mercenaries,
which is a factor in destabilization. I am thinking in particular of the foreign forces
and mercenaries in Libya. It will be essential to initiate a withdrawal process, as
the Libyans themselves have demanded, to strengthen the security of Libya and
the region. We want to make progress in that direction at the Paris Conference on
Libya on 12 November, in which neighbouring countries and the AU will be closely
involved. The process should be supported by demobilization, disarmament and
reintegration programmes. I also have in mind the Wagner mercenaries who have
been acting with impunity throughout the territory of Central Africa, whose abuses
are well established and whose presence is incompatible with peace efforts in the
Central African Republic and everywhere else.
Lastly, we must move forward on the issue of financing African peace
operations. France supports the sustainable and predictable financing of African
peace operations jointly by the AU and the United Nations, including through
compulsory contributions. The negotiations between the Council and the African
Union should be resumed.
France will continue to support the efforts of the United Nations to strengthen
its ties with the African Union.

21-1652427/33

S/2021/941

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Mexico to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
Mexico would like to thank you, President Kenyatta, for organizing this
debate contributing to strengthening the cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union (AU).
I want to highlight four areas where Mexico considers it important to promote
greater collaboration between the two organizations.
The first is attention to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. It is
vital to ensure that the international community, coordinated by the United Nations
and the World Health Organization, supports the efforts of the African Union to
combat the spread of the virus through the Africa Joint Continental Strategy for
COVID-19. It is unacceptable that only 5 per cent of Africa’s population is fully
vaccinated. That is why we consider it a priority to strengthen international
cooperation to guarantee access to vaccines against COVID-19, as well as to support
the post-pandemic economic recovery. As we have already pointed out a number
of times, the COVID-19 vaccine should be considered a global public good and
universal access to it guaranteed.
Secondly, I would like to point to the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons. Unfortunately, the African continent continues to be disproportionately
affected by unrestricted flows of weapons, especially considering that most of them
come from outside the continent. The United Nations and the African Union therefore
need to synergize their efforts to tackle the problem more effectively. Mexico
continues to consider the Silencing the Guns initiative especially commendable.
Ensuring that African States ratify and sign regional and international agreements on
illicit arms trafficking will help to strengthen that initiative. The producer countries
must adopt stricter controls and prevent these weapons from continuing to fuel the
conflicts that threaten civilian populations in the Sahel, the Horn of Africa, and
Cabo Delgado, in Mozambique, among others.
Thirdly, I want to highlight the importance of protecting the constitutional
order. In the course of the past year there have been frequent unconstitutional
changes of Government, threatening the stability of the continent and calling into
question the progress it has achieved in terms of democratic governance. My country
especially condemns the coup against the Transitional Government in the Sudan.
We support the call of the President of the African Union Commission to prioritize
dialogue and consensus in achieving a democratic transition there. In the case of
Mali, we support the efforts of the Economic Community of West African States. The
strategic cooperation between the African Union and the United Nations on regional
peace and security should be increased by strengthening early-warning mechanisms
to prevent conflicts and improving mediation and good-offices capacities.
Fourthly, it is essential to strengthen electoral processes on the continent.
Free, inclusive and fair elections are a cornerstone of countries’ efforts to strengthen
governance and end the danger of military coups. In that regard, Mexico hopes that
the elections in Libya will be held on 24 December, in accordance with the agreed
schedule. We also applaud the electoral assistance and observation work that the AU
has carried out in support of its member States, as in Somalia. Together with United
Nations agencies and subregional organizations, it should also continue to encourage
the full, equal and meaningful participation of women and the strengthening of
African electoral institutions.
28/33

21-16524

S/2021/941

In conclusion, Mexico would like to remind the Council that the final 2020
report of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in
Africa (S/2020/1292) included some concerns of the African members of the Security
Council and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines that are still awaiting the Council’s
attention, such as the need to take more rigorous account of the views of the African
Union’s Peace and Security Council on the issues on the Security Council’s agenda
that concern the African continent.

21-1652429/33

S/2021/941

Annex XIV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily A. Nebenzia
[Original: Russian]
Sir, we welcome your participation in today’s debate as President of the Security
Council, and we also take note of the presence of high-ranking representatives of
other countries at this video teleconference. We are grateful for the information
and assessments provided by Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed and Mr.
Donald Kaberuka, the High Representative for the Peace Fund of the African Union
(AU).
The Russian Federation supports the topic at the centre of today’s meeting.
Indeed, the challenges that have gripped the world lately require all of us to reaffirm
our previous commitments to the maintenance of peace and security in various
regions, including the African continent. Our Organization’s partnership with the
African Union continues to be a clear example of a successful one. It is founded on
the Charter of the United Nations and on its Chapter VIII in particular.
We welcome the progress that has been made in shaping the African Peace and
Security Architecture, in which the African Union’s Peace and Security Council, the
Continental Early Warning System and the African Standby Force play a central role.
Africans are increasingly actively involved in the settlement of conflict situations on
the continent, thereby proving the effectiveness of the principle of African solutions
to African problems. Nor should we omit to mention the AU’s mediation efforts
to resolve various crises that unfortunately continue to disturb the continent. We
welcome the African Union’s decision to extend its flagship initiative on ending
armed conflicts to 2030. The innovative ways in which the two organizations have
cooperated amid pandemic conditions also deserve full support.
We believe that in order to ensure that the assistance from the United Nations
in overcoming the challenges facing the African continent is more effective, it
is important to further expand the cooperation between the two organizations.
Productive cooperation between the Security Council and the AU’s Peace and
Security Council is especially important. We look forward to productive work
between the two Councils this year within the framework of the joint meetings to
be held in mid-December in Addis Ababa, as well as the preparatory committee
planned for those meetings in New York.
We believe that the African States are justified in raising the issue of the
provision by the United Nations of material and financial assistance for their efforts
to maintain international peace and security. We look forward to an agreement on
a common African position on the modalities of financing African peacekeeping
operations and using funds from the AU Peace Fund for that purpose.
In our view, the growing threat of terrorism needs greater attention. Terrorist
organizations continue to take advantage of the pandemic situation to strengthen
their positions, and the continuing deterioration of the situation in the Sahara-Sahel
region is particularly worrying in that regard. We are ready to share our experience
on anti-terrorism issues with our African partners in order to implement projects
aimed at increasing African countries’ potential ability to combat the threats of
terrorism and extremism.
In addition, resolving the problem of the continuing illegal unilateral sanctions
on some African States would also help to improve United Nations cooperation
with African countries. Such measures have only continued to expand in the past
30/33

21-16524

S/2021/941

few years, undermining these countries’ ability to deal with growing challenges
and threats, including the coronavirus pandemic. We have always advocated for
reviewing the sanctions regimes introduced through the Security Council in a timely
way. They should not have a negative effect on the ability of countries to resist
organized crime and terrorism or form effective security institutions, and neither
should they worsen humanitarian situations.
Our country intends to further develop cooperation on a basis of equality with
African partners, based on the decisions of the first ever Russia-Africa summit,
which was held in the autumn of 2019. We look forward to continuing that work
during the second such summit, to be held on the African continent next year.

21-1652431/33

S/2021/941

Annex XV
Statement by the President of Ghana, Nana Addo Dankwa
Akufo-Addo
I thank my good friend the President of the Republic of Kenya, His Excellency
Uhuru Kenyatta, President of the Security Council for the month of October, for
the invitation to participate in this high-level debate of the Council in my capacity
as current Chairperson of the Authority of Heads of State and Government of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS).
I congratulate Kenya on its successful presidency of the Council, and as
Ghana prepares to assume its seat on the Council in January 2022, we look forward
to working closely with Kenya and Gabon, within the coordination mechanism of the
African members of the Security Council, to advance the common interests of Africa.
ECOWAS welcomes Kenya’s choice of theme for this high-level debate, and
believes that true solidarity is required to deliver sustained peace and security in
Africa. The continent continues to be confronted by multiple threats to the territorial
integrity of some of its nations, and many of its civilian populations have been under
serious threat. In several instances, the situation of instability has been complicated
by an opportunistic convergence of interests among various actors, not only within
the conflict areas but also from outside the continent.
This unfortunate development is reflected in the events in the Sahel and
the Lake Chad region, in parts of East, North and Central Africa, where ongoing
conflicts, the destabilizing activities of terrorists and extremists, the profiteering
activities of purveyors of conflict and the devastating effects of climate change
and the coronavirus disease pandemic have resulted in a deadly cocktail with dire
consequences for our socioeconomic, political and security situations. In recent
months, further instability has been introduced into some parts of the continent
with the overthrow of constitutional Governments, with Mali, Chad, Guinea and the
Sudan notable culprits.
Even as Africa is confronted with these challenges, the dynamic nature
of the conflict situations on the continent is not necessarily beyond the response
mechanisms of our continental and regional organizations. The African Peace and
Security Architecture — supported by initiatives such as the African Union Master
Road Map of Practical Steps to Silence the Guns in Africa by 2020, which has now
been extended to 2030, the activation of the African Union Steering Committee
on Security Sector Reform in 2019, as well as the adoption in 2021 of the African
Union’s Doctrine on Peace Support Operations to provide strategic guidance for
the planning, conduct, management and liquidation of its operations — establishes
a solid foundation for an effective response by Africa to its security challenges.
Ghana applauds the continued engagement of the African Union and its regional
bodies, such as ECOWAS, in addressing the security challenges on the continent. We
encourage the strengthening of such arrangements.
What has been lacking, however, is global solidarity and burden-sharing. As
the Secretary-General acknowledged in his report Our Common Agenda (A/75/982),
we need to re-emphasize global solidarity and find new ways of working together
for the common good. It is my hope that within the Council we will be able to renew
solidarity in addressing the gaps in cooperation between the United Nations and
the continental and regional arrangements of Africa. I now want to highlight a few
points for the Council’s consideration.
First, regular consultations between the United Nations and the African Union
and its organs, such as the Peace and Security Council, as well as with regional
economic communities such as ECOWAS, provide an important framework for
bridging differences in the conceptual understanding of the security challenges on
32/33

21-16524

S/2021/941

the continent, and for improving our harmonized understanding of the responses
required to address such challenges. The collaboration has led to the development
of a few initiatives, including the United Nations-African Union Joint Task Force
on Peace and Security and the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework
for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security. We need to deepen collaboration
between the United Nations and Africa to sustain peace on the continent, rooted in
shared values and a strong commitment to multilateralism.
Secondly, the United Nations should enhance the wealth of experience it has
in preventive diplomacy in its engagement with Africa. While I acknowledge the
laudable collaboration between ECOWAS and the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel, for instance, I know that more is required and more could be
done if greater solidarity were shown in putting resources towards the agenda of
conflict prevention. In that regard, I welcome the Secretary-General’s intention to
elevate prevention and mediation under the new agenda for peace outlined in Our
Common Agenda. While prevention is less celebrated, a dollar spent preventing a
conflict is worth something more than 10 times its value in resolving a conflict once
it has broken out.
Thirdly, the cooperation between the United Nations and Africa must be a
steady effort towards resolving the root causes of these conflicts, within the context
of sustaining peace, encompassing programmes aimed at preventing the outbreak,
escalation, continuation and recurrence of conflicts. At the heart of addressing the
crises on the continent is the inclusion of women and youth in decision-making, as
well as in the whole cycle of conflict management. We therefore endorse the call
for the meaningful involvement of women and young people in decision-making
processes. We need to further encourage capacity-building for young men and
women in accordance with the parameters enshrined in the African Youth Charter,
and to engage them meaningfully in contributing to the agenda of Silencing the Guns
through the joint implementation of initiatives such as the Africa Young Women
Fellowship on Silencing the Guns project.
Fourthly, the linkage between peace and development cannot be ignored. We
welcome a strengthened United Nations development system, which works with
African institutions to strongly drive the continent’s development agenda based on
Africa’s agreed priorities in Agenda 2063, including the further deepening of the
Africa Continental Free Trade Area, whose secretariat is located in Accra.
With a youthful bulge, which portends opportunity, Africa also risks
destabilizing the world if its vibrant, but largely unemployed, youth are not made a
strong part of the industrialization and transformational agenda of Africa. The risky
migratory journeys of our youths to Europe in search of greener pastures, and the
radicalization of some of them by extremist groups, could compound our situation if
not addressed. We cannot take chances through inadequate responses to the threats
we foresee.
In conclusion, I have highlighted these points not because they are the most
important or most assured for the resolution of the situations on our continent, but also
because, like many other effective solutions, they represent the simple ones we ignore.
With a rapid increase in non-State conflicts since 2010, as the SecretaryGeneral recently reminded us, and with over 70 per cent of the conflict issues on the
agenda of the Security Council relating to Africa, it is evident that, in addition to
strengthening cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union and its
regional organizations, we must also consider the often-ignored simple solutions that
are rooted in solidarity, and the urgent need for renewed, collective political will.

21-1652433/33
