S/PV.8144

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8144th meeting

Wednesday, 20 December 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bessho. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Kyslytsya/Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Addressing complex contemporary challenges to international peace and security
Letter dated 1 December 2017 from the Permanent Representative of Japan to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2017/1016)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-45319 (E)
*1745319*

S/PV.8144

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Addressing complex contemporary challenges
to international peace and security
Letter dated 1 December 2017 from the
Permanent Representative of Japan to
the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2017/1016)
The President: In accordance with rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I
invite the representatives of Armenia, Australia,
Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belgium, Botswana, Brazil,
Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Guatemala, Hungary, India, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Maldives, Mexico, Morocco,
Nepal, the Netherlands, Norway, Pakistan, Peru,
Portugal, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Africa, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Turkey, Tuvalu
and Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Her Excellency
Ms. Joanne Adamson, Deputy Head of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/1016, which contains the text of
a letter dated 1 December 2017 from the Permanent
Representative of Japan to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note
on the item under consideration.
I wish to warmly welcome His Excellency
Secretary-General António Guterres, to whom I now
give the floor.
The Secretary-General: I thank Japan for using
its presidency of the Security Council to focus on the
increasingly complex drivers of armed conflict and
instability. Let me also express my appreciation to the
Government and the people of Japan for their hospitality
2/67

20/12/2017

during my visit to the country last week. I would like to
make three main points today.
First, we are seeing not only a quantitative but
also a qualitative change in threats to international
peace and security. The perils of nuclear weapons
are again front and centre, with tensions higher than
they have been since the end of the Cold War. Climate
change has emerged as a threat multiplier. Water
scarcity is a growing concern, as demand for fresh
water is projected to grow by more than 40 per cent
by the middle of the century. Inequality and exclusion
fuel frustration and marginalization. Cybersecurity
dangers are escalating, as some of the same advances in
technology that have generated so many gains have also
made it easier for extremists to communicate, broadcast
distorted narratives of grievance, recruit followers and
exploit people.
The number of armed conflicts has declined over
the long-term, but in the Middle East and parts of
Africa conflicts have surged. Conflicts are becoming
more intractable. They are longer — more than 20 years
on average — meaning that the people they displace
are spending ever-increasing amounts of time away
from their homes and communities. They are more
complex, as armed groups compete for control over
State institutions, natural resources and territory, and
as extremist groups with absolutist demands leave little
room for diplomacy.
We are seeing a multiplication of political factions
and non-State armed groups, with hundreds of armed
groups in Syria alone. There is also an increase in the
regionalization and internationalization of conflicts.
External military and financial support to conflict
parties prolongs civil wars and fuels wider tensions
as local fights become proxies for larger rivalries.
Conflicts are more linked with each other, and with the
worldwide threat of terrorism. And transnational drug
smugglers and human traffickers perpetuate the chaos
and prey on refugees and migrants.
Secondly, the changing nature of conflict means
rethinking our approaches, both how we work and
how we work with others. Our efforts must be
coherent, coordinated and context-specific. We must
work across pillars and across the peace continuum
towards integrated action. It was with that goal in
mind that I initiated three inter-linked reform efforts
aimed at repositioning the United Nations development
system, streamlining our internal management and
17-45319

20/12/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

strengthening the Secretariat’s peace and security
architecture. I have also sought to forge closer links
with regional partners, including the African Union,
the European Union and others. The Joint Force created
by the Member States of the Group of Five for the Sahel
is an important step in that regard, as is the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security, signed earlier
this year.
Thirdly, prevention must be at the centre of
everything we do. It is better to prevent conflict than
to manage it — which avoids tragic human suffering
and also saves money. Although hard to quantify and
typically undertaken far from the media spotlight,
prevention is a sound investment that produces ample,
visible dividends. Development is one of our best
instruments of prevention, and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development gives us enormous potential.
Development is an objective in its own right, and should
not be mis-used in pursuit of other aims. But the steps we
take towards achieving the 17 Sustainable Development
Goals will also help build peaceful societies.
Respect for all human rights — not only civil and
political rights but also economic, social and cultural
ones — is an essential element of prevention. In the
lead-up to the outbreak of widespread violence we often
see increases in repression, the closing of space for civil
society and the rise of sectarianism. We must invest in
social cohesion so that all people feel they have a stake
in society. We also know that gender equality is closely
linked with resilience and that women’s participation
is crucial to success, from conflict prevention to
peacemaking and sustaining peace. Where women are
empowered, societies flourish and peace processes have
a better chance of taking hold. We must also do more
to address the systematic violence faced by women
before, during and after conflict, and to pursue justice
for perpetrators as an essential part of post-conflict
healing and recovery.
Prevention also includes preventive diplomacy:
efforts to respond promptly to signs of tension and
to forge political solutions. The newly established
High-level Advisory Board on Mediation has met for
the first time to assess opportunities for engagement,
and I expect it to begin its first formal, but discreet,
undertaking soon. My own good offices are of course
available to the Security Council at all times.

S/PV. 8144

The concept of human security is a useful frame of
reference for this work, and I thank Japan for its longstanding advocacy. Human security is people-centred
and holistic. It stresses the need to act early and prioritize
the most vulnerable. Those must all be touchstones for
our work.
I welcome the efforts of the Council to explore
new ways to monitor and address the risks of conflict.
Let us work together to enhance the Council’s focus
on emerging situations, expand the toolbox, increase
resources for prevention and be more systematic in
preventing conflict and sustaining peace.
Finally, let me emphasize the need for unity on the
part of the Security Council. Without it, the parties to
conflict may take more inflexible and intransigeant
positions, and the drivers of conflict will push situations
to the point of no return again and again. But with unity,
we can advance security and well-being for all.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of Japan.
Let me begin by expressing my deep appreciation to
Secretary-General Guterres for participating in today’s
open debate and sharing with us his vision of how the
United Nations, especially the Security Council, can
effectively address complex contemporary challenges
to international peace and security.
In the 25 years since the Cold War, some parts of the
world have been enjoying the benefits of improvements
in science and technology, from groundbreaking
medicines to new frontiers in cyberspace and outer
space. On the other hand, during the same period we
have witnessed the rise in complex contemporary
challenges to international peace and security, such as
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, the
expansion of terrorism, climate change, pandemics,
transnational organized crime, including drug
trafficking, and violent extremism. These challenges
can manifest themselves as root causes and drivers of
conflict that can destabilize countries, lowering the
threshold to entering into violent conflict. They can
also exacerbate and prolong existing conflicts.
Examples of these threats abound. For instance,
in the Sahel region, climate change has become a
multiplier of existing challenges, which include food
exhaustion and malnutrition. Between 2014 and 2015,

17-453193/67

S/PV.8144

Maintenance of international peace and security

we experienced pandemics that became direct causes
of instability of those countries affected, while also
seriously affecting their economies and societies, even
regionally, thereby becoming multipliers of destabilized
situations. Peace operations, such as peacekeeping
operations and special political missions, are also
facing non-traditional challenges, such as non-State
actors and inter-State criminal organizations.
The Security Council has been tackling
these challenges, in most cases in the country or
region-specific context. However, Japan believes that
it is very important for the Council to discuss these
complex contemporary challenges to international peace
and security in a holistic and methodological manner,
and to develop ways to better address the situation
on the ground. There have already been a number of
meaningful Council meetings that have taken such an
approach, and we would like to encourage the Council
to be bold, active and at times innovative.
That does not mean that the Security Council will
encroach on the responsibilities of other organs, as some
may fear. The Council has a clear mandate to maintain
international peace and security, and the Council cannot
fully assume its responsibilities without addressing
mutually reinforcing, multidimensional factors that are
closely interlinked with peace and security. From this
perspective, Japan would like to propose three ideas.
First, the Security Council should take a more
comprehensive and integrated approach by embracing
perspectives of the peace continuum, as well as
peace and security, development, human rights and
humanitarian nexus. If the Security Council is to
more effectively address complex challenges, it needs
to increase its focus on effectiveness throughout the
whole conflict cycle, that is, by preventing the outbreak,
escalation, continuation and recurrence of conflict. At
the same time, attention should also be paid to the fact
that peace and security, development, human rights and
humanitarian elements are closely interlinked. To that
end, we believe that it would be helpful for the Council
to receive more integrated analysis from the field and
the Secretariat.
Secondly, as a means to achieve the first point,
especially from the perspective of sustaining peace,
we would like to stress the importance for the Council
to enhance cooperation with other organs within and
outside the United Nations. A recent good example is
the case of trafficking in persons in Libya, on which we
4/67

20/12/2017

have received briefings from the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the
International Organization for Migration, and sought
coordination with the African Union. While there is
no need to mention the importance of partnership with
regional and subregional organizations, cooperation
with other United Nations organs should be further
enhanced. The Council also needs to listen carefully to
the voices of non-Council Member States. For example,
for small island developing States, sea-level rise caused
by global warming is threatening their very existence. In
addition, it may be helpful for the Council to be briefed
by international development and financial institutions.
Thirdly, we believe that the human security
approach is highly relevant when addressing complex
contemporary challenges to international peace and
security. Human security places the individual at
the centre, based on a cross-sectoral understanding
of insecurities. Therefore, human security entails a
broadened understanding of threats and challenges.
Attaching great importance to this approach, Japan has
consistently provided human-centred, comprehensive
and preventive assistance through cross-sectoral
efforts with a range of partners. We hope to see
renewed attention paid to the human security approach
when addressing complex contemporary challenges
to international peace and security. We count on the
Secretary-General’s strong leadership to that end.
Finally, we would like to touch upon the ongoing
initiative of Secretary-General Guterres to reform
the United Nations. As we speak, a draft resolution
(A/72/L.33) on restructuring of the United Nations
peace and security pillar is being submitted for adoption
at the General Assembly. Although the scope of this
reform does not include Security Council reform, as
has been mentioned by many, no reform of the United
Nations will be complete without reform of the Security
Council. The Council also needs to change so that the
peace and security pillar of the United Nations can be
more coherent, nimble and effective, and truly have
positive impacts on the ground.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the fact that
we are all responsible for continuously reviewing what
measures and tools can be used in order for the Security
Council to play its leading role more effectively as one
of the principal organs of the United Nations, primarily
responsible for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Today’s open debate is aimed not
at drawing a conclusion, but instead at calling for
17-45319

20/12/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

continuous, thorough consideration on how the Council
can better address complex contemporary challenges.
There remains large room to be further examined
and explored by Member States. We hope that today’s
discussion will lay a good foundation for future ones,
and of course Japan will continue to participate actively
in discussions in the Council, as well as in the entire
United Nations system, and to contribute to the peace
and prosperity of the world.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Council.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): Ukraine aligns itself
with the statement to be delivered by the observer of
the European Union. I would like to add the following
remarks in my national capacity.
We would like to express our appreciation, Sir, for
your initiative to hold today’s open debate on a topic that
is highly fitting, both for taking stock of the Security
Council’s performance in its task of maintaining
international peace and security, on one hand, and,
on the other, for presenting forward-looking ideas
about how to make the Council’s work more efficient
and relevant in a rapidly changing international
environment. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for presenting his views and ideas.
Let me start with some positive remarks. Despite
all the criticism and negative assessment of the
United Nations in general and the Council’s work in
particular, which, regretfully, on a number of occasions
is justified, there is no alternative to the United Nations
and the Security Council in terms of a global entity to
safeguard international peace and security. Moreover,
in recent years, the Council has achieved some positive
results in its line of work. For example, the Council
should be — and I am sure is proud — of its contribution
to the cause of peace in Columbia, where it continues
to play an important role in ensuring a comprehensive
implementation of the Final Peace Agreement between
the Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia. We believe that the
United Nations should carefully study the lessons
learned in that regard and apply best practices in other
parts of the world.
In some instances the Council has demonstrated
its openness and readiness to readjust its work when

S/PV. 8144

considering conflict situations in Africa, in the light
of the emergence of new challenges and threats to
international peace and security. On the heels of its visit
to the Lake Chad basin region, it adopted resolution
2349 (2017), which highlighted the underlying causes
of the complex crisis in the region to be extreme
poverty, inter-ethnic and intercommunal tensions and
climate change.
The peaceful resolution of the constitutional crisis
in the Gambia, which was achieved first and foremost
thanks to the actions of the Economic Community of
West African States and the unified position of other
regional partners in West Africa, can also be put on the
positive side of the ledger of the Council’s work. Over
the past two years sanctions against Côte d’Ivoire and
Liberia were lifted. The United Nations Blue Helmets left
Côte d’Ivoire, as their presence was no longer required,
although they remain in Liberia, in significantly
reduced numbers, for contingency purposes.
The Council has been particularly active in
addressing the threat of terrorism. Numerous
discussions were held and landmark decisions were
taken on countering the efforts by terrorists to spread
their ideology, recruit followers, raise funds and
procure weapons and plan and perpetrate attacks.
Ukraine contributed to the Council’s endeavour by
raising the issue of protecting critical infrastructure
from terrorist attacks.
We are proud that, after the adoption of resolution
2341 (2017), several States Members of the United
Nations have taken concrete steps to implement it at
the national level. The agenda of the Council has
expanded considerably, owing to the close interlinkage
between threats to international peace and security
and such challenges as human rights, development and
climate change, to name just a few. We welcome that
positive shift, since threats to international peace and
security cannot be addressed effectively in isolation.
Today’s debate is another confirmation of the growing
understanding of that nexus. We hope that the Council
will continue to explore this topic and discuss the ways
to address the root causes and multipliers of conflict in
a comprehensive manner.
I must mention the progressive changes made in
the process of selecting the new Secretary-General.
Notwithstanding the glaring shortcomings and outdated
practices that remain, in particular with regard to socalled non-disclosure or so-called confidential results of

17-453195/67

S/PV.8144

Maintenance of international peace and security

20/12/2017

indicative votes on candidates, great strides have been
made to ensure a level playing field for all candidates
and to increase the overall transparency of the process.

most robust sanctions regime to date. That list is by no
means exhaustive, as there are many other cases where
the Council’s intervention was less than successful.

Another aspect that is probably not as visible
from outside the Council, but is nevertheless just as
important, is the improvement in the working methods
of the Council. That is an area that never fails to attract
harsh criticism from the wider membership of the
United Nations, which has strong opinions on how the
Council should or should not discharge its duties. In
that regard, I would like to commend the dedication and
hard work of the Japanese delegation, which provided
impetus and leadership in the negotiations on updating
presidential note S/2010/507 and the Handbook on
the Working Methods of the Security Council and
drafting presidential note S/2016/619, with regard to the
selection of Chairs of the Council’s subsidiary bodies.
We are pleased that those documents reflect several of
Ukraine’s priorities, including making the Council’s
field visits more transparent.

In our opinion, it is important to bear in mind
that perspective of the Council’s work when we
consider issues such as the Council’s ability to address
contemporary challenges to international peace and
security. We believe that the Council should be able to
do much more, but we also recognize the fact that it
can do only so much. At the same time, debates are
held, consultations are regularly conducted, numerous
resolutions are adopted and press statements are
produced — in an almost mechanized manner.

Alongside those positive examples in the Council’s
work, there is a much longer list of issues where the
Council could have put its vast potential to better
use. Such shortcomings, or even outright failures, are
seen not only in cases when cross-cutting, thematic or
new subjects are concerned — such as environmental
degradation, links between human rights and security,
the protection of civilians, the role of women and so
on — but also in clear-cut cases of difficult security
issues, which are the traditional purview of the Council.
For instance, the multifaceted challenges in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo remain largely
unresolved, despite the fact that the country hosts the
largest United Nations peacekeeping operation. In
current hotspots in the Middle East, including in Syria
and Yemen, an array of tragic events are unfolding before
our eyes. Even the Council’s most intense efforts on
such issues garner results with only marginal influence
on the overall situation. Even blatant violations of the
Chemical Weapons Convention are yet to be dealt with
in a decisive manner. Thus far, impunity appears to rule
the day. The Middle East peace process remains in a
perpetual deadlock. The composition of the Council
changes but the messages and signals heard around this
table for decades are by and large the same, with no
progress on the ground. The ongoing development of
nuclear and missile programmes by the North Korean
regime remains a standing threat to international peace
and security, despite the introduction of the Council’s
6/67

That is not to say that all of this is not important;
it is merely to underline the limited impact of the
Council’s work. The Council is not as effective as the
international community and many people around the
world hope and expect it to be — and not because it
deliberately ignores some issues or does not work
hard enough. On the contrary, the Council’s agenda
is growing and, with every passing year, its members
spend more and more hours deliberating in the Chamber
or in the neighbouring Consultations room. That state of
affairs is a result of the way the Council was conceived
and constructed to function.
First, the veto right of the permanent members of the
Council means that substantive action is possible only
when the interests of the five permanent members do
not conflict, if not coincide. In other cases, the Council
is left paralysed. Moreover, the lack of a mechanism to
overturn a veto means that there are no incentives for a
veto-wielding member to try to work out a solution on
a contentious issue.
Secondly, the scope of implementation of resolutions
has always been limited by the level of readiness of
countries to comply. Examples of non-implementation
and outright violations of resolutions abound
throughout the Security Council’s history, and the list
of offenders is quite extensive. This selective approach
to implementation does not bode well for the Council’s
ability to make a real difference in various situations
on the ground.
Finally, the premise of an effective and efficient
Security Council must be based on the assumed and
expected respect for the Charter of the United Nations
and the norms and principles of international law by all
Member States. I would like to specifically underline
the importance of the latter point. To our deepest regret,
17-45319

20/12/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

the world is currently living in an era of the erosion
of the rule of law, in which the arbitrary application
and selective or arbitrary interpretation of norms and
principles of international law, with the respective
obligations and commitments deriving therefrom, are
becoming a routine occurrence. The most obvious
manifestation of that is the aggressive policy of the
Russian Federation towards its neighbours. In 2008,
it occupied a part of Georgian territory; in 2014, it
illegally occupied and attempted to annex Crimea and
then expanded the armed conflict to the Donbas region
of Ukraine. Has the Council been able to provide a
fitting response? We are all well aware of the answer
to that question.
In anticipation of Russia’s usual tirades concerning
a so-called referendum in Crimea and a civil war in
the Donbas, I will just remind those who may have
forgotten that it all started with the deployment of
Russian troops without insignia in Crimea; with the
sending of Russian-trained armed groups and Russian
special operations forces into eastern Ukraine; with
rocket salvos launched from Russian territory into
Ukrainian territory; and with Russian regular army
troops crossing into Ukraine. And it continues, with the
constant sending of arms and ammunition to sustain the
war and a de facto occupation of certain areas of the
Donetsk and Luhansk regions.
The Russian delegation may also claim, as it usually
does, that our remarks have no relation to the subject of
today’s discussion. Our answer is very simple. Russia’s
actions undermined and continue to undermine the
international rules-based system, and they constitute a
direct threat to international peace and security, which
is the subject that the Council has to concern itself with.
In conclusion, Ukraine is convinced that without
a radical reform and complete overhaul of the Security
Council as it stands, we can expect only more of the
same — long discussions, sometimes even interesting
ones, but which have a limited impact where real
and concerted action is needed. Having said that, the
Council is not beyond redemption. In fact, not much
is needed — just a responsible attitude on the part of
permanent members to fulfil their duties for the good of
the world. So far, that aspect of the Council’s work has
been found wanting.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): My delegation aligns itself
with the statement to be made later today on behalf of
the European Union and with the Nordic statement.

S/PV. 8144

I want to begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
and the Japanese delegation for scheduling today’s
open debate, which provides us with an opportunity to
continue our important discussions on the increasingly
complex security challenges facing the world today and
how the Council can better address them.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his,
as always, insightful briefing on the subject and for
the visionary reform agenda that he has put forward,
which is, in many ways, aimed at improving the United
Nations response to many of the challenges that we face.
Multidimensional poverty, climate change,
transnational organized crime, food insecurity, weak
governance, abuses and violations of human rights and
growing inequality are only a few of the challenges that
are increasingly influencing the situations that appear
on the Council’s agenda. The negative impacts of those
threats to international peace and security are likely
to intensify. As the body responsible for maintaining
international peace and security, the Security Council’s
preventive role is perhaps now more important than
ever. However, prevention will not be possible without
a comprehensive and holistic strategy to address
those challenges.
The evidence in support of more comprehensive
and holistic approaches to prevention and sustaining
peace is building. The recent joint United Nations
and World Bank report, entitled Pathways for Peace:
Inclusive Approaches to Preventing Violent Conflict,
identifies exclusion, inequality and power imbalances
as the principal causes of many of today’s conflicts.
A lack of opportunity provides fertile ground for
conflict, radicalization and instability. During our visit
to the Lake Chad basin region, we saw first hand the
adverse effects of climate change on the stability of
the region. That has also been obvious in the Council’s
consideration of the situations in Darfur, Somalia and
the Sahel. In our work on Afghanistan, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Sahel region and Colombia,
among others, we have seen how organized crime,
illicit financial flows, the drugs trade and trafficking
in persons and natural resources fund warfare and have
a devastating impact on civilians.
True conflict prevention requires an understanding
of the structural nature of such challenges and their
interplay with political decisions. Building on the
sustaining peace agenda and in line with the United
Nations reform processes, what then is needed to

17-453197/67

S/PV.8144

Maintenance of international peace and security

put conflict prevention at the core of our actions and
to enhance our collective ability to deal with those
contemporary complex security challenges? I would
like to make three suggestions.
First, we need a thorough understanding of the
drivers of risk, the political will and adequate resources
to address them early on, and a United Nations system
that has the flexibility to respond. Frank, timely and
cross-pillar analysis and information are critical if
the Security Council is to be effective at preventing,
managing and resolving conflicts. Enhancing the
United Nations system’s joint analysis and integrated
strategic planning capabilities, including improved risk
assessments and risk management strategies, would
allow the Council and the United Nations system as
a whole to address conflicts in their early stages. We
are confident that the ongoing reform efforts, led by
the Secretary-General, will better position the United
Nations system in that regard.
As highlighted by numerous countries at the Arria
meeting on climate and security last Friday, there
is a clear need for the United Nations to enhance its
capabilities to better foresee, understand and respond to
climate-related security risks. That includes identifying
and responding to the risks of instability and insecurity
that arise from how the effects of climate change
interact with social, economic and political factors.
Secondly, research and experience show that
conflicts are more likely to become armed in unequal
societies. The promotion of gender equality and women’s
participation in peace and security efforts is therefore
essential to sustaining peace. For that reason, it is
important to consistently integrate a gender perspective
into our long-term strategies and, when responding to
complex challenges ahead, to understand how they
affect women and men and better target responses.
Finally, there is an evident and inherent link
between respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law and the maintenance of international
peace and security. Respect for and protection of human
rights contributes to efforts to address the root causes
and drivers of instability, thereby helping to prevent
and resolve conflicts and to sustain peace.
A general erosion of respect for international
humanitarian law is straining the credibility of this
body and putting the people whom we send into the field
at great risk. Constant attacks on humanitarian workers
and the assault against the United Nations Organization
8/67

20/12/2017

Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo earlier this month are shocking examples.
Responding early to violations of international
humanitarian law and violations and abuses of human
rights can effectively prevent conflicts before they
become a threat to regional and international peace
and security. When conflicts do occur, accountability
for such violations is vital for both justice
and reconciliation.
In conclusion, the best way to prevent societies
from descending into violence and crisis is to ensure
that they are made resilient through investment in
inclusive and sustainable development. With the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the sustaining
peace decisions, we have a strategy. What we now need
is political will, including in this organ, commitment to
multilateralism and a reinvigorated United Nations to
implement it.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I express Egypt’s appreciation to the delegation
of Japan for convening this important open debate. I
also thank Secretary-General António Guterres for his
comprehensive briefing.
Emerging and new challenges facing the
world — including terrorism, the proliferation of
extremist groups, organized crime, migration and
environmental and other unconventional issues — require
an innovative approach to addressing them. Given the
nature of those challenges, there is a need to coordinate
all efforts of the United Nations. Evolving and
increasingly complex contemporary challenges require
us to avoid adopting short-sighted approaches and silo
mentalities in favour of a comprehensive approach to
ensuring peace and sustainability by focusing on the
root causes of those challenges. In order to confront
those interrelated contemporary challenges, we must
uphold the following principles.
First, we need to develop the analytical capacity
of the Secretariat to develop comprehensive solutions
that take the nature and dimensions of every challenge
and their various contexts into account. Such a flexible,
analytical approach would allow the Organization to
identify the best means and tools for addressing those
challenges on a case-by-case basis.
Secondly, we must enhance the effectiveness
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) so that it
becomes a forum in which to coordinate national,
17-45319

20/12/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

regional and international work and provide advice and
proposals to the Security Council, thereby allowing
the Council to design mandates that would support the
implementation of comprehensive strategies aimed at
building and sustaining peace and laying the ground
for sustainable development in countries that require
the PBC’s assistance.
Thirdly, we need to develop regional approaches
to transnational challenges by enhancing coordination
and cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations to avoid duplicating regional
and international efforts to that end.
Fourthly, we need to fully honour the principle
of the national ownership of efforts to confront
contemporary challenges. National institutions must
shoulder the responsibility of setting their own
priorities and implementing their own follow-up when
confronting the challenges facing them, while the
international community can contribute to supporting
such national efforts.
Fifthly, we must make full use of States’ expertise
at the national level and the lessons learned by the
United Nations system by focusing on building national
institutions and capacities, thereby enabling States to
confront such challenges in a comprehensive manner.

S/PV. 8144

responsibilities and mandates assigned to each organ in
carrying out coordination tasks so that the best options
can be agreed upon in addressing problems arising from
conflict, avoiding unnecessary duplication of work and,
above all, preventing overlap and impingement upon
the specific mandates of each one.
We unequivocally believe that one of the challenges
that the Council must address in order to improve its
work is the effective implementation of mediation,
prevention, reconciliation and good offices for the
pacific settlement of disputes, as well as the pre-eminent
use of the provisions of Chapters VI and VIII of the
Charter. In that context, we believe that important
tools such as the Manila Declaration on the Peaceful
Settlement of International Disputes, adopted as
General Assembly resolution 37/10, must be considered
with a view to achieving that goal. On the other hand,
the implementation of the provisions of Chapter VII
for settling disputes must not be considered until those
under Chapters VI and VIII have been exhausted, and
must be implemented only as a means of last resort.
In that regard, the Security Council must always act
within the framework of the Charter and of respect for
the multilateralism — the principle upon which our
Organization is based.

Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, we thank
Secretary-General António Guterres for his briefing
today. We take this opportunity to reiterate our support
for his important work.

Therefore, we believe that one of the greatest
challenges facing not only the Security Council but
the Organization in general is unilateral action that,
in flagrant violation of the purposes and principles of
the Charter, recklessly risks undermining the work of
the Council and even threaten to exacerbate situations
on the ground, thereby entailing consequences that
could potentially negatively affect entire regions.
Regrettably, such unilateral actions are among the root
of governance vacuums and the weakening of the forces
of law and order. They have created in humanitarian
crises in various regions and led to the loss of millions
of lives.

The challenges to international peace and security
facing the international community, in general, and
in particular to the Security Council in carrying out
its mandate, are undoubtedly manifold and complex.
Nevertheless, we believe that those that truly threaten
to undermine the Council’s efforts to prevent breaches
of international peace and security are linked to
the inadequate implementation of the mechanisms
provided for under the Charter of the United Nations.
Accordingly, it is important to remain focused on the

Against that backdrop, the number of terrorist
groups and irregular fighters who have found the space
in which to commit destabilizing acts and crimes
against humanity has increased and become a clear
and current threat to international peace and security.
We believe that action taken by the international
community must be robust so as to confront that threat,
while contributing effectively to its eradication in
accordance with the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy.

In conclusion, in order to address such contemporary
challenges comprehensively, the United Nations must
coordinate the work of all its bodies without confusing
their mandates. That means that all United Nations
bodies must respect each other’s mandate without
encroaching upon it, in particular with regard to the
development pillar

17-453199/67

S/PV.8144

Maintenance of international peace and security

20/12/2017

Moreover, the proliferation of nuclear weapons
and weapons of mass destruction is another important
challenge facing the Security Council and the
international community. In that regard, we all face the
great challenge of urgently implementing the Treaty
on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, adopted by
the General Assembly on 7 July. In order to achieve
that goal, it is essential that States commit to banning
the development, testing, production, acquisition and
possession of nuclear arsenals and explosive devices,
and refrain from engaging in any act of provocation or
unilateral action that is clearly outside international law.

If we want to tackle these conventional threats
effectively, the United Nations and its Member States
must also consider contemporary transnational
challenges. These challenges do not care about national
borders. As our world becomes more connected, so too
will the challenges that we face. Therefore, to succeed
we must confront them together. To counter these
challenges, we must act at home, in partnership and
multilaterally. We cannot hope to prevent conflicts,
sustain peace or enable development otherwise. I should
like to illustrate the action that the United Kingdom is
taking in each of these areas with three examples.

Finally, Bolivia wishes to reiterate that, in its
dedication to respect for international law and as
a pacifist State, it advocates the implementation
of peaceful means of conflict resolution, good
offices,
preventive
diplomacy,
multilateralism,
non-interference, and respect for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of States, which
are universal principles recognized by the international
community and effective tools for avoiding the scourge
of war and its consequences.

First, at home we are tackling illicit financial
flows. Globally, these are estimated to be worth up to
$1.6 trillion a year. Our national crime agency believes
that tens or even hundreds of billions of dollars are
laundered through the United Kingdom. They include
the proceeds of armed groups, terrorists, organized
crime and corrupt officials in predatory States. These
proceeds fuel further conflict and are a barrier to peace
and stability. This year, we passed the Criminal Finances
Act, which ensures that we are better able to tackle this
illicit financing and consequently promote peace.

Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President for holding this important debate. It gives
us the opportunity both to reflect on the past year and
to look to the year ahead.
I want to thank the Secretary-General for his
excellent briefing, which clearly demonstrates that the
contemporary challenges we are addressing are highly
relevant, not just to the Security Council or the rest of
the United Nations, but to the whole world.
The Security Council has engaged this year on a
number of conventional threats to peace and security,
including North Korea’s nuclear weapons programme
and Da’esh in Syria and Iraq, but those conventional
threats have been fueled by contemporary challenges
that we all face. North Korea’s illegal missile
programme is partly funded by modern slavery. Syrian
terrorists spread their poisonous messages and plan
transnational attacks using the Internet. In fact, it is
hard to find a situation on our agenda where peace and
security dynamics are not bound up with contemporary
transnational challenges. The illicit trading of natural
resources in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the enslavement of migrants in Libya, smuggling in the
Sahel, drug flows in Colombia, ecological and climate
stress in the Lake Chad basin — the list goes on.
10/67

Secondly, through our partnerships we are tackling
climate change, which is recognized by the Security
Council as a factor that can aggravate existing threats
to international peace and security. We have partnered
with others to improve their resilience to the impacts of
climate change. In one project, we support 13 countries
in integrating risk-reduction and climate adaptation
into Government policies and institutions. This reduces
their instability and safeguards our collective security.
Finally and perhaps most importantly, we are acting
multilaterally, including here at the United Nations. Let
us consider the universal issues of modern slavery and
human trafficking. We know that these appalling human
rights abuses are most prevalent in conflict zones and
that they feed instability. We have sought to respond
and will continue to do so through the Security Council,
the General Assembly and the Human Rights Council.
Working through these multilateral organizations
allows us to connect the dots and to better address
the complex and multifaceted challenges that we are
confronted with. We must all endeavour to do more and
do it better here at the United Nations.
If the United Nations itself is the rise to the challenge,
we must support the Secretary-General in his ambitious
reform programme to join the United Nations up so that
17-45319

20/12/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

it can act more effectively and more efficiently at the
heart of a rules-based international system. The risk of
too much reform or too rapid reform is dwarfed by the
risk of not enough reform or too slow reform. We need
to get on with the reform to sustain peace better, to
meet the Sustainable Development Goals and to protect
the human rights that we cherish. Success in these
interlinked areas will depend on our ability to escape
silos and tackle the challenges coherently.
I have a simple wish for the year ahead. I hope
that as Member States deliberate over the SecretaryGeneral’s reform proposals, they will remember that
as we sit and debate this important issue, millions of
far less fortunate people confront insecurity, forced
displacement, rights violations, hunger and poverty as
a single reality. They do not recognize them as isolated
issues, and neither should we. Let us therefore take
responsibility at home, build partnerships overseas and,
most importantly, enable the United Nations to respond
ever more effectively to these challenges so that we can
achieve a safer and more secure world for all.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I should
like first to thank the Japanese presidency of the
Security Council for having taken the initiative to
convene this debate, which is especially welcome in
the current context, and the Secretary-General for his
enlightening briefing.
The debates and discussions that we have held
throughout this year have shown that the current
challenges to peace and international security are
both complex and multifaceted and that they call for
a response that is comprehensive its approach and
diversified in its application, and that is able to adapt to
the specificities of each crisis.
As the world has globalized so, too, have the threats
it faces. Terrorism knows no borders, while epidemics
or climate change sometimes have very real effects on
the stability of countries and can threaten the security
of an entire region. The United Nations must be able to
respond to them, using all of its tools and acting in an
integrated manner on the root causes of these threats.
That is the entire purpose of the Secretary-General’s
reform, which seekss to endow the United Nations with
the capacity to work in an integrated manner to prevent
conflicts and address their root causes. The Member
States must also respond, acting collectively, just as the
Council is mandated to do.

S/PV. 8144

Without seeking to be exhaustive, I would like
to refer to two of these complex challenges and one
major issue:
The first challenge is terrorism. Terrorism today
is one of the main threats to international peace and
security. Be it groups such as Al-Qaida, Da’esh and
Boko Haram, or individuals inspired by their barbaric
ideology, the terrorist threat has never been so high.
The phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters and
the massive use of the Internet and social media for
recruiting, financing or calling for action has also
added a new dimension to the threat.
While nothing justifies terrorism, we know that
it feeds on poverty, insecurity, displacement and
economic and social imbalances. It also feeds on
transnational organized crime and its many forms of
trafficking. Faced with a threat of this magnitude, it
is essential that States adopt a holistic approach and
consider all economic, political, cultural and social
comprehensive. Against those who oppose barbarism
to our way of life, our freedom and our democracy,
we must wage together an implacable frontier fight on
multiple fronts, with respect of our values ​​and with the
weapons of the law.
Terrorism is now one of those major global
challenges that States can no longer meet alone.
France is convinced, as President Macron reminded
the General Assembly in September (see A/72/PV.4),
that multilateralism is the right answer, with respect
not only to legitimacy but also to its effectiveness in
meeting these challenges.
The situation in the Sahel illustrates the dangers of
terrorism and the need for a comprehensive response.
The security threat to the States of the Sahel concerns
us all and calls for a collective response. On the
security front, the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) is an example of a joint and
concerted response to this threat, which calls for strong
and coordinated support from the United Nations and
all of us.
That is the meaning of resolution 2391 (2017),
which the Security Council adopted recently. This
response must go hand in hand with strong support for
development, which can bring lasting solutions to the
region’s problems. This is the meaning of the support
efforts made within the framework of the Alliance for
the Sahel, in particular to improve the employability

17-4531911/67

S/PV.8144

Maintenance of international peace and security

and education of young people, agriculture, energy,
governance and security.
The second challenge is climate change. The
root causes of a crisis are often multiple, and global
warming is an aggravating factor in fragile contexts.
This has been the warmest year on record. Extreme
climatic events are characterized by their intensity and
frequency. No country is spared today. We can no longer
ignore its profoundly destabilizing consequences.
The most vulnerable populations, already exposed to
other factors of conflict, whether political, social or
environmental, are the first victims. For small island
developing States and coastal countries, their very
survival is at stake. Their submersion, linked to ocean
rise, would also lead to massive migratory waves that
are particularly destabilizing for the security of these
regions. The same is true in areas where desertification
forces people to abandon their fields.
We now have the technological and financial
means to build a clean and secure future and protect
future generations. Climate change is not — or not
yet — inevitable. France is convinced that the answer
must be found first and foremost through the effective
and swift implementation of the Paris Agreement.
Our immediate priority is to fully implement it
because climate action is the best way to prevent
global-warming crises. This is the purpose of the
international conference on financing climate action
that President Macron organized a few days ago in
Paris with the Secretary-General of the United Nations
and the President of the World Bank.
The major challenge to international peace and
security that I wish to highlight is that of respect for
human rights. Many contemporary conflicts originate
in massive violations of human rights. I will cite but
two examples. In Syria, after years of repression by the
regime of Bashar Al-Assad against its own people, it
was the bloody crushing of peaceful demonstrations by
the civilian population calling for respect for their most
basic rights that brought about the situation we know
today. In Burma, it was the serious violations of human
rights, in Rakhine state in particular — violations
of civil and political rights including the right to
citizenship, disproportionate use of force, and sexual
violence — that led to thousands of Rohingyas fleeing
their region to the detriment of regional stability,
as described by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Pramila Patten last week in this very
Chamber (S/PV.8133).
12/67

20/12/2017

When human rights are violated, it is regional
security that is threatened. That is why, in order to
respond swiftly to serious human rights violations, it is
essential that the Security Council be informed by the
relevant mechanisms, including the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, whose early-warning
role is essential. That is also why it is important to
equip peacekeeping operations with robust human
rights and civilian-protection mandates and to ensure
the full implementation of those mandates.
Finally, the impunity of those responsible for
unconscionable violations is also a threat to the
sustainable restoration of peace. It undermines the
civil society’s trust and with it prospects for political
solutions. This reveals the extent to which the fight
against impunity through the relevant legal mechanisms,
in particular the International Criminal Court, when it
has jurisdiction, is both crucial in itself and essential to
peace and reconciliation.
In conclusion, these complex challenges, combined
with the long-standing but still-present threats, such as
inter-State conflict or nuclear proliferation, affect us
all immediately and collectively. All of us — each of
us — must, therefore, collectively, respond to it. The
United Nations must also be able to do so. We welcome
the Secretary-General’s willingness to ensure that the
Organization can meet this challenge by reforming
it and making it more agile, coherent and effective.
France fully supports these efforts.
What the debate today shows is that all of our
contemporary challenges are global and therefore call
for a comprehensive response that links peace and
security, development and human rights, and which is
anchored in dialogue and multilateralism. It is by taking
decisive action on these three fronts, while respecting
the universal founding values of the United Nations,
which protect individuals everywhere and guarantee
their dignity, that we will succeed in responding
collectively and sustainably to these challenges.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank the Japanese
presidency for this very timely and critical debate,
which will help to bring about greater awareness and
therefore more coordinated and effective action by the
Security Council, the United Nations system and the
international community.
Since this is the last debate presided over by our
colleague Ambassador Bessho, as well as Japan’s final
moments as a non-permanent member of the Council,
17-45319

20/12/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8144

I wish to extend my congratulations to him and his
able team for their effective leadership in guiding the
Council during a busy and challenging month and
to thank them for the cooperation extended to my
delegation throughout the year of our membership in
this body.

diplomacy available to the United Nations. Kazakhstan
has also founded the Conference on Interaction and
Confidence-Building Measures in Asia, which today
comprises 26 countries, including some outside Central
Asia, engaging them in efforts to ensure peace and
stability in Asia through confidence-building measures.

We also express appreciation to Secretary-General
Guterres for his insightful briefing and commend him
for his determined efforts to strengthen the United
Nations peace and security pillar and its development
system and to undertake management reform, for which
he can count on our full support.

At the open debate in January (see S/PV.7857),
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kazakhstan,
Mr. Kairat Abdrakhmanov, presented a policy
address entitled “Kazakhstan’s concept and vision of
sustaining global partnerships for a secure, just and
prosperous world”. According to that address, one of
the goals of the Security Council should be to create
conditions conducive to preventing and eliminating
the threat of a global war by reducing the degree of
military confrontation at the global and regional levels
through many means, including mediation. A recent
illustration of that approach has been Kazakhstan’s
direct engagement in supporting United Nations efforts
through the Geneva process for Syria. Astana hosted
several rounds of intra-Syrian talks, which were led
by Russia, Turkey and Iran as stakeholders, and which
contributed to the creation of de-escalation zones,
reduced military activity and the improvement of the
humanitarian situation.

Today’s debate takes place at a time when threats
and challenges to peace and security are considerably
more complex and serious than they have been in the
past. Contemporary and likely future perils arise not
just from inter-ethnic conflicts and armed attacks alone,
but also from terrorism, organized crime, and illegal
trafficking in weapons, drugs and human beings. These
threats are further aggravated by developments that
have societal and economic roots, such as the senseless
killing of innocent civilians, migration destabilization
due to refugee flows and internal displacement
caused by forced expulsions of people, environmental
degradation and climate change.
Kazakhstan fully supports the Secretary-General’s
vision for a new Agenda for Peace that bolsters the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development in order to bring
about national, regional and global stability as well as
development. Kazakhstan believes that early warning,
preventive diplomacy, mediation and peacekeeping are
interdependent and complementary components of a
comprehensive integrated strategy in which sustaining
peace should be an integral element running through
the entire cycle.
When my country gained statehood in 1991, we
realized that investing in sustaining peace should begin
early enough to avoid conflict; without it, stability can
be uncertain and fragile, vulnerable to new shocks.
Since its independence 26 years ago, Kazakhstan
has therefore been at the forefront of preventive
diplomacy and conflict prevention, which is one of the
core principles of our foreign policy. An outstanding
example of this approach has been the initiative of
my President to create the United Nations Regional
Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia,
which is celebrating its tenth anniversary this month.
The Centre constitutes a mechanism for preventive

We are convinced that the achievement of peace and
the renunciation of war as means of settling inter-State
problems are central to the survival of humankind in
the twenty-first century. In that context, Kazakhstan
is promoting the implementation of the Manifesto: The
World. The 21st Century, which declares war on war
and violence worldwide by the centenary of the United
Nations in 2045.
United Nations peacekeeping is another fundamental
tool in addressing today’s threats and challenges. In
that regard, Kazakhstan fully supports the SecretaryGeneral’s reform of the structures of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of
Political Affairs, as well as his many initiatives, as
introduced on 6 April. Together with others, we will
work towards making the mandates of peacekeeping
missions more relevant and achievable, especially
in multidimensional and hybrid operations that are
deployed in zones of violent extremism. Peacekeeping
operations need to be made more effective, accountable
and flexible, with strong components for the protection
of civilians and human rights, as the Secretary-General
has suggested. Missions also have to focus on active and
inclusive political processes to reach peace accords that

17-4531913/67

S/PV.8144

Maintenance of international peace and security

include all parties. The recruitment of well-qualified
staff, the provision of adequate equipment and the
engagement of new countries with United Nations
peacekeeping, could greatly enhance what we hope to
achieve.
Having attended several visits of the Security
Council to various countries and regions in 2017,
we can rightly conclude that adopting a three-track
strategy can help to address conflicts. That should
include strengthening the three pillars of the United
Nations system, particularly peace and security and
the development nexus, as they are closely interlinked.
A regional approach should prevail in tackling
problems in conflict-prone areas, rather than adopting
a narrow, country-specific focus. That approach
becomes efficient when it is accompanied by a well
coordinated, comprehensive development paradigm
in which the entire United Nations system functions
as one United Nations. Such a vision would ensure
optimal investments in the prosperity of all Member
States, cooperating with one another in the interest of
capacity-building, building resilience and disaster risk
reduction.
In conclusion, Kazakhstan will continue to be
fully engaged in addressing threats and challenges to
international peace and security, not just during our
presidency of the Council during the month of January
2018, but throughout its term and beyond.
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to begin by thanking the Japanese
presidency for convening today’s open debate. It has
the full support of my delegation. We also thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
If we were to analyse the threats and challenges
to international peace and security that existed at the
moment when the the United Nations was created and
compare them to those we face today, we would see an
increase not only in the quantity of threats, but also in
the complexity of such phenomena. The new challenges,
threats and challenges that arise in the international
context must persuade the Security Council to consider
all issues that could trigger or exacerbate conflicts.
The increase in armed conflicts characterized by
unprecedented violence, the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, and the growth in the legal and
illegal trade of all types of weapons, the progression
of terrorism, cyberattacks, hunger and the effects of
climate change, to name just a few, require more than
14/67

20/12/2017

ever a strong commitment on the part of the international
community to addressing them.
In times when many of those manifestations of
violence and devastation arise from global causes,
frameworks or strategies, it would be negligent to
imagine that the reponse could be merely local. The
international community must rise to the occasion, be
more supportive, consolidate its frameworks of joint
action and strengthen global governance in order to
find solutions to such serious problems. The increasing
complexity of the threats and challenges to international
peace and security force us not only to pay special
attention to prevention, but also to be creative in our
proposed solutions.
To that end, greater coordination between the
agendas of the various organs of the United Nations
is indispensable, although we should not modify or
interfere with their respective mandates and areas
of competence. The dynamic of work in the United
Nations demonstrates that the nexus among security,
development, human rights and the humanitarian field
is becoming increasingly evident. Uruguay believes
that, in addition to explicit threats to international peace
and security, there are also some phenomena that can
exacerbate crises in conflict or post-conflict situations.
Examples of such exacerbating phenomena are the
effects of climate change, pandemics and transnational
organized crime.
It is important that a comprehensive approach
be adopted in order to sustain peace, in particular by
preventing conflicts and addressing their root causes,
strengthening the rule of law at the international and
national levels and promoting sustained and sustainable
economic growth, the eradication of poverty, social
development, sustainable development, national
reconciliation and unity through inclusive dialogue
and mediation, access to justice and transitional
justice, accountability, good governance, democracy,
accountable institutions, gender equality and respect
for and protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms.
It is no trivial matter that the world’s military
expenditure was $1.69 trillion in 2016, representing an
increase from 2015. We should ask ourselves how many
needs could have been satisfied if only a portion of
that spending had been redirected to the economic and
social development of less richly endowed countries.
The possession of nuclear weapons is worrisome and
17-45319

20/12/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

the delay in the disarmament of nuclear-weapon States
also endangers and threatens global stability and the
security of humankind. The use and threat of the use of
nuclear weapons constitute a crime against humanity
and a serious violation of international law and the
Charter of the United Nations.
In the context of our concern over the development
of nuclear weapons, we must not lose sight of what has
been recognized as the main threat to international
peace and security today, namely, the situation in the
Korean peninsula. A solution to the tensions on the
Korean peninsula will be found only through dialogue,
negotiation and political commitment. We therefore
urge the parties concerned once again to comply with
the provisions of the numerous resolutions of the
Security Council on the situation in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and to resume the SixParty Talks in order to contribute to a lasting political
solution.
Finally, I commend the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral to carry out reform of the Secretariat within the
peace and security pillar of the Organization. We hope
that an improvement in the effectiveness, efficiency and
coordination of the Secretariat will produce benefits
at the systemic level that we can all enjoy in the best
possible conditions as we face the evolving challenges
and threats to international peace and security.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): It could not
be more timely for the Security Council, particularly
the non-permanent members whose terms of office
end in a few days, to address the current complex
challenges facing international peace and security. The
Senegalese delegation thanks the Japanese presidency
for choosing this topic, which is at the heart of the
original mission of this organ, namely, implementing
instruments to maintain and entrench sustainable and
lasting peace in the world. Also, I would like to thank
the Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres, for his
important briefing, which has shed light on our work.
In recent years, the international community has
stepped up its efforts to stave off threats to peace and
provide a sustainable solution to security challenges.
I would like to mention in that regard, inter alia,
the report of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations (see S/2015/446), the reform of the
peacebuilding architecture, the Secretary-General’s
Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism, the
establishment of the Office of Counter-Terrorism, the

S/PV. 8144

review of resolution 1540 (2004) and the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development.
But it is terrorism, international health crises,
climate change, the scarcity of water resources,
transnational organized crime, nuclear proliferation,
the circulation of small arms in relation to their issue
by non-State actors, sexual violence, the recruitment
of children and the illicit exploitation of natural
resources — the list is long but hardly exhaustive of
challenges — that are still awaiting a comprehensive
response from the international community.
However, recent events in the Korean peninsula
have moved the nuclear weapons race front and
centre in our strategic concerns. While the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action — also known as the
5+1 group agreement — shows us that a diplomatic
solution is always possible, the North Korean nuclear
programme, the prospects of which are gloomier than
ever, demonstrates that we must proceed with firmness,
perseverance and creativity in order to arrive at such
solutions. I would like to take the opportunity of this
debate to reiterate Senegal’s commitment to nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
Another challenge is that of international terrorism,
which, despite the defeats it has suffered in Iraq and
Syria, through which it has lost its territorial holdings,
remains intact as is evidenced by the resurgence of
terrorist attacks, including in Egypt, Afghanistan,
Somalia, Spain and Burkina Faso, and on goes the list.
In addition, the shocking images of the sale of African
migrants as slaves in Libya attest to the scale and
gravity of transnational organized crime, including by
the non-State actors, which take advantage of poverty
and armed conflict to thrive.
There is also a growing link among international
terrorism, transnational organized crime, migration,
trafficking in persons, and non-State actors. Hence it
is imperative for the Security Council to conduct an
in-depth assessment of the issue of non-State actors in
relation to peace and security, particularly with regard
to their access to weapons of mass destruction, small
arms and light weapons. Let there be no mistake: those
challenges will remain as long as those armed groups
have access to weapons, but also as long as we do
not address the root causes, develop more inclusive

17-4531915/67

S/PV.8144

Maintenance of international peace and security

economic and social policies, fight extremist discourse
and strengthen international cooperation.
Mindful of the complex challenges resulting
from the threat that non-State actors pose to the
Organization’s peacekeeping operations, during
Senegal’s tenure as a non-permanent member, and
especially during its presidency of the Council, we
emphasized two priorities, namely, the fight against
the asymmetrical threats faced by the United Nations
peacekeeping operations and the strengthening of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations.
While the first priority aims to make United
Nations peacekeeping operations more efficient by
improving the cooperation among the Secretariat’s
various departments, from planning to deployment to
defining mandates, which must be better adapted to the
realities on the ground, the second is to create optimal
synergy between the work of the United Nations and
that of regional and subregional organizations.
The example of the African continent shows us that
those two approaches complement and reinforce each
other, thereby enabling the Security Council to make
use of regional and subregional organizations where
it cannot deploy operations with an offensive mandate
in order to respond to asymmetrical threats. Examples
abound, from Somalia to the Lake Chad basin, where
African countries have deployed their troops to respond
to the threat posed mainly by non-State actors.
That is the full meaning of resolution 2320 (2016),
which the Council adopted at Senegal’s initiative, on
the financing of African Union peace operations. That
is why Senegal welcomes the initiative of the SecretaryGeneral to reform the peace and security pillar by
restructuring of the departments of the Secretariat,
as well as focusing on preventive approaches so as to
enhance the efficiency of the Organization in the area
of peacekeeping.
Because we are convinced of the advantages of
a preventive approach, here in the Security Council
Senegal has actively invested in the management and
resolution of the Gambian crisis. In that connection,
the support of the United Nations and of the African
Union for the efforts and leadership of the Economic
Community of West African States led to the peaceful
transfer of power, while respecting the sovereignty of
the Gambian people.
16/67

20/12/2017

That same conviction forms the foundation of the
Senegalese initiative “Water, Peace and Security”,
which aims to contribute to conflict prevention efforts
by promoting cooperation for access to cross-border
water resources, but also through mediation and good
offices. Allow me to welcome the establishment by
the Secretary-General of the High-Level Advisory
Board on Mediation and to renew Senegal’s support to
that end.
In conclusion, it is clear that resolving the many
complex security challenges we face will require
a comprehensive approach that takes into account
the issue of non-State actors and includes a conflictprevention approach, one that puts the work of the
Organization on the track of a promising partnership for
peace. That is exactly why Senegal, during its tenure in
the Security Council — but above all in general — has
worked towards peace, especially on our continent,
Africa. I can assure members of my country’s continued
commitment in that regard.
Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Secretary-General Guterres for his briefing.
At present, the international situation is complex
and constantly changing. Traditional and non-traditional
security risks are interwoven, while global challenges
are increasing by the day. Meanwhile, all countries are
interdependent even while their interests are linked.
Therefore, seeking peace, development and cooperation
remains the general desire of the Member States.
The international community urgently needs to
work together in order to make new contributions to
addressing global challenges properly and promoting
international peace and development.
First, we must uphold the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations. The United
Nations has existed for more than 70 years, and the
cause of peace and the development of humankind
has seen significant progress. However, the beautiful
blueprint traced by the Charter has yet to be realized,
while new challenges keep emerging. In the face of old
problems and emerging challenges, the purposes and
principles of the Charter are not obsolete and remain
immensely significant and realistic in guiding our
work. To promote the spirit of the Charter, to face
history with honesty and to draw lessons from history
has always been our source of strength in maintaining
peace and building the future. We hope that Member
States will join hands, honour their firm commitment
17-45319

20/12/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

to the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter, promote a new type of international relations
based on mutual respect, fairness, justice and win-win
cooperation, build a community of common human
destiny and make new contributions to advancing the
noble cause of human peace and development.
Secondly, we must settle disputes peacefully
through dialogue and negotiations. With the world
today far from being secure, and with regional conflicts
expanding, maintaining peace and security is the
primary responsibility of the Security Council — a
task entrusted by Member States. All countries should
actively defend the authority of the Security Council
in international security affairs and support the efforts
by the countries concerned and regional organizations
in peacefully settling disputes through dialogue,
negotiation, mediation and good offices. The United
Nations and the Security Council should adhere to the
principles of objectivity and impartiality, respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and their
right to choose their social systems and development
goals on their own, and establish a concept of
comprehensive, mutual, common, cooperative and
sustainable security so as to play a constructive role
in addressing regional conflicts appropriately and
promoting peace through negotiation.
Thirdly, we must take comprehensive measures to
address complex global challenges. The root causes
of conflict, such as poverty and underdevelopment,
are far from being solved, while non-traditional
security threats, such as terrorism, climate change,
refugees, migrants and epidemics, are constantly
expanding — setting a higher bar for global governance.
We hope that the international community will
adhere to multilateralism, increase their development
contributions, fully implement the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change, reach an early consensus on the global
compact for safe, orderly and regular migration, follow
the principle of mutual consultations, joint efforts and
benefit-sharing, push for open, inclusive, universal and
win-win globalization and create favourable conditions
for addressing global challenges.
Fourthly, major organs of the United Nations
should fulfil their mandates and generate synergy. The
United Nations is a core platform for addressing global
challenges. The main organs, such as the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council, should abide by the United Nations

S/PV. 8144

Charter and its responsibilities, adhere to their
mandates, coordinate their work in preventing conflicts,
maintaining peace, building peace and combating
traditional and non-traditional security threats, bring
into full play regional initiatives and organizations and
actively support the countries concerned in capacitybuilding for sustainable development and building
capabilities so as to develop synergies for combating
traditional and non-traditional security threats.
China is ready to work together with the
international community to properly address the
increasingly complex global challenges and make
greater contributions to building a world that enjoys
lasting peace, universal security and common prosperity
and that is open, inclusive, clean and beautiful.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): We thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing and for his
commitment to conflict prevention and the sustaining
peace agenda. We stand behind the Secretary-General as
he implements an ambitious vision for a United Nations
that can better address the world’s most complicated
and pressing challenges. The Security Council is in
a unique position and has a unique responsibility to
respond to crises too large for any one nation to address
on its own. Yet to meet such challenges, we must
ensure we have the tools and capabilities to respond the
realities of the world we live in.
Peacekeeping operations, for example, are
a powerful mechanism for the maintenance of
international peace and security and the protection of
civilians. The United Nations has more than 100,000
troops and police deployed worldwide — responding
to crises in ways no other institution can. Yet we must
ensure that those missions meet the needs of people on
the ground. This is not about producing more reports or
reorganizing departments; it is about taking a careful
look at each mission and asking difficult questions.
Are we using our resources well? Does each mission
promote a political solution? Are we effectively
protecting civilians? Are we fostering independence,
or dependence?
We did that just recently during the mandate renewal
for the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA). We supported an increase in MINUSCA’s
troop ceiling, while also emphasizing the importance
of focusing on the quality of the troops deployed.
To that end, we pressed for stronger requirements in

17-4531917/67

S/PV.8144

Maintenance of international peace and security

the mandate for preventing and reporting on sexual
exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers and for reporting
on performance indicators of force effectiveness, more
broadly. In Liberia, the United Nations devised a
peacebuilding plan in preparation for the withdrawal
of the peacekeeping mission early next year. The plan
was developed in close coordination with the Liberian
Government and included the participation from civil
society, and the result is a plan that all parties can
buy into.
Yet the Security Council has generally used
peacekeeping missions as a tool in response to imminent
risks of mass violence or, too often, after conflict has
already broken out. To more comprehensively promote
peace and protect human lives, we must look first at
underlying challenges to peace and security, including
a failure to promote development or human rights or
to meet humanitarian needs. When left unaddressed,
those shortcomings can develop into threats to
international peace and security. Those factors can
not only exacerbate conflict but, in many instances,
directly lead to instability — a vicious cycle that is
often largely man-made and preventable.
In Yemen, for example, approximately 22 million
people out of a population of 29 million are in need of
humanitarian assistance. There are more than 984,800
suspected cases of cholera, and more than 7 million
people at potential risk for famine. Access constraints at
key ports only fuel that crisis and prolong the suffering
of the Yemeni people. And famine is not just a human
tragedy, it is an issue of peace and security. Earlier this
year, the Secretary-General warned us that we were in
the midst of the largest food security emergency since
the Second World War — with more than 20 million
people in north-east Nigeria, Somalia, South Sudan
and Yemen facing famine. Those conditions were not
caused by drought or natural causes, but rather from
conflict and, in some situations, are a result of parties
more interested in power and personal gain than in the
safety and security of their own people.
Recent reports of human trafficking in Libya have
sparked moral outrage and drawn attention to those
abominable acts. Men, women and children fleeing
conflict or persecution often find themselves vulnerable
to forced labour or sexual exploitation — taken
advantage of by ruthless traffickers with no regard
for human dignity. The individuals responsible for
those horrific crimes are too often also engaged in
transnational trafficking of weapons and narcotics,
18/67

20/12/2017

as well as in financing terrorist organizations. Those
challenges remind us every day of how high the stakes
are for strengthening democracy, increasing prosperity
and improving security — all of which are elements
necessary to building lasting peace.
Despite its shortcomings, the United Nations has
the power to develop solutions to the transnational
problems we face. Those complex challenges demand
a truly whole-of-United-Nations approach, as well
as deeper partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations and improved integration of the work of
United Nations partners and other stakeholders. The
Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Support Office play an important role in bridging the
divides between the three United Nations pillars in
support of coherent peacebuilding efforts and analysis.
Once again, we are grateful for the Secretary-General’s
participation in today’s meeting and we encourage him
to continue bringing issues to the Council’s attention
early and often when he believes that an issue requires
Council attention or action. Fragile States share many
common characteristics, such as weak governance,
environmental degradation and poverty, that are
interlinked with political instability, transnational
crime and violent extremism. Those issues overlap and
so too should our responses. Now let us all ensure that
we have the right tools to act.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to thank the
Japanese presidency for organizing this important open
debate on addressing complex contemporary challenges
to international peace and security. We should also
commend you, Mr. President, for the very useful
concept note you have made available to help us frame
the debate (S/2017/1016, annex). The note points to the
need to focus not only on the root causes of conflict,
but also on the drivers of those conflicts, despite the
fact that it is often difficult to pinpoint how climate
change, for example, represents a root cause or driver
of conflict. All the same, I just wanted to underscore
how useful we found the concept note.
We all know that some of the challenges and threats
to international peace and security that we face today
are not only different from those that we have faced in
the past, they have also become much more complex
and difficult. The Secretary-General mentioned many
of them in his statement today. That is why we cannot
address these contemporary challenges with old ways of
thinking and tools designed for different challenges and
threats at a different time. There is a need for new ways
17-45319

20/12/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

of thinking and innovative tools to respond to emerging
challenges to international peace and security.
There can be no doubt that these challenges require
States to strengthen their cooperation with one another
more than ever before. The various recent studies
and reviews have made valuable recommendations
in that regard. What has emerged clearly from them
is the importance of adopting a comprehensive,
holistic approach to addressing the peace and security
challenges of our time, not only by promoting greater
coherence in the United Nations system, but also by
strengthening key strategic partnerships with regional
organizations to prevent, manage and resolve conflict
and crisis situations in different parts of the world.
The partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union is a good example of that. We can hope
that cooperation between the Security Council and
the African Union Peace and Security Council can be
strengthened far more.
We understand, of course, that the relevant
recommendations of the studies and reviews will
have a meaningful impact only if they are translated
into concrete action. That cannot happen without
comprehensive reform, which is why we support the
ongoing reform process that the Secretary-General
has embarked on to make the United Nations fit for
purpose. The fact that the proposed reform of the United
Nations peace and security pillar prioritizes prevention
and sustaining peace as its overarching goals is very
welcome. We believe that it will give the Organization
the framework it needs to organize a more coordinated,
coherent response to the root causes of violence and
conflict in various States of conflict.
We hope that the results of the reforms will enable
the United Nations to develop an integrated capability
for comprehensively tackling contemporary security
challenges such as the Organization’s fragmentation
by minimizing overlapping structures and mandates,
ensuring greater transparency and accountability and
improving the planning and budgetary processes.
We believe that this will ultimately strengthen the
Organization’s ability to deliver effective and efficient
operational support in the field, including on complex
security terrains where peacekeeping and special
political missions are deployed.
Considering the strong links between the security,
development and human rights pillars of the United
Nations, there is no question that ensuring an

S/PV. 8144

integrated, coherent and cross-pillar approach within
the Organization is critical to addressing the factors
driving conflicts. However, that should not necessarily
mean that we should change the established mandates,
functions and funding sources of the various United
Nations entities. That is particularly relevant in the
light of the clear division of labour between the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council, as stipulated in the Charter of the
United Nations, and we note the assurances given by
the Secretary-General in that regard.
We believe that the Security Council is not best
suited to discussing matters that fall under the Chartermandated responsibilities of the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council. Nor does
it have the relevant expertise to make appropriate
recommendations and decisions on issues related to
social, economic and environmental matters. It should
therefore deal only with issues that come directly under
its mandate. Indeed, there are a great many critical
issues in today’s world that do not receive the attention
they should from the Council. One clear example is
respect for the principles of international law governing
relations between States, since so many conflicts have
resulted from a failure to respect them.
In conclusion, to go back to the essential issue of
United Nations reform in the area of peace and security,
I should stress that the most important task at hand is to
avoid fragmentation within the United Nations system
and to promote the synergy and complementarity of the
three pillars of the United Nations, in order to ensure
a continuum in its policies so that they are relevant
and effective in addressing the challenges of our
times. That is what the ongoing reform process should
be all about. We very much hope that it will help to
reorient the restructuring of the Organization towards
that objective.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
today’s meeting and for the open debate format, which
enables us to engage in a broad exchange of opinions
on an issue as complicated as this one, the factors that
make it difficult to resolve conflicts today. Your choice
of subject is timely not only for the Security Council,
which, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, has the main responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security, but also for the entire
United Nations system, its principal organs and all its
Member States.

17-4531919/67

S/PV.8144

Maintenance of international peace and security

When the Council discusses individual conflicts,
we deal with the entire spectrum of threats to peace.
That said, every country or regional situation has its
own unique set of circumstances that must be considered
when taking decisions. That context-specific approach
is always at the heart of our work. All too often,
unfortunately, in dealing with the most intractable
threats, we have to rely on Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations, which regulates those decisions.
However, in your concept note (S/2017/1016, annex),
Mr. President, you rightly point out that in individual
situations there may be other factors at work besides
the threat to peace — these so-called challenges, which
can influence the process of arriving at a settlement.
They may include all kinds of circumstances that
extend far beyond the framework of the list included in
the concept note for today’s meeting. Unfortunately, the
most urgently topical challenges to stability are beyond
the reach of this list.
What we have in mind, first and foremost, is outside
interference in States’ domestic processes, including
foreign support for such subversive processes as
unconstitutional regime change and seizures of power.
The representative of Ukraine deliberately omitted
to mention these important underlying causes of the
conflict in south-eastern Ukraine. What he said about
international law, and law in general, simply comes
across as blasphemy. How can the representative of a
country talk about compliance with the law when its
leadership came to power as a result of a coup against
the Government in Kyiv in February 2014? That was
when this tragedy began. We all know that the way to
resolve this conflict is through full implementation
by the Kyiv authorities of the Minsk agreements, as
endorsed by Security Council resolution 2202 (2015).
Getting back to the subject of the meeting, the
concept note also failed to take account of the unfair
distribution of access to natural resources and other
assets that has been the legacy for dozens of States in the
wake of colonial rule. It would also be helpful to take a
look at the problems caused by unilateral economically
coercive measures; the ongoing disparity in access
to modern technologies, including environmentally
friendly ones; the rapacious exploitation of natural
resources by transnational corporations; the unfair
distribution of positions in the global economic
governance institutions; the failure to uphold official
development assistance commitments; and the problem
of poverty and growing social inequality, which, as
20/67

20/12/2017

many reports point out, is highly likely to provoke or
stoke existing conflicts. Of course, none of this rules
out the possibility of the negative influence on efforts
to reach a settlement of a conflict of factors that have
already been mentioned, such as climate change,
hunger, epidemics, transnational crime and so on.
However, it is important to keep in mind that none of
these challenges are universal; they are unique to each
specific situation.
Needless to say, the role of the United Nations is
to provide support to States, which bear the primary
responsibility for responding to security challenges on
their territories. In that context, we firmly believe that
as a general rule it is helpful for the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council and the Security
Council to consider the interrelationships between
issues of peace, security, development and human
rights. However, it is vital to maintain the principle of
division of labour and each of these principal organs
should act within its own area of responsibility.
We proceed from the fact that the Charter of the
United Nations assigned to the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council a mandate to consider
socioeconomic and environmental issues, which include
combating climate change and ensuring sustainable
water use, health care and similar issues. It is the
General Assembly, with its universal membership, that
makes recommendations on such issues, all of which
have many different aspects. They are all considered in
the relevant specialized committees and in individual
forums such as the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change. Combining all these
elements together and preparing balanced decisions on
them demands a variety of expertise and time that the
Security Council does not possess. We believe that this
type of coordinated arrangement among Member States
in the principal organs of the United Nations can be a
reliable basis for the work of the Secretariat also after
the restructuring of its peace and security architecture
that has begun.
Today the General Assembly has considered the
issue of requesting Secretary-General António Guterres
to submit detailed proposals on this topic. Given that,
we believe it is inappropriate to transfer to the agenda
of the Council general issues that come under the remit
of other principal organs within the United Nations
system with a much broader representation of Member
States. The Council should not usurp their voices.
17-45319

20/12/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Cardi (Italy): At the outset, I would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and the
Japanese presidency for organizing this important,
lively and timely meeting.
Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
later by the observer of the European Union.
Today’s open debate lets us reflect on how the
Security Council has been addressing contemporary
challenges to international peace and security,
especially this year, from terrorism, extremism,
transnational organized crime and trafficking in
persons to grave violations of human rights, mass
displacements, humanitarian crises and the increasingly
adverse effects of climate change. In many instances
the Council has recognized their interconnected nature
and their role as drivers and multipliers of conflicts.
It has also concurred on the need to address them in a
comprehensive and integrated manner.
As the Secretary-General called for in his first
address to the Council in January (see S/PV.7857), a
shift from reacting to conflicts to their prevention,
based on the concept of the peace continuum, should be
at the core of our efforts to make United Nations action
more consistent and effective. Italy fully shares and
supports that approach, along three main directions.
First, we must continue to analyse the interconnected
nature of contemporary challenges and their impact on
international peace and stability. During its term on the
Council, Italy focused its attention on trafficking in
persons and on its link with terrorism, organized crime,
mass displacement and serious violations of human
rights. We also addressed the issue of the protection
of cultural heritage from destruction and trafficking
by terrorist groups, in order to counter the financing
of their activities, but also to protect communities’
cultural identity. Through its unanimous adoption of
resolutions 2388 (2017) and 2347 (2017), the Council
demonstrated its united will to counter these scourges,
recognizing in them a threat to international peace
and security. Similarly, last week Italy organized an
Arria Formula meeting on the security implications of
climate change. Addressing the root causes of conflicts
must also continue to be one of our priorities if we are
to prevent them from emerging or recurring. During
our presidency, the meeting on security challenges in
the Mediterranean region (see S/PV.8106) highlighted
the nexus between peace, security, socioeconomic
development and human rights, as well as the urgent

S/PV. 8144

need to put people’s needs and rights at the centre of our
action. The protection and empowerment of people are
key to building resilient and inclusive societies, in line
with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the sustaining peace agenda.
Secondly, a broader and more preventive use of the
entire toolbox at the disposal of the United Nations is
essential to enable the Council to engage at an early
stage in situations that may escalate or relapse into
conflict, and to define preventive actions by the United
Nations system as a whole. In that regard, I would like
to recall two recent important initiatives undertaken
by the Secretary-General in line with Article 99 of
the Charter of the United Nations — his letters on the
four famines and on the situation in Rakhine state.
We encourage him to fully exercise that prerogative
whenever it is needed.
In addition, it is important, in our view, to develop
more effective early-warning systems. As an example,
the Framework of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes should
be more widely used. The Special Representatives of
the Secretary-General should brief the Council more
regularly. The Council should make full use of informal
meeting formats to discuss issues that may not be
formally on its agenda but that deserve its attention.
Security Council missions, as we have seen, are also a
very important tool for improving our understanding
of specific security contexts and adjusting our action
accordingly, as this year’s visits to the Lake Chad region,
Colombia and the Sahel, among others, demonstrated
very clearly.
The capacity of the United Nations is unparalleled
and must be fully exploited by improving synergy
and coordination among all United Nations actors
at Headquarters and on the ground. The role that
peacekeeping operations, special political missions,
country teams and specialized agencies, funds and
programmes play in building and sustaining peace must
be further strengthened by better integrating and fully
implementing the concept of the peace continuum. The
Council must uphold the principle of peacekeeping
reform when addressing country-specific situations,
while bearing in mind the need for clear entry,
transition and exit strategies. The primary goal is to
support inclusive political processes to foster resilient
societies and national ownership.
In Haiti, for example, the establishment of the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti

17-4531921/67

S/PV.8144

Maintenance of international peace and security

has provided a model case of transition. Equally,
peacekeeping missions must be equipped to focus
on capacity-building. In that regard, resolution 2382
(2017), which Italy promoted along with the other
members of the Council, has recognized and enhanced
the importance of the police component in bridging
the work of the United Nations from peacekeeping
to peacebuilding.
Thirdly, we must focus on the way forward. The
Secretary-General’s proposals on the reform of the
United Nations system are coherent with the Council’s
work on those topics. The Council should continue
to provide its full and united support for the efforts
of the Secretary-General as we look forward to a
more effective, flexible, transparent, efficient and
accountable Organization — one in which the various
bodies of the Organization work and act together.
As underscored by the Secretary-General, the
United Nations is not alone in its efforts for peace.
Partnerships with regional organizations and civil
society are also fundamental to improve the coherency
of our actions across the three pillars and along the
conflict cycle, in line with the principle of subsidiarity.
In conclusion, we think that it is imperative to
break the silo approach and build on broad consensus.
We agree on the substance, as today’s debate has also
confirmed. The Council is capable of being effective in
living up to its responsibilities and in standing united
to confront contemporary challenges to peace and
security, through innovative thinking and bold actions.
Finally, since this is my last statement in the Security
Council, as Italy nears the end of its mandate as a
non-permanent member, allow me to first congratulate
you, Mr. President, and your delegation for your work
and excellent presidency for the month of December,
and to extend to all delegations around the table my
personal thanks and that of my team’s for all of their
cooperation during this intense year in the Council.
The President: The representative of Ukraine has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): We regret that, despite
numerous references to the General Assembly in its
statements, the Russian delegation does not follow the
work of that organ and the developments there — or,
perhaps even worse, it is just intentionally addressing
that body, the main organ of the United Nations
22/67

20/12/2017

representing the collective voice of all the States
Members of the United Nations, with complete disdain.
Just yesterday, the General Assembly reaffirmed
the shameful status of the Russian Federation as an
occupying Power in Ukraine (see A/72/PV.73), and, by
extension, as a party to the international conflict. In
that respect, we would like to simply repeat what has
already been stated in the Security Council on numerous
occasions. As an occupying Power and a party to the
dispute, and as an authoritarian regime under one of the
highest number of bilateral and multilateral sanctions
in the world, Russia, by virtue of the Charter of the
United Nations, has neither the legal nor moral right to
pronounce itself on Ukraine at the Council, let alone
to lecture my delegation, or that of any other Member
State. That will at least be the case until Russia returns
Crimea to the Ukraine, withdraws its troops from
the Donbas and pays in full for the damage done by
its occupation.
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We encourage the representative of the Ukraine to
respect the Security Council and its members. We do
not want to get into a senseless polemic, but Ukraine’s
latest comments run contrary to common sense and
force us to once again take the floor.
From the beginning of the conflict in the
Ukraine — which was a direct consequence of the
unconstitutional seizure of power by those on the
Maidan, which the citizens of Donetsk and Luhansk
did not recognize — we have time and again heard
in various forums about Russian intervention and
aggression in the conflict.
However, there was and is no proof of those
allegations. But there is proof of a number of violations
of international law by the Ukrainian party. Those
facts are regularly published by representatives of the
United Nations and other international organizations.
What is the point of the endless bombardment, despite
all of the statements and warnings from humanitarian
groups on the threats of large-scale humanitarian and
natural disasters? We consider those activities by
the authorities in Kyiv as inhuman, in making use of
schemes to make sure that they get their pensions and
social contributions.
17-45319

20/12/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

How many more schools and hospitals do they
need to destroy before they address the situation at the
negotiating table and deal with the issue of terrorists?
We repeat that the road map was drawn up in the Minsk
agreements; it just need to be implemented.
The President: The representative of Ukraine has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. Given
the long list of speakers, I would ask him to be brief and
to make that his last intervention.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): Just a few days ago, I
made a statement in which I quoted not a Ukrainian
official, but the former Secretary-General of the United
Nations. Allow me to briefly repeat it, followed by an
additional quotation.
“I am particularly concerned about the situation
on and around the border between Ukraine and the
Russian Federation. This remains a key obstacle to
the de-escalation of the situation on the ground, as
arms and heavy weaponry reportedly continue to
flow unabated into Ukraine from Russia. There is
an urgent need to ensure a secure border between
the two countries, with international verification,
as discussed in the Minsk talks.”
That quotation is from the Secretary-General’s
press conference on 29 August 2014, and if that is not
sufficient evidence for the Russian Federation of its
aggression against Ukraine, I wonder what is.
To give another quotation:
“In the case of the Ukraine, security assurances
were an essential condition for its accession to
the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. However,
the credibility of the assurances given to Ukraine
in the Budapest Memorandum of 1994 has been
seriously undermined by recent events, such
as the occupation of Crimea and parts of the
Donbas. The implications are profound, both for
regional security and the integrity of the nuclear
non-proliferation regime.”
That is a quotation from a statement made by the
Secretary-General at the opening meeting of the Nuclear
Security Summit on 24 March 2014 at The Hague.
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked for the floor to make a further
statement. I would also like to ask the representative of
the Russian Federation, given the long list of speakers,
to keep his statement brief and make it his final one.

S/PV. 8144

Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to draw the attention of
our Ukrainian colleagues to the fact that there is a
mechanism to observe the situation in the southeast of Ukraine — the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission to
Ukraine. Every day, and sometimes even twice a day, it
visits areas that are not controlled by the Government,
and in none of its reports has it written about any mass
movements of weapons or troops.
With regard to the security of the nuclear facilities
in Crimea after it was returned to the Russian
Federation, we informed the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) that all nuclear facilities on
the Crimean peninsula were under reliable control
and were working safely and in compliance with the
provisions of the IAEA.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements
are kindly requested to circulate their texts in writing
and to deliver a condensed version when speaking in
the Chamber.
I wish to inform all concerned that we will be
carrying on this open debate right through the lunch
hour, as we have a large number of speakers.
I now give the floor to the representative of Colombia.
Mr. Morales López (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Ambassador Koro Bessho of Japan for
convening this open debate and for the concept note
(S/2017/1016, annex), which has served as a guide to
debate an issue which certainly is of great importance
and current relevance.
The maintenance of international peace and security
is the fundamental mandate that the Charter of the
United Nations has entrusted to the Organization, and,
more specifically, to the Security Council, which has
the responsibility to ensure that the decisions taken
within this organ are consistent with the changing
needs in an ever more complex global context.
As is stated in the concept note, an integrated
approach to the threats to peace and security requires
timely attention and action to address the main causes
and multipliers of conflict. The Secretary-General
quite rightly alluded to that this morning. He referred
to the alarming qualitative and quantitative increase

17-4531923/67

S/PV.8144

Maintenance of international peace and security

in threats that constitute a clear peril to humankind as
a whole: nuclear proliferation, climate change, water
shortages, more bloodthirsty and long armed conflicts
and also phenomena that affect security in cyberspace.
All of that requires more flexible diplomacy if we are
to be more effective, but also if we are to focus on
prevention. In that regard, Colombia believes that it is
precisely that aspect of prevention and peacebuilding
that should make the maintenance of peace a priority in
the work of the Security Council.
As my country pointed out recently in the General
Assembly during the adoption of the resolution on
reforming the peace and security pillar, we can be
under no illusions. The security and peace situation that
we are currently living in around the globe currently
requires bold, effective and expeditious measures
to respond to needs that the current structure of this
pillar of the Organization prevents resolving with
forcefulness. Undoubtedly, the changing nature of the
conflicts today is a challenge to the Organization. It
should lead us to create new ways to address them and,
at the same time, generate a culture of prevention that
is genuinely effective.
That need to strengthen institutional capacity in
the face of real threats is what motivated Colombia to
support the efforts of the Secretary-General to reform
the peace and security pillar of the Organization, an
effort that, thankfully, was recently endorsed by the
General Assembly, thereby making this debate even
more timely. My country is following this process in
the conviction that it constitutes an important step in
the right direction, making it possible to modernize and
adapt the Organization to the crises and emergencies
affecting the world today.
Against that backdrop, I would like to emphasize
that we must not underestimate the relationship
between an effective administration and the division of
responsibilities from the highest level so that the United
Nations is able to fulfil its mandates. At the same
time, however, we should also support the worthwhile
initiative of the Secretary-General to place greater
emphasis on preventing conflicts and on the concept
of sustaining peace, which clearly require additional
mechanisms and flexible processes for the swift and
effective deployment of the enormous capabilities at
the disposal of the Organization.
Colombia has experienced both to the results and
the challenges faced in preventing conflict, thanks
24/67

20/12/2017

to the United Nations special political mission in
Colombia, mandated and consistently supported by
the Security Council, and subsequently the transition
towards a verification mission that is the result of the
significant impetus that the United Nations has given to
building stable and lasting peace in my country.
Finally, I would like to stress that the success of the
Colombian peace process is based on the premise that
the prevention and resolution of conflicts flows from
a comprehensive approach that takes into account the
crucial elements of sustainable development, gender
equality and the role of women in transitional processes
and institution-building.
Before I conclude, I would like to warmly
congratulate Japan for its exceptional and outstanding
role as as it soon concludes its tenure in the Security
Council. I would also like to thank other countries that
are completing their Security Council membership
this year.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Sparber (Liechtenstein): Liechtenstein wishes
to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this
timely debate.
As the number of conflicts increase and their
humanitarian consequences reach unprecedented
dimensions, the world expects the United Nations to
find better ways to prevent conflict and sustain peace.
Today’s discussion is driven by a growing awareness
that the complex challenges of today’s conflicts need to
be addressed in a consistent manner across the entire
conflict cycle. A comprehensive approach to peace and
security includes the rule of law, fundamental rights
and freedoms and sustainable development. The 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development is itself such a
comprehensive approach, most prominently Sustainable
Development Goal 16. The Sustainable Development
Goals concretely address the interdependence between
security and development and offer a powerful
prevention tool.
Along the same lines, implementation gaps in
development commitments and disregard for human
rights obligations are important early warning signs
that provide relevant information for preventive action,
from which the Security Council should benefit to
the largest extent possible. With respect to conflict
multipliers, such as climate change, food insecurity,
17-45319

20/12/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

water shortages and organized crime, thematic debates
and their outcomes, these can help inform the Council’s
decision-making, which has generally paid insufficient
attention to those phenomena. However, that requires
systematic integration of the findings of those
discussions into the Council’s consideration of specific
crisis situations.
Contemporary security challenges tend to be
complex. They require tailor-made solutions that are
attuned to a particular context. At the same time, they
also share important characteristics, including, in
most cases, an erosion of the rule of law. One aspect
of sustaining peace, which has been neglected rather
systematically by the Council, is the importance of
accountability for lasting peace. Transitional justice
is an indispensable part of consolidating peace and
preventing conflicts. It contributes to deterrence,
strengthens the rule of law and allows traumatized
communities to come back together and move forward.
The International Criminal Court (ICC) is a tool at
the disposal of the Council in that respect. Beginning
in July next year, the ICC will also be able to exercise
jurisdiction over the crime of aggression, which goes to
the very core of the Council’s mandate and the purpose of
the Organization. However, in the past year the Council
has shown half-hearted engagement with the Court and
failed to follow up on the two referral decisions it made.
It is therefore crucial that other accountability options
be considered, such as the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, which
was the General Assembly’s response to a vetoed ICC
referral in the Council. At its core, the challenge that the
Council faces to embrace justice as a key ingredient for
creating lasting peace. We see that reflected as a core
message in the 2030 Agenda, but it is largely lacking in
the work of the Council itself.
The situation in Libya is a sad showcase about
how the absence of the rule of law provides a breeding
ground for one of the most complex security challenges
of our time. The horrific reports of slavery and genderbased violence, including against men and boys, are not
only a symptom of conflict but also a driver of further
violence. Slave markets provide financing for terrorist
and other criminal activities, thereby further increasing
instability in Libya and the broader region. We recall
that those crimes fall under the jurisdiction of the ICC,

S/PV. 8144

and we welcome the announcement of the Court on
conducting investigations. The Security Council should
support such efforts, both politically and financially, as
a tangible contribution to addressing the complexity
of the challenge and to improving the situation on
the ground.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): I would like to begin by
thanking Japan for organizing this debate. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing this morning.
We are living in a remarkably more dangerous
world, in which a wide range of new threats have
emerged even as older ones continue to fester.
Challenges to international peace and security are
intensifying at a time when the foundations of the world
order are fraying.
Conflicts continue to rage across the world, from
Africa to Afghanistan. The civil wars and factional
fighting in Syria, Libya and Yemen are becoming
more vicious and consequential, generating record
levels of human displacement. Efforts to change the
status of Jerusalem threaten to drive an already volatile
Middle East into further turbulence and chaos. As
Secretary-General António Guterres has warned,
we may be sleepwalking into a catastrophe on the
Korean peninsula. At the same time, the long-standing,
internationally recognized disputes of Palestine and
Jammu and Kashmir continue to fester. The Palestinian
and Kashmiri people continue to suffer horrific human
rights violations at the hands of occupying forces, while
the world continues to watch without addressing those
egregious situations. All those situations compound the
challenges of a more turbulent and volatile world.
In order to effectively address such challenges,
we must identify the drivers of international conflict,
which include unresolved, long-standing conflicts and
disputes, foreign military interventions, political and
economic injustice, terrorism and violent extremism
and the displacement of populations due to persecution,
poverty, climate change and conflict. We have to ask
whether we are preventing and resolving conflicts or
just managing them, and that only partially and in a
rather unedifying manner. After all, the primary
purpose of establishing the United Nations was to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war.

17-4531925/67

S/PV.8144

Maintenance of international peace and security

What we certainly need is a shift from a culture of
reaction to a culture of prevention. Effective preventive
strategies rely on an early reaction to signs of trouble,
efforts to alleviate the factors that trigger violence and
the resolution of the underlying root causes of violence,
such as foreign occupation, a lack of resources and
social and political systems that lead to injustice and
grievance. There is obviously no one-size-fits-all
solution to conflict prevention and mitigation. Moving
a country towards durable peace begins with a clear
understanding of the sources and nature of conflicts.
Ambitious conflict-prevention strategies should
avoid the pitfalls of either a delayed reaction or an
incorrect reading of the signs of an impending conflict
or catastrophe.
More Blue Helmets are currently deployed than at
any time in history. United Nations peacekeeping has
always been a cost-effective tool for the maintenance
of international peace and security, but peacekeeping
alone is not able to deliver the dividends of peace.
Peacekeeping needs to be strengthened through support
for political solutions, since only by reinforcing the
primacy of politics can we make peace durable and
sustainable. The focus on sustaining peace is therefore
welcome, but in order to sustain peace, we must first
build peace, address the drivers of conflict and create
the enabling conditions that allow peace to flourish.
Let me set out a number of suggestions that we see
as essential to addressing the complex contemporary
challenges to peace and security.
First, while axiomatic, addressing the root causes
of conflict remains the best conflict-prevention and
conflict-resolution strategy. Second, a clear shift
in approach from an emphasis on military action
to negotiation and to finding political solutions is
required. Third, inclusive national ownership and
leadership are essential to driving peace processes
forward. Fourth, the United Nations must better utilize
the tools for maintaining peace and security provided
for in Chapter VI of its Charter: “negotiation, enquiry,
mediation, conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement,
resort to regional agencies or arrangements, or other
peaceful means”.
Fifth, all resolutions of the Security Council
must be implemented, uniformly and non-selectively.
Selective implementation weakens multilateralism
and the credibility of the United Nations, compounds
conflicts and intensifies the suffering of the affected
26/67

20/12/2017

and afflicted people. Sixth, the form and functions of
United Nations peacekeeping must be shaped by the
situation on the ground, not by the often competing
political interests in New York. Finally, seventh, as
we know, peace and security, development and human
rights are inextricably linked. It is true that a lack
of development and of respect for human rights can
endanger international peace and security, but without
peace and security, the lack of development and the
violation of human rights are a certainty.
In conclusion, let me say that the proliferation of
conflicts today is a clear sign of the need for urgent
action. The proposed reform of the peace and security
architecture is necessary but is not sufficient to make
a real difference. Fundamental change in the way in
which we deal with conflicts is really required. Only
then will we be able to succeed in our collective quest
for sustainable and enduring peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Hungary.
Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): First of all, I wish to
thank Japan for convening this important debate and
Secretary-General Guterres for his briefing.
While we align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union, I wish
to add a few observations in my national capacity.
The words “comprehensive”, “integrated” or
“holistic” are not just buzzwords that dominate our
discussions at the United Nations nowadays. They are
real reflections and much-needed calls for actions,
given the intertwined challenges of our time. There are
anchors to our work.
First is putting further emphasis on prevention. The
need to shift our focus towards preventing conflicts,
as opposed to merely reacting to them, is clearly selfevident. I believe that the only way to achieve and
preserve peace within and among societies is through
dialogue. I am therefore encouraged by the dedication
of the Secretary-General to start a surge in diplomacy. I
would also like to reiterate Hungary’s firm commitment
to the role of preventive diplomacy and mediation. To
assist the United Nations in their activities in this field,
my Government made voluntary contributions in 2016
and in 2017.
Preventive processes should include intercultural
and interreligious dialogue and reconciliation, in
tandem with moderate religious and community leaders
17-45319

20/12/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

and faith-based organizations, in order to build trust
and mutual understanding and respect. Cultural and
science diplomacy, education and awareness-raising
are key in that regard. For example, this year’s World
Science Forum, held in Jordan and co-organized
by Hungary, proved the power of science for peace,
which encompasses reconciliation and the prevention
of conflict.
Secondly, we must address peace, security and
development as one. A smooth transition between
political solutions, humanitarian action and development
cooperation is key to ensuring that countries will not
relapse into conflict. Sustainable development is our
best available tool in preventing conflict, and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development created a new
impetus for all organs and the entire membership of the
United Nations to work together in new ways. Besides
changing the narrative, we — United Nations organs
and Member States alike — must all change the way in
which we operate.
There is no sustainable peace without respecting
human rights and international humanitarian law.
Member States, in partnership with international
organizations and civil society, should build resilience
in our societies against the risks of destabilization and
radicalization. That should start, we believe, with the
protection of the most vulnerable. Hungary fights for
the rights of national, ethnic, religious and linguistic
minorities, and of women, girls and children, among
others, by ensuring that their human rights and
fundamental freedoms are fully respected. We have to
fight modern slavery and human trafficking in every
corner of the world, and Hungary is firmly committed
to fighting terrorism and supporting the new United
Nations counter-terrorism system.
Addressing complex contemporary challenges to
international peace and security is a daunting task, one
that no country can achieve on its own. Our mission
is to make sure that we combine our efforts, use the
considerable tools at our disposal and ensure that the
terms “comprehensive”, “integrated” and “holistic”
will not remain mere words.
We know that water is a source of life but also of
conflict. Hungary is committed to addressing waterrelated challenges. The scarcity of fresh water resources
constitutes a serious challenge to the international
community. In Hungary, we say that water connects;
it does not divide. That was said both in 2013 and

S/PV. 8144

2016, during the Budapest Water Summit. I was very
honoured to co-moderate the water dialogue, together
with Tajikistan. We believe that discussing the added
value and the drawbacks of platforms that talk about
the strengthening of the UN-Water system would
provide coherent policy guidance, and monitoring and
follow-up are necessary tools that we must strengthen.
I encourage convergences so that water can find its best
place in the United Nations development system.
Finally, in taking reform forward, we take it
seriously. Today we have a rare opportunity before of
us to help both the Organization and its Member States
to address the structural shortcomings of the United
Nations and empower it to move out of the functional
silos, integrate the prevention approach and enhance
the coherence of United Nations activities in the field.
It is more important than ever to enhance the
performance of the Security Council, which faces an
unprecedented number of conflicts and complex crises.
The world has too often been witness to devastating
consequences due to the non-action of the Security
Council in certain situations. As a member of the
Accountability, Coherence, and Transparency group,
we wish to stress that the Code of Conduct regarding
Security Council action against genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes has already been
signed by 114 Member States.
Sitting here as an ambassador and a female
permanent representative, I must conclude by saying
that we cannot address enough the role of women in the
maintenance of peace and security. I believe that each
century has its defining moral issue. If slavery was the
towering moral issue of the nineteenth century and if the
fight against totalitarianism and colonialism dominated
the twentieth century, then the rights of women and the
struggle to uphold them in every corner of the world
will be — and has been — the moral imperative of the
twenty-first century.
I wish to congratulate Japan on its work in the
Security Council and wish everybody happy holidays.
The President: I thank the representative of
Hungary for her statement. I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Lauber (Switzerland) (spoke in French): We
thank you, Mr. President, for having launched this
debate. We share the conviction that we must confront

17-4531927/67

S/PV.8144

Maintenance of international peace and security

emerging problems at an early stage and that the
greatest insecurity arises when risks accumulate.
It is not enough to enumerate the different
phenomena and negative trends. We need to discuss the
tools that we have at our disposal to address the issues
and their root causes. In that regard, I would like to
focus today on the preventive potential of certain recent
international frameworks, agreements and processes
and give a few examples of how Switzerland and other
Member States can contribute to realizing this potential.
First, the United Nations has never had a more
solid framework for conflict prevention than today.
Prevention is in the DNA of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and of the resolutions on
sustaining peace that the Council and the General
Assembly unanimously adopted in 2016 . An additional
impetus for linking the pillars with prevention is
anchored in the Secretary-General’s reform agenda.
The new United Nations-World Bank prevention study
says that for every dollar invested in prevention, $16
is saved.
Secondly, the implementation of the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change is, in our view, a
significant preventive step. The Paris Agreement
acknowledges the strong links between climate change
and peace and security. Switzerland is currently
addressing the specific challenge of the interaction
between water resources and peace.
We are involved in the Blue Peace Initiative, which
aims at preventing conflicts linked to the domestic
or transboundary management of water. Switzerland
encourages members of the Council to further analyze
the relation between the competition for natural
resources, climate change and peace and security.
Thirdly, respect for human rights is essential for
conflict prevention. In order to enhance systematic
cooperation within the United Nations system on
human rights issues and to strengthen the existing
human rights framework, in 2016 Switzerland launched
the Appeal of 13 June. The Appeal specifically calls for
intensified cooperation between the Security Council
and the human rights organs of the United Nations with
a view to strengthening conflict prevention. To date,
71 Member States have joined the Appeal, and we invite
all others to do the same.
Fourthly, many conflicts arise around issues of
perceived or real exclusion and injustice. That is an
28/67

20/12/2017

aspect that deserves our attention, including in the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. Together with Brazil and Sierra Leone,
we helped to launch the Pathfinders for Peaceful, Just
and Inclusive Societies. As part of that cross-regional
group of Member States, we are determined to accelerate
the implementation of Sustainable Development Goal
16 and its related targets. The Pathfinders recently
launched a road map that spells out the process and
challenges more clearly.
Switzerland remains committed to strengthening
the capacity of the United Nations to recognize and
address new and complex challenges to peace and
security. Currently they are enormous, but we also have
very solid reference frameworks and agreements on
human rights, climate change, development and peace
and security. We can effectively contribute to conflict
prevention by taking them seriously and implementing
them thoroughly.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this timely and important
debate. Today, in every pillar of United Nations action,
there exist tremendous challenges.
We welcome the constructive exchange of ideas
that is taking place in this open debate today. We share
the concern expressed by many as to the gravity of
existing threats and risks. We wish to contribute to the
discussion by highlighting the following points that, in
our opinion, deserve special attention.
In the face of the complexity of the contemporary
challenges we are facing, no single State possesses
the capacity to take on these challenges alone. As the
Secretary-General stated:
“The interconnected nature of today’s crises
requires us to connect our own efforts for peace
and security, sustainable development and human
rights not just in words but in practice.” (see
S/PV.7857, p. 3)
The United Nations is in acute need of substantial
reform to increase its capacity to address the challenges
we face. It must enhance its effectiveness and live up
to its role as the primary platform in dealing with
international peace and security. Hence, we commend
the Secretary-General for acknowledging this need and
support him in his efforts. We welcome the adoption
17-45319

20/12/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

of the General Assembly resolution expressing support
for him to continue to work on restructuring the United
Nations peace and security pillar (resolution 72/199).
Since the report of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446), a primary
objective has been to increase the effectiveness of United
Nations peacekeeping operations while prioritizing
political solutions to crises. The prevention of crises
before they scale up to open conflicts is essential in this
regard, and so is preventing the relapse of such crises
in post-conflict recovery processes. The SecretaryGeneral’s surge in diplomacy for peace initiative and
his subsequent proposal on reform of the peace and
security pillar have underscored the importance of
prevention and the role of mediation, to which Turkey,
together with Finland, is devoting special attention and
effort as co-Chair of the Group of Friends of Mediation.
The Security Council, in view of its objective and
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security, also needs to be reformed so that it can address
complex contemporary challenges in that realm.
The views of Turkey, as a member of the Uniting
for Consensus group, on the substance of Security
Council reform are well known. The Security Council
has on many occasions failed to provide timely and
adequate responses to emerging and prevailing crises.
Most often inaction results from the threat of, or, as
we witnessed this week, the use of veto. This is the
greatest roadblock facing the Security Council. The
veto disables the Security Council’s function, and,
whatever the motivation, the outcome is a sustained
or aggravated crisis and a United Nations whose
credibility is undermined each and every time such an
event occurs.
We would also like to underline here the
importance of greater Security Council interaction
with non-Council members and various United Nations
agencies and bodies. Also important is the cooperation
of the United Nations with other organizations.
We also subscribe to the idea that we should take a
comprehensive, holistic and integrated approach to the
increasingly complex contemporary challenges.
Let me say as a final point that we need to pay
greater attention to tackling the root causes of or factors
driving conflicts. The use and proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction; terrorism; territorial, ethnic,
religious or cultural disputes; or driving factors such

S/PV. 8144

as climate change, water, famine, pandemic disease,
transnational organized crime, and human and drug
trafficking, among other things, pose a challenge to
the international community as a whole. As noted in
the concept paper prepared by the Japanese presidency
(S/2017/1016, annex), the Council has aimed to discuss
the relationship between many of these factors and
security in many open debates and briefings. We
support this approach, because no crisis can be
addressed adequately without paying due attention to
these factors in the context of a comprehensive and
collective approach.
Turkey, as has been the case so far, stands ready
to join its efforts with those of other nations in
increasing our joint capacity to address these complex
contemporary challenges.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lithuania.
Ms. Jakubonė (Lithuania): I have the honour
to address the Security Council on behalf of Latvia,
Estonia and my own country, Lithuania. We align
ourselves with the statement to be delivered on behalf
of the European Union and its member States.
We thank Japan for organizing this open debate,
which provides an important opportunity to better
understand the complex contemporary challenges
to international peace and security. I would also like
to thank Secretary-General António Guterres for
his statement.
The global security environment has indeed changed
dramatically in recent years. Some would even argue
that the world is entering one of the most dangerous
chapters in decades. From the spread of terrorism and
violent extremism to transnational organized crime,
from climate change to energy and cybersecurity, our
collective inability to prevent and resolve conflicts is
giving rise to new threats and emergencies. Shocking
abuses of human rights, including violations of women’s
rights and the use of rape as a tool of war, exacerbate
existing instabilities and fuel new conflicts.
The sharp rise in military conflicts ranging from
those in Syria, Yemen, Libya and the Sahel to Russian
aggression in Ukraine is outstripping our ability to
cope with the consequences. Some of these conflicts
share the features of hybrid and proxy wars, and this is
what makes them intrinsically contemporary.

17-4531929/67

S/PV.8144

Maintenance of international peace and security

The complex and constantly changing nature of
non-conventional threats to international peace and
security demands innovative responses and action from
the international community. In this regard, we call
on all States to support the United Nations peace and
security reform, which aims to create a modernized
United Nations that is capable of addressing the
complex contemporary challenges to international
peace and security and acting more effectively in the
area of prevention.
While today’s subject is vast and the issues are
many, let me focus on two priority issues for the Baltic
States: hybrid threats and cybersecurity.
From the weaponization of information and social
media to economic pressures and energy blackmail, to
crippling cyberattacks and conventional threats, hybrid
warfare is on the rise. Concerns regarding Russia’s
interference in national election processes are not
limited to European countries alone. The multifaceted
nature of hybrid threats also encompasses the politically
motivated exploitation of critical infrastructure or even
the development of unsafe nuclear power plants on the
border with another country.
Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia, being at the forefront
of hybrid threats, have undertaken a series of actions
both individually and collectively. Enhancing societal
resilience to hybrid threats is a priority for our nations.
The Baltic States strongly believe that increased
societal awareness, resilience-building and media
and information literacy can contribute to increased
preparedness to tackle hybrid threats. To this end, we
have initiated programmes aimed at helping society to
recognize propaganda and information warfare. We
are also strengthening our strategic communications
capabilities and working closely with the relevant
strategic communication units of the European Union
and NATO.
With regard to cyberthreats to international
peace and security, cyberspace constitutes a
complex environment ranging from Internet and
mobile communications to the security of critical
infrastructure. Today we accept that cyber has become
an integral part of a modern conflict landscape.
Increased cybercrime and politically motivated attacks
on electronic services mean that cybersecurity is more
important than ever before. In 2007, when Estonia
faced a series of cyberattacks — one of the earliest
Internet-era examples of cyberconflict — that was
30/67

20/12/2017

not yet common knowledge. Those attacks brought
about an increased awareness of the need to improve
cybersecurity measures throughout the world.
Latvia and Lithuania have also experienced
politically motivated cyberattacks. We know from
experience that building partnerships is essential for
enhancing cyberresilience. Challenges in cyberspace
can be addressed only through an inclusive,
multi-stakeholder approach. Closer cooperation of the
public and private sectors as well as civil society is
vital. All interested parties must make a joint effort to
ensure the security and resilience of the information and
communications infrastructure, focusing on prevention
and preparedness in order to develop effective and
coordinated mechanisms for reacting to increasingly
more complex cyberattacks and cybercrimes.
We believe that regional and subregional cooperation
is key to strengthening cybersecurity in critical
infrastructure. Our three countries have taken serious
steps to strengthen cybersecurity. Furthermore,
Lithuania has submitted an initiative to develop mutual
assistance in cybersecurity and cyber rapid-response
teams within the European Union’s Permanent
Structured Cooperation on Security and Defence.
The complexity of hybrid and cyber threats clearly
calls for more complex and innovative responses from
the international community. The very nature of hybrid
threats makes clear that conventional security is not
enough: human, societal, environmental and energy
security are equally important in order to maintain
peace and security in the contemporary world. Hybrid
and cyberthreats are not going anywhere. They are
here to stay as part of modern warfare. We therefore
encourage countries to share best practices and lessons
learned in tackling such threats, both regionally
and internationally.
In conclusion, the Baltic States remain committed
to broadening their understanding of complex drivers
and threats to global security, and to working to find
relevant and effective responses to challenges to
international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Mr. Hattrem (Norway): I have the honour
to make this statement on behalf of the Nordic
countries — Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and
17-45319

20/12/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

my own country, Norway. The Nordic countries would
like to thank Japan for organizing this debate.
Today’s security challenges must be addressed
comprehensively and across the dividing lines between
humanitarian, development, peacebuilding and security
efforts. Famine, pandemics, violent extremism and
organized crime destabilize countries and fuel conflicts.
Increasingly, environmental degradation resulting from
climate change is also contributing to conflicts. If we
are to deal with that, we must cooperate on working to
achieve the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
fulfilling the Paris Agreement on Climate Change,
implementing other major environmental agreements
and preventing conflicts over shared water resources.
We welcome the strengthened partnership between
the United Nations and the World Bank. Their joint
study, Pathways for Peace: Inclusive Approaches to
Preventing Conflict, makes a strong case for investing
in development as a way of preventing conflict, and
provides much-needed guidance on how development
interacts with other efforts to that end.
We are major partners in long-term development,
and strong supporters of the Green Climate Fund
and initiatives by the World Bank, the United
Nations Development Programme and others with a
particular focus on African and small island States.
We consistently promote the women and peace and
security agenda and commend the Council’s important
role in establishing the normative framework for that
agenda and its implementation. Women’s participation
in United Nations peacekeeping operations makes such
operations more efficient and improves humanitarian
access and the ability to respond to people’s needs.
Inclusive political settlements are key to peace and
development and essential for legitimacy and ownership,
and inclusivity starts with women. Our efforts must
be rooted in the communities we are striving to help
stabilize and rebuild, such as, for example, by making
better use of the positive contributions that young people
can make, as the Council called for in its resolution
2250 (2015), on youth and peace and security. In the
Colombia peace process, victims were heard, civil
society was involved and women were influential. It
is now up to us all to support the implementation of
Colombia’s peace agreement.
The Nordic countries will work with all Member
States to follow up the landmark resolutions on
sustaining peace. We are among the major contributors
to the Peacebuilding Fund. For every dollar invested

S/PV. 8144

in prevention, 17 are saved in post-conflict assistance.
Nevertheless, we need to do even more to provide
predictable and sustained financing.
We must place prevention at the core of the agenda
of the United Nations. The reforms initiated by the
Secretary-General are important, and we fully support
his reform agenda. Reform of the Security Council
is also needed to better reflect today’s geopolitical
realities, and should include both permanent and
non-permanent seats for Africa. The Nordic countries
continue to emphasize the importance of ensuring that
small States have the opportunity to serve regularly
on the Council as elected members. We are convinced
that the peace and security challenges of today’s world
require a concerted response. We need multilateral
structures, in particular the United Nations, which we
must strengthen and make more efficient.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Ntsoane (South Africa): We would like
congratulate Japan on its assumption of the presidency
of the Council for the month of December and to
thank it for hosting this open debate, which reminds
us of the central mandate that we are all tasked with
pursuing. We cannot overemphasize the centrality of
this subject in the work of the Council and indeed the
entire United Nations. Today’s debate is therefore both
timely and fundamental.
The Security Council, born from the ruins of
the Second World War, was created to maintain
international peace and security. That also entails the
active pursuit of peace and security as a prerequisite
for sustainable development and global prosperity. The
world has changed enormously since the 1940s, and
the nature of the threats to global peace and security
has changed accordingly. Today the conflict landscape
consists largely of intra-State conflicts and only a
handful of traditional inter-State wars, which are either
frozen or have decreased in intensity. Indeed, conflicts
today largely reflect internal strife in our Member
States and the transnational threats to them. The nature
of the conflicts that our forebears envisaged when this
Organization was created has therefore changed.
That fundamental change in the nature of
international conflict translates into greater complexity
in the challenges that the Council faces in pursuing and
maintaining peace. Unfortunately, while the world has
changed, the Council has largely remained the same.

17-4531931/67

S/PV.8144

Maintenance of international peace and security

Contemporary challenges have highlighted divisions
within the Council, particularly among its permanent
members. At times this has even paralysed the work
of the Council, and that has cost human lives in real
terms. For example, while the situation in Israel and
Palestine has been on the Council’s agenda almost
since its creation, the Council’s meaningful action on
the matter has been limited. That was evident in this
Chamber two days ago, when the Council was prevented
from taking action by a veto-wielding member State
(see S/PV.8139). The situation in Syria has also
shown that when the Council is divided, it is unable
to meaningfully contribute to peace, its core mandate.
There may be times when that paralysis warrants the
involvement of the entire General Assembly under the
“uniting for peace” formula set out in General Assembly
resolution 377 (V).
The Council is sorely in need of reform. Through its
excellent work as Chair of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions,
Japan has helped to make incremental improvements in
the Council’s working methods, and we commend the
recent work done to update the S/2010/507 document
(S/2017/507). The Council needs such developments in
its working methods if it is to improve the manner and
effectiveness of its efforts.
Ultimately, improved working methods cannot
obviate the need for comprehensive reform of the
Council if it is to better represent the configuration of
today’s world. We believe that reform that results in a
more representative Council will enable it to be more
effective in dealing with the complex contemporary
challenges to international peace and security. With
regard to emerging and asymmetrical threats such
as terrorism, a broader multilateral approach, one
that does not overemphasize military solutions but
addresses the broader root causes of conflicts and their
prolongation, is essential. We need a truly global and
coordinated response to enable us to deal with such
threats, which include the scourges of transnational
crime and trafficking in persons.
We also face the problem posed by countries
that continue to rely on nuclear deterrence for
their security, entailing postures that themselves
threaten regional and global security. The fact
that the Council’s permanent members actively
promote compliance with nuclear-non-proliferation
norms — while continuing to keep their fingers on the
triggers of these instruments and failing to implement
32/67

20/12/2017

their nuclear-disarmament obligations and related
commitments — creates a credibility problem for the
multilateral nuclear-non-proliferation regime and the
Council’s ability to deal with such matters. We are
deeply concerned about the possible use of nuclear
weapons, whether by design, accident or miscalculation,
particularly at a time of heightened international and
regional tensions.
South Africa supports the non-proliferation
agenda, particularly as a State party to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, as well as the
Pelindaba Treaty, which designated Africa a nuclearweapon-free zone while promoting the inalienable
right of States to the peaceful use of nuclear energy
and technology. We were among the core sponsors
of the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons,
and welcomed its adoption in July with the aim of
establishing the most stringent possible international
norms for nuclear weapons through prohibition leading
to their total elimination. We call on States Members
of the United Nations that have not signed the Treaty
to do so.
In conclusion, fulfilling the central purpose of the
United Nations — the maintenance of international
peace and security — depends on the Organization’s
ability to effectively respond to global threats.
The world has changed, but we are still stuck with
anachronistic structures that, unsurprisingly, have
been found wanting and ineffective in dealing with
complex contemporary challenges to international
peace and security. We need greater representation and
a stronger voice for those closest to the world’s crises
and most able to help to respond to them effectively. We
need a Council adapted to providing truly multilateral
solutions to the threats facing today’s world, marked
by consistent and non-discriminatory decision-making
and the pursuit of collective rather than narrow national
security interests.
It is against that backdrop that South Africa will be
introducing a draft resolution in the General Assembly
with a proposal for marking the centenary of the birth
of our late President Nelson Mandela with a peace
summit. The summit would be aimed at reinvigorating
the global commitment to international peace and
security, and we call on all Member States to support
and sponsor the draft resolution to keep the legacy of
Mandela alive as we strive to achieve global peace.
17-45319

20/12/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): At the outset, I should like
to thank you, Sir, for putting the very important subject
of today’s debate on the agenda. From my perspective,
it represents the culmination of your presidency, so
I reiterate my thanks. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his very pertinent statement this
morning. He began with the climate issue, focusing
attention on the effects of climate change on security.
I would also like to begin my statement on this
subject by quoting Chancellor Merkel, who, at the
twenty-third session of the Conference of the Parties to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, held in Bonn a month ago, said,
“On the one hand, we have melting glaciers,
rising sea levels and flooding; on the other, we have
storms, unbearable heat and severe droughts. No
one — no one — should or can ignore this. And if
we also think about the growing global population,
we know that increasing conflicts over natural
resources will be inevitable if we do nothing to
protect the climate.”
Last Friday, we had an Arria Formula meeting chaired
by our Italian colleague. I found it very encouraging
that all delegations participating in this discussion
recognized that there was a direct link between climate
change and security.
However, we have all been following the
discussions today, and climate change is only one of
the many threats to peace and security that speakers
have mentioned. Climate change is only one driver of
conflict. Many other speakers mentioned human rights.
The representative of France mentioned in particular
the current situations in Syria and of the Rohingya in
Myanmar. Further issues include the shrinking space
for civil society, as highlighted by the SecretaryGeneral; underdevelopment, as highlighted by China;
gender inequality and violence against women, to which
I will return; terrorism; transnational organized crime
and trafficking in human beings and drugs; pandemics;
migration; cyberattacks, as our Lithuanian colleague
just mentioned; and the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, as mentioned by others — and yet
that list does not capture them all.
Considering that all of these things have an effect
on peace and security, a body such as the Security

S/PV. 8144

Council that is tasked with dealing with peace and
security must address these issues. We must not take an
isolated, narrow approach in the Security Council but
a holistic one, looking at all the root causes of conflict.
Of course, the Security Council is not the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
We are not here to discuss how to stop climate change
or reduce carbon emissions but to talk about the effects
of climate change on peace and security. My Russian
colleague, with whom I already had a discussion during
the Arria Formula meeting, said we must always look
at the unique circumstances of each individual country,
and of course we could then look at climate change in
Mali. But climate change has an effect on the whole
region, on the Sahel and the Lake Chad region, and so
we must take a broader, regional view. We have a very
able Russian Under-Secretary-General for CounterTerrorism. There are many conflicts that are affected
by terrorism and where we must take a broader view.
I very much support the view expressed by the
representative of the United States and other colleagues
that the Secretary-General should regularly provide
the Security Council with early-warning assessments
to ensure that crises do not erupt and that the Security
Council begins dealing with these issues sooner. I think
that the Secretariat should conduct a more general
assessment with a view to informing the Security
Council at an early stage that something may be going
wrong in a country or region.
Germany therefore also fully supports the
Secretary-General’s proposals for reform, particularly
in the area of peace and security, with the aim of
ensuring that the Secretariat looks at a conflict’s
entire life cycle, from early prevention through to the
prevention of a relapse into conflict. We fully support
this idea, as well as encouraging closer links between
the Peacebuilding Commission and the Security
Council. Last week, for example, the Friends of the
Peacebuilding Commission, under the able chairship of
our Thai colleague, had a long discussion on the Sahel
and what can be done there. I think there should be a
direct link to the Security Council in such instances,
since the Security Council is also discussing the Sahel.
Why not make use of the Peacebuilding Commission’s
efforts in a systematic approach to conflicts?
I have a few more points to make. I think that Ethiopia
mentioned the importance of partnerships, particularly
with the African Union, and I can only endorse that
view, which I think is very important indeed.

17-4531933/67

S/PV.8144

Maintenance of international peace and security

In conclusion, I would like to focus on one particular
driver of conflict, which is the use of sexual violence as
a tactic of war. Together with Iraq, Germany hosted a
meeting yesterday in the Economic and Social Council
Chamber to which we invited Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Patten, who discussed the fact
that sexual violence against women is used as a tactic of
war, as, for example, in the crimes committed against
the Yazidis by Da’esh, which are truly horrifying. We
must do everything we can to prevent such things
from happening. Unfortunately, Iraq is not the only
place where this goes on. There are others. We must
also consider it from the perspectives of prevention,
of social reconciliation and, importantly, of impunity.
That in particular must be prevented, because if it is not
it creates another root cause for the next conflict.
I thank you once again, Mr. President, for putting
this topic on the agenda. I hope there will be follow-up
on today’s discussion over the coming year. Some have
indicated that they will take up the issue, and Germany
will support them.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Mr. Cooreman (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s debate.
I would like to congratulate you on your country’s
presidency of the Security Council.
Much has been said about the maintenance of
peace and the complexity of the multidimensional
challenges to international peace and security. It is
our view that those challenges must now be addressed
with a comprehensive and integrated approach. In that
regard, I wish to focus my statement on the issue of
environmental security.
The environment is one of the fundamental
dimensions of sustainable development and should
be part and parcel of our comprehensive approach to
security. Desertification, the melting of the ice-caps,
sea-level rise, the decline in forest cover and arable
land and the increasing scarcity of water resources
have disturbing and immediate effects on societies
in the areas affected. Such environmental changes
force people to migrate, fuel tension and spark violent
conflicts, with repercussions that transcend the borders
of the countries and regions concerned. It is therefore
vital that upsets in the climate and in ecosystems be
analysed and assessed in a security context that allows
the Security Council to play its role in promoting
34/67

20/12/2017

sustainable solutions to contain the potential sources
of conflict.
To facilitate that endeavour, Belgium favours the
appointment a special representative for environmental
security, whose work will enable the Security Council
to act in a timely manner. In addition, the current
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General
could report on the threats to environmental security
linked to their respective mandates so that they can be
discussed by the Council and other competent agencies
of the United Nations. The appointment of the special
representative could be an integral part of the broader
reform of the peace and security pillar. We welcome the
adoption today of resolution General Assembly 72/199,
which supports the vision of the Secretary-General, and
we eagerly await concrete proposals.
Belgium will continue to take an active part in the
discussions and will attempt to firmly anchor the global
approach in the peace and security pillar of the United
Nations and in our national policies. Belgium already
attaches priority to the financing of the general budget
of the agencies of the United Nations, by giving them
the means to implement the gloval approach.
In the broader context, Belgium is working on the
humanitarian-development nexus, some aspects of
which can have an impact on environmental security.
Several flexible humanitarian funds financed by
Belgium have enabled contributions when natural
disasters occur. That was the case following the
recent hurricanes that affected the Caribbean region.
In addition, Belgium has also adopted a new, flexible
approach in transition contexts that seeks to create
bridges between humanitarian aid and development
activities, with a view to addressing the causes of
vulnerability and to strengthen the resilience of
populations. In 2018, support will be provided in thaat
framework to Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in the Lake Chad region.
Given the complex challenges to international
peace and security, Belgium promotes a comprehensive
approach, both nationally and internationally. We know
that our credibility will depend on our ability to turn
our dreams into action.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): We thank Japan for its
valuable efforts as President of the Security Council
17-45319

20/12/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

for the month of December, as well as for convening
today’s very important open debate on crucial issues.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his important
comments, underscoring intensive international efforts
and cooperation to foster peace and security.
The Security Council has the primary responsibility
for international peace and security. The General
Assembly and the Secretary-General play major
important and complementary roles, along with other
offices and bodies of the United Nations. Those roles
often overlap and should therefore reinforce one another
in order to be effective.
Indonesia commends the Security Council when it
has decisively and justly enabled peace. But like many
previous speakers in today’s debate, we are also deeply
concerned that conflicts have increased threefold in
recent years, with an unprecedented number of people
displaced forcibly. The rise of intolerance, xenophobia,
hate and islamophobia is aggravating the international
environment, which impedes efforts. We owe it to
our people to do everything in our capacity to enable
harmony, peace, development and prosperity, near and
far. Driven by that national resolve, Indonesia strongly
supports the call by the Secretary-General for the surge
in political diplomacy in conflict prevention, which
should be translated into concrete action.
In addressing various complex contemporary
challenges to international peace and security, we
would like to highlight the following points.
First, the diversity of challenges — including pandemics,
famine, organized crime, drug trafficking — and an
inability to tackle the root causes of disputes can spark
and sustain conflicts. We are therefore encouraged
by the fact that the United Nations is increasingly
examining conflict in a comprehensive manner and
has committed to deepening the connection between
sustaining peace and the Sustainable Development
Goals. However, much more needs to be accomplished
in practical terms.
Secondly, it is vital that the Secretary-General’s
proposal to restructure the peace and security pillar
succeeds in making the engagement of the United
Nations in the entire peace continuum more effective
and nimble. Indonesia is actively contributing in
intergovernmental discourse, with the view that reform
is not an end in itself and should lead to concrete
improvement for conflict-affected countries and the
way we do business.

S/PV. 8144

Thirdly, national ownership is essential. As
countries affected by conflict establish their future
objectives and governance, meaningful participation
by everyone in the citizenry, including woman, youth
and minorities, is critical. Having the concerns and
aspiration of all legitimate national stakeholders
reflected in the national programmes builds their stake
in an enduring vision of peace and development.
Fourthly, we emphasize that in tackling the root
causes of conflicts, the Security Council must fully
uphold the principles of international law, human rights
law and humanitarian law. It must be judicious, not
dictated by any particular national perspective. That
commitment is once again tested on the question of
Palestine. Marred by vetoes, the Council’s inaction has
not only had devastating consequences for populations
on the ground; it has made finding a solution to the
situation more complex.
Fifthly, while the Security Council is the
main organ of the United Nations whose job is to
maintain international peace and security, it cannot
single-handedly solve those challenges. It needs better
cooperation and understanding, including with troopand police-contributing countries and host countries in
peacekeeping operations and with the Peacebuilding
Commission in dealing with new peace challenges
and establishing integrated strategies for conflict
prevention, peacebuilding and recovery, as well as with
regional and subregional organizations in maintaining
and strengthening Chapter VI of the Charter of the
United Nations.
Although global challenges are plenty, Indonesia
will steadfastly continue to play its role in the
United Nations ideals with concrete contributions to
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding, not
only by providing peacekeepers, but also through ideas,
capacity-building and by proposing and pushing for
global collaboration.
I also agree with many of the points made by
several speakers. Time is of the essence for us in terms
of working together to carry the flag of peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Akbaruddin (India): Sitting here listening
to the speakers makes me realize the validity of a
dictum that I heard many years ago. It is that each
generation tends to confront the challenges of the next

17-4531935/67

S/PV.8144

Maintenance of international peace and security

generation, using the tools of the preceding generation,
without even knowing it. Today’s debate appears to be
one such instance. The topic refers to the complexity
of contemporary challenges to international peace
and security. It is useful to remind ourselves of the
need to focus on the terms “contemporaneity” and
“complexity”.
Seven decades ago — to paraphrase the
unforgettable depiction of the poet W. H. Auden — the
world was emerging from the low, dishonest decades
of depression, tyranny, war and genocide. Those years
of catastrophe were on account of the then-leading
Powers fighting over territories and resources globally.
The threat to international peace and security at that
time came from those competing Powers jostling for
geostrategic supremacy. The primary concern in terms
of peace and security at that time was to prevent a
recurrence of a major war by maintaining geostrategic
balance among the major Powers.
The challenges that are increasingly being
mentioned in the discourse of this Chamber these
days as areas of concern for international peace and
security are different. The emphasis, as we have heard,
is on challenges such as climate change, pandemics,
famines, natural disasters, humanitarian crises and
cybersecurity. That is surely a different agenda from
the one of seventy years ago. Moreover, the power
balance that existed seventy years ago has changed
quite significantly.
Once we recognize the complexity of our times and
how they have changed, it is not difficult to understand
why the structures designed for vastly different times
tend to be ineffective in dealing with the challenges that
are being outlined here. In short, our responses require
a basic reordering of our perspectives.
Such challenges are not new to humankind; humans
have faced them since time immemorial. However,
it is acknowledged that their impact is sometimes
much wider in modern times in an interdependent
world. Technological changes are creating economic,
ecological, political and social globalization that
requires cooperative responses. Disruptions anywhere
tend to impact aspects of contemporary life elsewhere.
The complexity of issues on the global agenda today
is perhaps unique to our times. That has added to the
challenges in the delivery of global public goods. When
global public goods are underproduced and fail to be
delivered, everybody suffers.
36/67

20/12/2017

At the same time, it is also obvious that some States
are better able and equipped to handle complex threats.
Those who are more vulnerable to such occurrences
lack the basic resilience required. Often it becomes
an issue of the level of economic development and the
availability of financial and other resources.
The disparity in the economic development of
countries cannot be seen in isolation from an increasingly
globalized scenario that links markets for commodities,
labour and finished products, manufacturing supply
chains, services and financial markets. That points
us to the distortions in the way global governance for
trade, investment and human mobility functions today.
Those are all issues that cannot be addressed
merely by securitization of transnational challenges.
Most of the interlinked issues that are now understood
to be important point to the fundamental need to
ensure that sustainable development is available to all
and to reduce gross disparities. Such issues are rightly
discussed outside the Council by the wider membership
of the United Nations at various levels, not merely in
this Chamber and not only under its rubric of peace
and security.
In this Chamber, we would do well to address
the complexities of the peace and security scenario,
such as those arising from the globalization of terror
networks. Those networks operate across borders with
their hateful ideologies, some of which are based on
deep-rooted perceived grievances. They raise finances,
procure arms and recruit operatives. That is a common
challenge that requires greater focus by the Council,
one in which close nternational cooperation needs to be,
can be and should be expanded for our common interest.
It appears that that common threat to States and
societies is not clearly understood here. Even on
counter-terrorism, cooperation continues to elude this
Council. It is noticed that on an issue as serious as the
designation of terrorist individuals and entities, the
Council-mandated sanctions committees fail to make
concrete progress and in some cases fall victim to
narrow political and strategic concerns. In other cases,
when sanctions committees have designated terrorists,
there are States that mainstream United Nationsdesignated terrorist individuals into their political
processes in total disregard of international law, thus
jeopardizing our common security.
The reasons for the lack of success of international
structures designed seven decades ago in dealing with
17-45319

20/12/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

the complex challenges of today are self-evident. A
non-representative Council, designed many years ago
to maintain the balance of power among competing
rivals, is simply not equipped to handle the challenges
that have changed beyond recognition in the intervening
decades. An instrument that is no longer considered
legitimate and has lost its credibility cannot be our hope
for salvation. New realities cannot be addressed by old
paradigms. To tackle contemporary challenges, we
need to move beyond old moulds. Until then, “speech
acts” like today’s debate will remain just speeches, and
will have little impact on the billions of “we the people”
who are striving to live peacefully in a safe and secure
manner well beyond this Chamber.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Peru.
Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru
welcomes Japan’s initiative to convene this meeting,
which gives us the opportunity to consider different
national perspectives on the current challenges facing
the international community, within a context of a
United Nations reform that could make a significant
difference for the Organization’s Member States. We
also thank the Secretary-General for his briefing on
this important topic.
It is accepted that, in addition to the traditional
challenges to international peace and security, there
are now increasingly complex global challenges that
are affecting the security of our citizens, unravelling
the social fabric, undermining and delegitimizing
institutionalism and stoking conflict.
An example is the impact of climate change,
which is frequently observed in different parts of
the world, in generating natural disasters and in the
scarcity of essential resources, such as water. Those
have the potential to generate conflicts and subsequent
humanitarian crises due to, for example, migration, food
insecurity and overpopulation in certain territories. We
can also mention transnational organized crime with its
many facets: the illicit trafficking of arms, drugs and
cultural goods, illegal mining and logging, trafficking
in persons, and cyberattacks, among other crimes,
many of which are linked to terrorist groups.
In that context, there is no greater remedy than
strengthening our commitment to multilateralism and
rethinking the best ways to deal with those new threats.
Addressing the traditional causes of violence requires
a broad consensus on the need to sustain peace through

S/PV. 8144

economic growth, respect for human rights, the rule of
law, access to justice and policies of social inclusion
and reconciliation. Thus we are aware of the continuing
need to prevent conflicts from springing back in ever
new forms.
It is clear that our response to those threats
should not be one of denial but of adopting a new
focus — multidimensional, participatory, cooperative
and integrated, one that that identifies such threats,
explores their influence in any given conflict and
attacks them on various fronts, with the Security
Council being a fundamental one. In that context, we
support the reforms that Secretary-General António
Guterres has been promoting to render the Organization
more coherent, effective, efficient and coordinated,
as well as able to flexibly respond to the security and
development needs of States.
Implementing reforms that promote prevention
as a central element, with the appropriate tools for
taking timely action, is a primary responsibility under
the Charter of the United Nations. That, however,
must be complemented by cooperation — aimed at
strengthening greater capacities and firm institutional
structures for States — among the various agencies
and programmes throughout the system to make the
Organization’s response capacity more effective.
In conclusion, I underline that Peru will accord
high priority to focusing on those challenges in its
upcoming capacity as a non-permanent member of
Security Council during its two-year term from 2018
to 2019.
The President: I now give the floor to the Deputy
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations.
Ms. Adamson (European Union): I am honoured
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and
its member States. The candidate countries the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia; align themselves with
this statement.
First, I would like to commend Japan for holding this
open debate at a particularly opportune moment, and
also thank Secretary-General Guterres for his briefing.

17-4531937/67

S/PV.8144

Maintenance of international peace and security

Addressing complexity is a challenge that no single
actor, instrument or forum can take on alone. We are
pleased to provide our contribution to that work as part
of the wider international community. The focus of this
debate addresses the very core of the Council’s mandate
and indeed the international community’s capacity to
prevent, manage and resolve crises. The complexity of
today’s challenges requires adapting our tools, avoiding
silos approaches, working more closely together and
addressing issues early on.
As the Secretary-General reminded us in his first
statement to the Security Council in his new functions
almost a year ago (see S/PV.7857), conflict prevention
is not a priority, but the priority. Recognizing and
addressing situations early on is crucial to ensuring
our possibilities for success, preventing them from
worsening, and avoiding the loss of lives. We stand
ready to accompany the United Nations in the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts to conduct the reform process. We also
see the need and potential of engaging, motivating and
coordinating efforts with other stakeholders — namely,
the private sector — whether in the area of peacebuilding
or sustainable development efforts.
Indeed, the increasing complexity of challenges
also calls on us to change so as to be better equipped
for breaking the conflict cycle. It is not only a moral
obligation, but a pragmatic imperative, with huge
economic advantages. Last year, the European Union
adopted a global strategy reiterating our commitment
to a global order based on international law, including
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
That commitment translates into an aspiration to
address the root causes of conflicts so as to provide
the basis for sustainable change. In particular, we
are looking forward to working with members of the
Security Council to help establish a practice of holding
early discussions in the Council on situations at risk
of becoming violent conflict cases, and the pursuit of
early collective action to prevent violence.
The global strategy for the European Union’s
Foreign and Security Policy indeed identifies “the
integrated approach to external conflicts and crisis”
as one of its priorities, which strongly has resonated
with the overall United Nations agenda, which also
strives to enhance coherence both within its system
and the international order. It requires the EU to
further strengthen the way in which it brings together
institutions, expertise, and instruments, and works with
member States in prevention, peacebuilding and crisis
38/67

20/12/2017

response, as well as stabilization, in order to contribute
to bring about sustainable peace.
The integrated approach addresses all policy
dimensions of a conflict or a crisis by bringing together
a multidimensional, multiphased, multilateral and
multilevel approach. While addressing conflicts early
on is necessary, staying the course is an even more
substantial challenge. Relapse into conflict is more the
rule than the exception, especially if proper followup and implementation of peace agreements are not
done. The EU translates that “multi-approach” through
engagement at various levels. A multidimensional
approach means that the EU is ready to contribute to
the maintenance of peace through its various policies,
tools and instruments. A multiphased approach means
that we will remain a committed partner throughout the
conflict cycle — investing in prevention, resolution,
and stabilization — while avoiding premature
disengagement when a crisis erupts elsewhere. A
multilevel approach entails the need for acting at local,
national, regional and global levels. The multilateral
approach is translated through a commitment to engage
with all players present in a conflict, who are necessary
for its resolution. That includes our key partners, such
as regional and international organizations, as well as
civil society actors.
Conflicts are best resolved by those who have to
live with their outcomes, but we have a possibility,
and indeed a duty, to support them. That increased
emphasis on conflict prevention, human security
and fostering the resilience of States and societies,
including by building capacities to manage conflicts
peacefully, has been translated through concrete
change in the European External Action Service. In
January, we created a dedicated unit to implement that
new approach to addressing the entirety of the conflict
cycle: early warning, conflict prevention, security sector
transformation, stabilization and conflict response, as
well as mediation. That unit, known by its acronym
PRISM, is already enjoying close cooperation with the
United Nations and is ready to enhance it further.
Only last week, the European External Action
Service presented a new concept on stabilization,
aimed at addressing complex situations in peace and
security. Addressing complex political and security
situations requires more than ever an integrated
approach, with a range of interlinked and concurrent
actions, including partnerships with the United Nations
17-45319

20/12/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

and other key actors. Without a holistic and concurrent
effort, stabilization will only be partial.
It is also more than ever needed to ensure that
conflict sensitivity is embedded into everything
we do. Indeed, sound, joint conflict and resilience
analysis is required. Addressing complex contexts
begins with a thorough assessment of the situation. We
are undertaking joint analysis and strategy thinking
increasingly with our international partners from the
outset, as well as with civil society — a crucial element
in any effective approach to conflict prevention. As
demonstrated by the Arria Formula meeting held by
the Council last Friday, we should not shy away from
recognizing and closely examining new and emerging
challenges to peace and security such as, for example,
climate change. On the contrary, the Security Council
should regularly look at security risks triggered by
climate change with the objective of using its unique
role within the United Nations system to prevent
climate change-induced unrest and conflict.
Lastly, in a complex world, our working methods
need to evolve. By addressing situations earlier and in
a more coherent, integrated manner, and mobilizing the
entire toolbox at our disposal, we can help transform
our approach to conflicts and crises, and in that vein
further empower the Security Council in fulfilling its
core mandate. The EU stands ready to assist the United
Nations in that process.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. Giacomelli Da Silva (Brazil): I thank you, Sir,
for convening this important debate. I also wish to thank
the Secretary-General for his informative briefing.
Brazil
has
traditionally
underscored
the
interdependence between security and development.
That relationship was the subject of an open debate
convened by the Brazilian presidency of the Security
Council in 2011 (see S/PV.6479), as acknowledged by
the concept note (S/2017/1016, annex) circulated by the
Permanent Mission of Japan for this meeting.
The interlinkage between security and development
is complex and nuanced. Poverty and inequality may
exacerbate tensions in some scenarios but do not
necessarily endanger international peace and security.
Geopolitical rivalries, militaristic approaches and the
unilateral use of force are far more serious sources of
regional and global instability. Let us never forget that

S/PV. 8144

throughout history, many of the most lethal conflicts,
serious humanitarian crises and appalling human rights
violations resulted from those causes.
While discussing the increasingly complex
dynamics that affect contemporary conflicts, we
should be careful to avoid misinterpretations and
generalizations that might be detrimental to the
coherence, effectiveness and legitimacy of the United
Nations. In particular while debating the means to
implement new concepts like sustaining peace, we
must be cautious in avoiding attempts to securitize the
development agenda.
Climate change, international migration, population
growth, food insecurity and other sustainable
development issues do not constitute threats to
international peace and security nor are they root causes
of conflicts per se. Latin America and the Caribbean,
a region that historically faces such challenges but is
not in conflict, is a clear example of that. This is why
such phenomena should remain within the purview of
the appropriate multilateral bodies with the adequate
legal mandates and technical expertise. The most
efficient way to meet these development challenges
is to allocate the necessary resources to tackle them,
including through technology transfer, technical
cooperation and humanitarian assistance, as well as
through the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
Among the threat multipliers mentioned in the
concept note, we should include the misjudgments
that gave rise to decisions authorizing the use of force
since they unilaterally create or intensify humanitarian
emergencies as the cases of Libya, Syria and Yemen
attest. In this regard, Brazil highlights the need to
enhance the mechanisms of accountability pertaining to
the use of force under the authorization of the Council,
and even more so in the absence of such permission.
Priority should always be given to the peaceful
resolution of conflicts. We support the SecretaryGeneral’s call for a surge in diplomacy today and a leap
in conflict prevention for tomorrow.
In practice, successful peacekeeping operations
demonstrate the potential for a constructive
relationship between security and development. The
recent experience of the United Nations in Haiti is a
positive example, as rightly pointed out in the concept
note. Brazil was proud to play a significant role in those
successful peacekeeping efforts.

17-4531939/67

S/PV.8144

Maintenance of international peace and security

Brazil believes the Security Council would benefit
from strengthening its engagement with other United
Nations entities and agencies that have a role to play
in formulating strategies for preventing and resolving
conflicts. In this respect, the Peacebuilding Commission
stands out for its bridging role, as recognized by the
twin sustaining peace resolutions (Security Council
resolution 2282 (2016) and General Assembly resolution
70/262).
Finally, a reformed Security Council, with a more
democratic composition, a wider membership among
developing countries and more transparent working
methods, would increase its effectiveness in facing
the complex challenges to international peace and
security. By more accurately reflecting the realities
of the twenty-first century and including more diverse
perspectives on present problems, it would preserve the
legitimacy and credibility of the United Nations and the
multilateral system as a whole, allowing us to address
the true root causes of contemporary conflicts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia.
Ms. Radwan (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We appreciate your
wise leadership of its proceedings. I would like to offer
your friendly country our gratitude for the important
role that you have played during your non-permanent
membership in the Security Council, which is almost
at its end.
We would also like to thank the other Member
States that will depart from the Council at the end of
this year, namely, Egypt, Senegal, Italy, Ukraine and
Uruguay. We wish their peoples continued security,
prosperity and good will.
We value today’s initiative to hold an open debate on
dealing with contemporary challenges to international
peace and security. It comes at a time where peace and
security are absent and where we notice an increase in
violent sectarian extremism, with the causes of conflict
and their multipliers spreading throughout the world.
The United Nations and the Security Council now have
a role to play in resolving conflict in a comprehensive
and systematic manner; this role has in fact become
an urgent necessity, which was made very clear in
the briefing this morning by the Secretary-General,
Mr. António Guterres.
40/67

20/12/2017

Mr. President, we agree with you that contemporary
challenges appear to be complex and interlinked.
However, most of the main root causes of conflict arise
from a small number of reasons, including occupation,
attempts to impose sectarian domination, interference
in the internal affairs of other States, oppression,
marginalization and lack of respect for international
agreements, laws and resolutions. These are also the
main causes of the emergence and spread of terrorism.
It is important, therefore, to note what your proposal for
dealing with existing conflicts, namely, that our actions
should arise from a clear understanding of and a strong
intention to address the root causes. Indeed, conflicts
need to be addressed through a comprehensive and
integrated approach.
Israel’s continued occupation of Palestinian land,
its continued aggression against Al-Haram Al-Sharif
and the blessed Al-Aqsa Mosque, and the violence
that is being perpetrated by terrorist settlers are all
clear violations of international law and agreements.
Moreover, they are the main causes of many of the
armed conflicts in the region. The frustration and
deprivation triggered by the occupation are among the
main motivators that terrorists use to propagate their
message. The international community must therefore
must work tirelessly and immediately to fulfil its
obligations to the Palestinian people in order to help
them enjoy their inalienable rights. It must put an end
to the Israeli occupation of Palestine and the rest of the
Arab territories. It must help to establish an independent
Palestinian State with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital,
in accordance with United Nations resolutions and the
Arab Peace Initiative proposed by my country more
than 15 years ago.
Approximately 24 hours ago, on 19 December, the
capital of Saudi Arabia, Riyadh, was the victim of an
attempted attack by a ballistic missile that was wantonly
fired from inside Yemeni territory by the rebel Houthi
militias, with Iran’s backing. The missile was aimed at
residential areas but was intercepted by the Coalition’s
air defence forces. Its wreckage was spread throughout
several residential neighbourhoods, with most of it
falling near a health-care facility without causing any
damage or loss of life. This abominable act of aggression
comes after an attempt on 4 November by rebel Houthi
militias to target King Khalid International Airport in
Riyadh with an Iranian-made ballistic missile.
The actions of the rebel Houthi militias in
threatening the peace and safety of the Kingdom of Saudi
17-45319

20/12/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

Arabia, with the backing of the Iranian Revolutionary
Guard and the terrorist group Hizbullah, are a blatant
violation of the Charter of the United Nations, the
principles of international law and the resolutions of the
Security Council, and may be tantamount to war crimes.
Moreover, they constitute a dangerous escalation that
threatens regional and international peace and security.
The rebel Houthi militias fired 81 ballistic missiles.
It is beyond imagination that a rebel militia has
developed such ballistic capabilities and fired missiles
indiscriminately at civilians without deterrence or
accountability. But the rebel Houthi militias are
doing just that. It is unimaginable that a Member
State could dismiss the resolutions of the Security
Council and violate a sanctions regime, smuggling
weapons and ballistic technology in breach of the
international non-proliferation system, undeterred and
unaccountable. That is the Iranian regime. It is a wellknown and documented fact that the Iranian regime
has transported and smuggled weapons and ballistic
missiles to the rebel outlaw Houthi militias. The Council
has been briefed on the Secretary-General’s reports on
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), which
include substantial, irrefutable evidence of the danger
of the Iranian regime’s violations of international
law, which threaten regional and international peace
and security.
The criminal and terrorist behaviour of the rebel
Houthi militias in the aftermath of the assassination of
the former President of Yemen, Mr. Ali Abdullah Saleh,
comes amid abominable sectarian calls to violence. It
has also been accompanied by raids of homes and the
arrests or detention of thousands of civilians, including
women and children. Yemen has also witnessed
widespread political assassinations that have drenched
the city of Sana’a and other Yemeni cities in blood.
Such behaviour is damning evidence of the sabotaging
role that Iran is playing in Yemen and of its support for
the terrorism of the rebel Houthi militias.
The escalation of violence and terrorism in such
an unprecedented and insane manner in recent days
is a result of an uprising in Sana’a against Iranian
oppression and domination in the wake of the brave
decision made by the leaders of the General People’s
Congress to confront the rebel Houthi militias and
Iran’s destructive plans in Yemen and to return to the
political process.

S/PV. 8144

As the rivers of blood flow in Yemen, we call on
the Security Council to respond to the Yemeni people’s
cry for help and save them from Houthi and Iranian
terrorism. The Security Council should clearly condemn
such terrorist crimes and strive to put an immediate end
them and to hold their perpetrators accountable. We
call on the Security Council to take deterrent measures
against Iran for the support that it continues to lend to
the terrorist actions of the rebel Houthi militias and
their attempts to undermine international and regional
peace and security. We call for the immediate and
full implementation of all relevant Security Council
resolutions. The Security Council must support all
efforts to prevent Iran from smuggling weapons to the
Houthis and all forms of its proscribed support.
It is no secret that sectarian policies and
interference are being carried out in a manner that
creates a distorted image of the situation and enforces
oppressive political domination, all of which create
fertile ground for terrorism, including the cross-border
terrorism that we are witnessing today, as embodied
by Da’esh, Hizbullah and the Iranian Revolutionary
Guard. We believe that attempts to impose domination,
interfere in the internal affairs of States and create and
sow sectarian conflicts, as Iran is attempting to do in
many of the countries of the region, will create fertile
ground for further conflict.
It is important to note that Iran’s aggressive
behaviour is one of the most important causes of
instability in our region and the threat it poses to
international peace and security. Iran’s expansionist
and radical policies, which are based on extremism,
have led to conflict and the continued suffering of
peoples, both in and outside of Iran, and the spread
of terrorism in the region and throughout the world.
Iran shamelessly supports the terrorist actions of the
Iranian Revolutionary Guard, which has been tasked
with exporting radical Iranian ideology and supporting
terrorism across the world, including by its agents, the
terrorists of Hizbullah. Those actions are not limited to
perpetrating war crimes against the Yemeni people, but
include the following few examples.
Iran continues to violate international humanitarian
law, including by perpetrating war crimes and crimes
against humanity in Syria, where it provides financial
support, fighters and training. Iran also supports and
recruits thousands of sectarian militias and foreign
mercenaries from all over the world. Iran continues
to support, fund and arm the terrorist organization

17-4531941/67

S/PV.8144

Maintenance of international peace and security

Hizbullah in Lebanon, Syria and throughout the world.
Iran continues to support sectarian militias in Iraq that
have obstructed the State’s efforts to create unity and
establish peace. Iran continues to meddle in the internal
affairs of many countries of the region, including the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the Kingdom of Bahrain.
We call on Iran to immediately abandon its sectarian
agenda and expansionist policies, end its aggressive
behaviour and abide by the Charter of the United
Nations and all relevant United Nations resolutions.
We call on Iran to concentrate its efforts and resources
on its own development and the welfare of its people,
which is the only way that the countries of the Arabian
Gulf can arrive at an understanding based on peaceful
coexistence, dialogue and mutual respect.
Resolving conflict requires a deep understanding
of the root causes of its conflict. Some parties are
duplicitously masking their political desires behind a
so-called sacred right to breach international laws and
conventions. That is the case with the Israeli occupation
authorities and the mouthpieces of the Iranian regime
and its assistants, Da’esh and Al-Qaida, as well as those
who follow in their footsteps. All of that underlines the
importance of confronting threats to international peace
and security comprehensively and systematically, based
on the rule of law, the implementation of international
resolutions and accountability for all of those who
violate international law.
We would therefore reiterate the need to end the
Israeli occupation and the expansionist behaviour
of the Iranian regime. We must hold those who have
perpetrated war crimes and crimes against humanity
accountable. We also stress the importance of goodneighbourliness and non-interference in the internal
affairs of States, as well as the need to guarantee the
full implementation of United Nations resolutions. If
we do all all that, we will find it easier to resolve the
current crises.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia will
firmly confront any threat to its security and safety,
in accordance with the principles and goals of the
Charter of the United Nations. Moreover, we will work
diligently to contribute to any initiative that would
entrench and enhance peace and stability and achieve
sustainable peace and development in the region and
the world beyond.
42/67

20/12/2017

The President: I remind all speakers to limit their
statements to four minutes so that the Security Council
can carry out its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of Ecuador.
Ms. Yánez Loza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
open debate on challenges to international peace and
security. There is no doubt that the maintenance of
peace and the prevention of conflicts are linked to a
series of indubitably complex factors.
However, this is not a new reality. The United
Nations was created with the objective, among others,
of saving future generations from the scourge of war.
In order to fulfil that goal and the other objectives
outlined in the Preamble to the Charter of the United
Nations, the international community has adopted a
series of proposals that interlink the maintenance of
international peace and security, the peaceful settlement
of disputes, the self-determination of peoples, friendly
coexistence among all nations and the solution of
economic, social, cultural or humanitarian problems
through international cooperation.
Ever since its foundational document was
written, the United Nations has recognized the close
interlinkage of those issues. One of the most obvious
of these is the relationship between disarmament and
development. Article 26 of the Charter expresses the
need to maintain international peace and security
with the least diversion for armaments of the world’s
human and economic resources. The relationship
between disarmament and development was most
clearly expressed at the International Conference on the
Relationship between Disarmament and Development,
convened by the General Assembly in 1987. The
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
commitment to achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals, as well as the vast means required for its
implementation, highlight even further the relationship
between disarmament and development.
Recognizing the complexity of those factors, the
Charter envisages a series of organs with different
competences, albeit with a certain overlap between
them. That is why the General Assembly, the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council, together
with the Secretariat, must work in a coordinated
manner to meet the objectives and purposes of the
Charter, all while respecting the prerogatives of each
organ and avoiding the duplication of functions. There
17-45319

20/12/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

is no doubt that these complex interrelationships
mean that the maintenance of international peace and
security is affected by various issues such as climate
change, respect for human rights and, as we have seen
very recently, the damage caused by natural disasters.
We must nevertheless emphasize how important it is
to ensure that the Security Council avoids making
security issues out of topics that may be current at
any given moment and thereby arrogate to itself
functions that come under the purview of other United
Nations entities.
Article 99 of the Charter of the United Nations
assigns to the Secretary-General the important duty
of informing the Council about threats to international
peace and security. We believe that together with the
appropriate implementation of preventive diplomacy, as
Secretary-General Guterres has advocated, he should
make use of that function when appropriate.
The Secretary-General’s proposed reform of
the peace and security pillar is currently under
discussion in the General Assembly, in accordance
with its responsibilities. Once the Assembly has taken
a final decision, we hope to see all United Nations
bodies working in coordination so that peacekeeping
operations, special political missions and peacebuilding
efforts are effective and efficient. The participation
of women and a focus on gender, whose benefits are
indisputable, should occupy a special place in these
areas, especially peacebuilding.
In conclusion, we believe that we should emphasize
some initiatives that can prove very helpful, such as the
early use of mediation as an effective way to prevent
conflicts, and we therefore commend the SecretaryGeneral’s initiative establishing a High-level Advisory
Board on Mediation, since we support all efforts
towards diplomacy for peace, and especially as they
accord with the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kyrgyzstan.
Mrs. Moldoisaeva (Kyrgyzstan): At the outset,
I would like to thank the Japanese presidency for
convening today’s open debate on addressing the
complex contemporary challenges to international peace
and security in connection with the Security Council’s
agenda item on the maintenance of international peace
and security. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing today. Today’s meeting is

S/PV. 8144

unquestionably important and timely in the light of the
Council’s primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
We should base our efforts to deal with the root
causes of conflicts and the factors that exacerbate
them on a holistic and comprehensive approach. The
Security Council has directed special attention to that
approach with its holding of a series of thematic debates
that demonstrate the relationship between security
and development and the need for an interdisciplinary
approach to conflict resolution, policy, security,
development, human rights and the rule of law.
We agree that the Security Council should play
a vital role in decision-making on peacekeeping and
humanitarian actions, as well as in facilitating efforts
to achieve political solutions. In that regard, Kyrgyzstan
supports efforts to increase the Council’s effectiveness,
a priority task that can be achieved only if members act
with unanimity, respond quickly to emerging threats
to international peace and security and implement
decisions effectively. We must not ignore the importance
of ensuring that other international institutions play an
increasingly active role in solving problems that can lead
to instability and conflict. The United Nations system,
which itself is in need of reform, has an important role
to play in this. In that regard, we support the initiative
of the Secretary-General aimed at reforming the
Organization’s entire peace and security architecture
in order to strengthen our ability to prevent and resolve
conflicts, as well as to improve development reform.
We hope to see strengthened cooperation between the
United Nations and Member States, thereby enhancing
the effectiveness of the United Nations system,
including in the fight against terrorism. We are pleased
that progress has been made in many areas.
In conclusion, we would like to emphasize that
the successful resolution of the challenges we face to
peace and security, conflict resolution and development
issues will depend first and foremost on improving the
effectiveness of the activities of the United Nations and
its entities.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to commend you, Mr. President, for our
brother nation of Japan’s admirable work in presiding
over the Council this month, as well as to thank you
for convening today’s open debate and for the related

17-4531943/67

S/PV.8144

Maintenance of international peace and security

concept note (S/2017/1016, annex). We would also
like to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
We welcome his vision for conflict prevention and
preventive diplomacy.
The challenges to collective security today
are evolving as conflicts are becoming longer and
increasingly complex and terrorism and extremism
persist. That is why we must adopt a comprehensive
approach to promoting international peace and
security. Our shared challenges demand that we all
take a positive approach, engaging in dialogue rather
than confrontation and respecting international law.
Conflict prevention through dialogue is a step towards
establishing international peace and security. Without
that dialogue, conflicts become more complicated and
global instability increases. That is why Qatar believes
that if we are to achieve international peace and
security, we must strengthen our collective prevention
of conflicts, resolving those conflicts and differences
based on Article 33 of the Charter of the United
Nations. My country has always worked actively to
help to resolve conflicts peacefully. We therefore
welcome the Secretary-General’s decision to prioritize
the prevention of conflicts and crises, which bring with
them immense human costs and undermine our ability
to achieve the overall objectives of the United Nations
in the areas of peace, development and human rights,
as the Secretary-General noted in his 17 December
report on reforming the peace and security pillar of
the Organization.
We support the Sustainable Development Goals
and preventive diplomacy, which are also priorities
for the Secretary-General where peace is concerned.
In that regard, we welcome the regional consultations
on sustaining peace in the Middle East to be held on
18 and 19 January 2018 in preparation for the General
Assembly’s high-level meeting on the subject in April.
I am sure that the Council is aware that the major
and complex challenges in the Middle East constitute
a threat to international peace and security. That is
why we must redouble our efforts and our cooperation
with the countries of the region and the international
community in order to resolve these very different
crises and to eradicate terrorism, extremism and other
challenges. Our region is unfortunately dealing with
new crises that undermine stability and international
efforts to establish peace and security in the region
and fight terrorism. In that regard, I should note that
Qatar continues to suffer from the illegal blockade and
44/67

20/12/2017

unilateral measures that are being conducted against it
on baseless pretexts, in violation of international law and
the Charter of the United Nations and to the detriment
of friendly relations among countries. Therefore, all of
the efforts for global peace and security are undermined
as well.
Major challenges and emerging crises have arisen,
such as those related to cybersecurity. Indeed, the
Internet is being used and abused in order to undermine
international peace and security. The world has seen
major violations of many organizations in our region.
As the Secretary-General noted in his first statement
to the General Assembly (A/72/PV.1, cyberwarfare
is a reality. We cannot ignore it, and it is growing. It
undermines relations among countries, bodies and
systems in the modern world. We are the victims of
this piracy. That is why we reiterate that the absence
of a regulatory body holding perpetrators accountable
is a problem. It undermines international peace and
security and is a source of concern for the international
community. We need audacious, far-reaching and strict
measures. The perpetrators of these crimes must be
held accountable.
Qatar reiterates that it stands ready to participate
in any international joint efforts toend this scourge in
the area of cybersecurity. In that regard, my delegation
reiterates its support for the conclusions of the Group
of Governmental Experts on Information Security
and its assessment of the importance of strengthening
international cooperation, particularly in the area
of cybersecurity.
In conclusion, we reiterate our commitment to
working effectively and actively to support international
efforts to counter complex contemporary challenges.
That is the best way to implement the goals and objective
of the Charter of the United Nations and to help the
Council maintain international peace and security.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to commend the delegation of Japan for holding
this important open debate and for submitting a concept
note (S/2017/1016) on the topic. We are also grateful to
the Secretary-General for his statement.
The concept note raises a fundamental question as
to how the Security Council can better address today’s
complex contemporary threats to international peace
and security in a holistic and comprehensive manner.
As the Secretary-General points out in his most recent
annual report on the work of the Organization:
17-45319

20/12/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

“The United Nations was established to prevent
war and human suffering by binding us together
through a common rule-based international order.
Today that order is laden with contradictory trends,
and a clear assessment must be made if we are going
to address these challenges effectively.”(A/72/1,
para. 2)
The objective of ensuring a peaceful, just and
prosperous world is hardly achievable if the universally
recognized fundamental values, norms and principles
are overtly disregarded or misinterpreted, conditioned
and implemented with reservations in order to
whitewash aggressions and other illegal actions. At a
time of increased brutality of armed conflicts, with the
highest level of forced displacement, growing terrorist
and separatist threats, attempts to inculcate enmity and
hatred and instigate wars, more concerted actions and
synergy are required at all levels to end the conflicts
of today and direct greater attention to preventing the
conflicts of tomorrow.
Azerbaijan fully supports the Secretary-General’s
determination to genuinely contribute to preventing
wars and sustaining peace and his efforts to conduct
the reform process. We welcome the adoption by the
General Assembly earlier today of resolution 72/199, on
restructuring of the United Nations peace and security
architecture, as an important step forward in further
strengthening the role, capacity, effectiveness and
efficiency of the Organization.
First and foremost, all States must strictly comply
with their international obligations, particularly those
relating to respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States and inviolability of their international
borders. Those fundamental principles are constituents
of the common rule-based international order; they
are universally binding and apply to all situations
and conflicts, whatever their distinct root causes and
nature. Peace and good-neighbourly relations, based
on full respect for the aforementioned principles, are
necessary prerequisites for economic cooperation. In the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the Heads
of State and Government and High Representatives
stated, in particular, that there could be no sustainable
development without peace and no peace without
sustainable development.
Special attention should be given to the
implementation of resolutions adopted by the principal
organs of the United Nations, in particular those

S/PV. 8144

relating to the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict
prevention and resolution. Needless to say, the lack of
proper attention of the Security Council to the apparent
disregard of its resolutions containing binding demands
cannot constitute an accepted practice of the Council’s
working methods. It is intolerable that armed aggression
against sovereign States, the resulting military
occupation of their territories and deliberate actions
aimed at changing their demographic composition
and cultural character of the seized areas along racial,
ethnic or religious lines continue, notwithstanding the
Security Council resolutions.
It is obvious that no peace settlement can be
reached that is inconsistent with international law. It is
important that conflict prevention efforts and conflict
settlement frameworks and mechanisms not be used as
a tool for entrenching the situations achieved as a result
of the unlawful use of force, war crimes, crimes against
humanity, acts of genocide and ethnic cleansing. The
fact that illegal situations continue because of political
circumstances does not mean that they are thereby
rendered legal or can go on forever.
Serious breaches should give rise to special
consequences, which include, inter alia, duties of States
to cooperate in order to bring to an end a serious breach
by lawful means, not to recognize as lawful a situation
created by such a breach, nor render aid or assistance
in maintaining that situation. Furthermore, apart from
preventive diplomacy efforts and the expeditious
peaceful settlement of disputes and conflicts, the most
effective deterrent is, undoubtedly, ensuring a speedy
end to impunity.
Azerbaijan’s consistent position with regard to the
topic under consideration is well known and derives
from its practical experience of facing continued armed
aggression, foreign military occupation and ethnic
cleansing and from its keen interest in contributing
to the achievement of sustainable peace in our region
and worldwide.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that, in
order to better address today’s complex contemporary
threats to international peace and security and ensure
the effectiveness of commonly agreed strategies to that
end, we should, first and foremost, uphold fundamental
principles and adhere to the uniform application of
international law.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Kuwait.

17-4531945/67

S/PV.8144

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we commend Japan’s presidency of the Council
this month and Italy’s presidency last month. We highly
value the efforts made to convene this meeting to
discuss a very important topic that is considered to be
an issue of major concern for all Member States, under
the theme “Maintenance of international peace and
security: addressing complex contemporary challenges
to international peace and security”. We thank you,
Sir, for the concept note (S/2017/1016, annex) that was
prepared for today’s meeting. Finally, I would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his valuable briefing
earlier today.
The United Nations was formed 72 years ago
with the purpose of saving future generations from
the scourge of war, and its main role, according to the
first paragraph of the Charter of the United Nations,
is the maintenance of international peace and security,
which is ensured by preventing conflict. The Security
Council is tasked with that primary responsibility,
in accordance with Chapter V of the Charter, which
contains other relevant Articles and Chapters. Chapter
VI, in particular, includes provisions that authorize
the Security Council to perform its role. However, the
Security Council’s ability to carry out its responsibilities
varies and, in some instances, those responsibilities
and powers are not fully exercised.
Kuwait’s foreign policy is primarily founded on
resolving conflicts peacefully and diplomatically, as
our history shows over time. We support efforts at
mediation and the peaceful resolution of conflicts,
as well as efforts to build national and regional
capabilities, enhance peace and stability, achieve
development and uphold human rights, especially in
areas of tension that are at risk of slipping into conflict.
We reiterate Kuwait’s deep conviction that development
and human rights are intrinsically linked to security,
and we support efforts to achieve the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development in order to leave no one
behind and address one of the main reasons for conflict
throughout the world.
We also underscore that the Secretary-General’s
vision for enhancing and entrenching the main pillars
of the United Nations — peace, security, human
rights and development — will undoubtedly lead to
sustaining peace. That requires complete harmony
and coordination of effort among the relevant organs
in order to address any threats to international peace
and security. We must acknowledge the urgency of
46/67

20/12/2017

enhancing the relationship between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations — in line
with today’s reality where the problems we face are
extremely complex and intertwined, in a way that no
single country can resolve them without cooperation
and assistance from others.
We look forward to enhancing regional strategic
cooperation and partnerships with other organizations,
especially the League of Arab States and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation. We also agree
with the Secretary-General’s description of the new
challenges facing international peace and security and
the need to prevent conflict, given the complexity of the
challenges and the need for multidisciplinary responses
to them.
We therefore reiterate the need to hold regional
dialogues and enhance the exchange of expertise in
arriving at a common regional approach to resolving
conflicts and other issues pertaining to regional and
international peace and security. That should entail
the continued involvement of regional and subregional
organizations in the peaceful settlement of conflicts,
including through prevention, confidence-building,
mediation and good offices.
Peacebuilding and peacemaking are one of the
main pillars of maintaining of international peace
and security, which underscores the importance
of upholding and strengthening that dimension in
peacekeeping operations and instituting the necessary
reforms to enable peacekeeping operations to fully
fulfil their mandates.
I agree with the Secretary-General’s vision for
reforming the peace and security pillar of the United
Nations, which is considered an important step towards
enhancing the effectiveness of that pillar. I also
welcome the General Assembly’s adoption this morning
of resolution 72/199, on restructuring that pillar so
that the Secretary-General can begin to implement
his vision in order that the United Nations becomes
more transparent, effective, accountable and capable of
upholding the responsibilities entrusted to it.
While we look forward to our membership of the
Security Council starting next year, we would like
to take this opportunity to express our appreciation
to Japan, Italy, Senegal, Uruguay, Ukraine and, last
but not least, sisterly Egypt. We thank them for their
outstanding role and the valuable, effective contribution
17-45319

20/12/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

that they have made to the Security Council during
their membership.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Viet Nam.
Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam): First of all, allow
me to thank the Japanese presidency for taking the
initiative to convene this open debate on the very
important topic of addressing complex contemporary
challenges to international peace and security. I also
thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive and
informative briefing.
The United Nations was established to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war and
to promote better standards of life for people. Despite
remarkable progress over the decades, the Security
Council — with its primary responsibility to maintain
peace and security — is now facing great challenges in
responding to regional and global crises, preventing the
risk of the outbreak of conflicts and addressing critical
issues, including, inter alia, with regrd to nuclear
weapons, other weapons of mass destruction, nuclear
proliferation, inter-communal conflicts, territorial
disputes, arms races, massive flows of refugees and
migrants, terrorism and violent extremism.
Overcoming those challenges requires comprehensive
approaches, broader perspectives and new partnerships
at all levels. We acknowledge the broad support for the
Secretary-General’s reform agenda, which reflects our
desire for an effective United Nations and its enhanced
role in promoting multilateralism in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and international law and
as a platform for delivering our common commitments.
In that context, my delegation welcomes this morning’s
consensus adoption of General Assembly resolution
72/199, on restructuring the United Nations peace
and security pillar. Please allow me to make some
observations in that regard.
First, there is an urgent need for a humancentred and whole-of-pillar approach to implement
a comprehensive and long-term strategy on conflict
prevention and sustaining peace. For such a strategy
to work, we must make full use of the United Nations
existing tools on preventive diplomacy and mediation
and encourage the engagement of the entire United
Nations system, particularly the Security Council, and
other stakeholders. The United Nations should therefore
play its coordinating role in enhancing partnerships
with the regional and subregional organizations.

S/PV. 8144

Secondly, the Security Council has a vital role in
peacekeeping decisions. It is important to establish
clearly that any peacekeeping operation must be
deployed in conformity with the basic principles
of United Nations peacekeeping operations and
within existing resources. Peacekeeping must also be
coupled with peacebuilding, with a view to achieving
sustainable peace, by ensuring smoother transitions
and better exit strategies to assist conflict-affected
States in addressing root causes, strengthening national
capacities and advancing socioeconomic development.
Thirdly, we stress the urgency of the need for
Security Council unity during the decision-making
process and collective action to security challenges. We
also believe firmly that reforming the Security Council
is a fundamental key to successful and meaningful
United Nations reform. We support a future Security
Council expanded in both categories and reformed in
its working methods, so as to make it more democratic,
transparent, effective, representative and accountable.
As in other regions, prosperity, stability and
security in the Asia-Pacific region are bound together
by traditional and emerging non-traditional security
challenges that are interlinked, while posing a serious
threat to international peace and security, hampering
economic and social development and negatively
affecting peoples’ lives in the region. We have been
following the current escalation of tensions on the
Korean peninsula with grave concern. Viet Nam
advocates the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula
by peaceful means and urges all the parties concerned
to exercise self-restraint and strictly abide by the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
As a responsible and proactive Member, has always
been committed to the maintenance and consolidation
of peace, security and stability in the region. The
situation in the East Sea — also known as the South
China Sea — is in our common interests and a matter
of concern. Together with countries of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations, we call on all the parties
concerned to exercise self-restraint and settle disputes
in the East Sea by peaceful means and in accordance
with international law, including the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, fully respect
diplomatic and legal processes and continuously
implement the Declaration on the Conduct of Parties
in the South China Sea. With the recent adoption of the
code of conduct for the South China Sea, it is high time to
intensify further efforts to conclude the code of conduct

17-4531947/67

S/PV.8144

Maintenance of international peace and security

in a timely, substantive manner, in order to achieve an
effective, feasible and legally binding instrument.
Let me conclude by reiterating that, in these days
of complexity and uncertainty, we must learn from and
build on what we have achieved to overcome the threats
and challenges we face, to ensure that the Organization
has the structure and tools necessary to deliver on
its mandates. Achieving a sustainable, peaceful and
prosperous future for all will depend upon our collective
action and united determination — where there is a
will, there is a way.

20/12/2017

and restructuring of the peace and security pillar, as
set out in his report contained in document A/72/525,
which the General Assembly just endorsed today (see
A/72/PV.74).

Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank Japan for convening this open
debate on a topic of great relevance to the United
Nations, given that the world is at a critical crossroads
where international peace and security are under threat.

When it comes to maintaining peace, the primary
responsibility of the United Nations, and of the Council
in particular, is to invest in the security, peace and
prosperity of everyone in every country throughout the
world without exception. In its broadest sense, today
more than ever, the work of peacekeeping operations
should harmoniously contribute to the Organization’s
other agendas aimed at fostering the nexus between
peace and security, development and human rights. The
United Nations must ensure the primacy of resolving
conflicts through political means and demonstrate
flexibility, swiftness and effectiveness in the face of
warning signs of crises or the outbreak or exacerbation
of conflicts — and in general in addressing specific
changing needs on the ground.

In recent years, Security Council members have
discussed the need to address the root causes and factors
that exacerbate conflicts, through a comprehensive and
wide-ranging approach. The paradigm shift we are
pursuing together at the United Nations — the focus we
are placing on prevention with sustainable peace and
development as its cornerstone — is the right path. The
three review processes carried out in 2015 — namely,
on United Nations peacekeeping operations, the
peacebuilding architecture and the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) — produced coinciding results.
We must pay attention to the root causes of conflicts;
we must prevent them from emerging or recurring;
and we must find political solutions. The three reviews
also identified the need to correct the fragmentation
in the United Nations system, as it is limiting the
Organization’s ability to respond to armed conflicts in
a timely and flexible manner by making use of the tools
at its disposal.

As Mexico has stated on previous occasions, the
Council must make sustaining peace a reality in its
area of competence; the Council should help to channel
the Organization’s efforts to address the root causes of
conflicts in order to prevent them from erupting and
work with other entities, such as the Peacebuilding
Commission, the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council, to resolve conflicts in an effective
and lasting way and in a spirit of transparency and
accountability. That is the major challenge. As the
Chair of the Group of Friends of Sustaining Peace,
Mexico reiterates that the effective development and
implementation of this concept will reorient the work
of the United Nations to make it more coherent and
cross-cutting across all its organs, leading us to a more
sophisticated and holistic vision of peace by building
capacities and tools that allow us to address conflicts
in all their phases.

The identical resolutions — Security Council
resolution 2282 (2016) and General Assembly resolution
70/262 — defined sustaining peace as a goal and as a
process that encompasses addressing the root causes of
conflicts, focusing on containing the spread of conflict
and increasing the normative and operational coherence
within the United Nations system and among all its
bodies. We welcome the fact that the recommendations
arising from the three reviews as well as the content
of those two resolutions were taken up by SecretaryGeneral António Guterres in his proposal for the reform

We must combat various phenomena in the
disturbing international context in which we live
that, far from seeking peace, serve to fuel crises and
conflicts. We must reject hate speech that stigmatizes
people on the basis of their racial, religious or national
origin, which is causing so much harm throughout the
world. We must condemn the irresponsible flows of
weapons and the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons, which are tools of death and destabilization,
as well as criminals’ instruments of power, and profit
only a few.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.

48/67

17-45319

20/12/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

We cannot forget that the threat of the use of force
is prohibited in the foundational Charter of the United
Nations. The threat of the use of force is even more
serious when it is accompanied by the use of weapons
of mass destruction, in particular nuclear weapons.
Mexico reiterates the responsibility and obligation
we all have to forge a robust and efficient system of
global governance, based on international law and
cooperation, and not on the destabilizing threat of the
use of weapons.
It is time to renew our commitment to multilateralism
and to the United Nations. We must reaffirm our trust in
the Organization and shape it so that it is best placed to
protect the highest interests of all humankind, because
that is the reason it was created.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Mlynár (Slovakia): First of all, I join
other delegations in most sincerely thanking you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate towards
the end of your Security Council presidency. I wish
you, Sir, every success in your responsibilities as
Council President.
This debate is important, as it significantly
contributes to building a common understanding and the
required consensus about the need for a comprehensive
and concerted approach to the maintenance of
international peace and security. This meeting is also
timely in the light of our ongoing constructive dialogue
on the reform of the United Nations. The General
Assembly took an important step today in adopting
resolution 72/199, which will help the SecretaryGeneral to take his reform proposal for the United
Nations peace and security pillar to the next phase and
allow him to further elaborate his reform proposals in
that area. Adopted by consensus, the resolution reflects
our collective determination to revitalize the United
Nations to better serve the needs of peoples around the
world. Together with the Permanent Representative of
Rwanda, I was honoured to co-facilitate the process of
informal consultations on the drafting of the resolution
in an open, transparent and inclusive manner, with the
aim of ensuring Member State ownership and support
for that important endeavour, while building trust and
consensus. That is something that I believe we all need,
both in the Council and in the Assembly.

S/PV. 8144

Slovakia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union. I would like to
add a few points in my national capacity.
The Security Council, as the primary United
Nations organ responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security, plays a leading
role in shaping United Nations action in this area.
As pointed out in your concept note (S/2017/1016,
annex), Sir, in recent years the Security Council has
repeatedly discussed and expressed its views on a
wide range of non-traditional — put better perhaps as
“cross-cutting” — threats, including those concerning
public health, the exploitation of natural resources,
climate change, transnational crime, poverty
and underdevelopment, and forced displacement.
We very much welcome today’s focus on those
important linkages.
First of all, we think that the Security Council
should deal with these issues in a more systematic and
targeted fashion, including by exploring and identifying
the linkages, synergies and correlations among them.
Each and every conflict scenario is different: there
is no one-size-fits-all. However, we should strive to
identify and address the root causes and drivers of
conflict that hinder the path to peaceful, durable and
sustainable solutions.
The increasing impact of those cross-cutting
challenges to international peace and stability calls
for an updating of the tools at the Council’s disposal in
order to better integrate diplomatic, economic, military
and capacity-building responses in conflict resolution
and peacebuilding endeavours. In that context, we
firmly believe that both the Security Council and the
General Assembly should take greater, more systematic
and more in-depth advantage of the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
The Security Council should furthermore promote
greater integration, coherence and partnerships
among the activities of the United Nations missions,
the United Nations system and non-United Nations
actors, including, of course, the relevant regional and
subregional organizations, in particular the African
Union, the European Union, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the
Economic Community of West African States and
others. Those partnerships are truly essential and their
importance cannot be overemphasized. We have seen
that ourselves, for example in November 2014 when we

17-4531949/67

S/PV.8144

Maintenance of international peace and security

partnered with the United Nations, the African Union,
the European Union and others in organizing the first
Africa Forum on Security Sector Reform, which was
a very positive contribution to debating some of the
cross-cutting issues, such as security sector reform
(SSR), justice, the rule of law and other related issues.
In that context, we are committed to actively promoting
even closer partnerships. Given that Slovakia will hold
the chairmanship of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe in 2019, we are particularly
looking at how to further enhance the partnership
between the United Nations and the OSCE.
Last but not least, the Security Council should
enhance its preventive and mitigating role — one of its
most significant responsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations. There are opportunities to sharpen and
expand the preventive capacities of the United Nations.
There is a need for deeper integration and coordination
in preventive endeavours, including among the relevant
components of the United Nations system.
I have already mentioned the issue of security
sector reform, which I would also like to highlight in
the context of the link to sustaining peace, which is also
reflected in resolution 2151 (2014). The Group of Friends
of Security Sector Reform, which is co-chaired by South
Africa and my country, is planning to hold a high-level
round table, proposed to take place on 23 April 2018,
that will contribute to the sustaining peace activities
of the General Assembly in that month, and will seek
to build on the important insights of previous events
and relevant recently developed policy and research in
the areas of sustaining peace, prevention and security
sector reform. To highlight just three key areas of our
focus in that regard, I would mention genuine national
ownership, effective partnerships and addressing SSR
and different types of related linkages, primarily as
political challenges and avoiding other, more technical,
approaches.
Although the primary responsibility in peace and
security efforts lies with national authorities, the United
Nations and the broader international community
must effectively support those activities. We have a
collective responsibility to make the United Nations
more effective and efficient in addressing the real and
immediate needs of populations on the ground. In that
context, the debate you have convened today, Sir, and
the specific linkages that we are focusing on show a
very timely and practical approach.
50/67

20/12/2017

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ghana.
Mrs. Pobee (Ghana): Ghana joins previous
speakers in expressing its appreciation to the Japanese
presidency of the Security Council for convening this
open debate on addressing complex contemporary
challenges to international peace and security, and to
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing
on the subject.
As rightly pointed out in the concept note prepared
for this debate (S/2017/1016, annex), our world today is
witnessing the negative influence of complex driving
factors that pose a serious challenge to the ability of
the United Nations to fulfil its primary responsibility
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
My delegation therefore welcomes the convening of
this open debate, which follows a series of thematic
debates held at the Security Council in recent years on
topics including the interlinkages between security and
development, addressing the root causes of conflict,
peace and security in Africa — which specifically
focused on the impact of climate change on security in
the Sahel region — conflict prevention and sustaining
peace and other themes touching on human rights,
economic and social advancement and gender and youth
perspectives on peace and security. The cumulative
outcome of those debates has served to reinforce the
validity of this statement by the Secretary-General
from his report entitled “In larger freedom: towards
development, security and human rights for all”:
“we will not enjoy development without security,
we will not enjoy security without development,
and we will not enjoy either without respect for
human rights.” (A/59/2005, para. 17)
There is no denying that compelling arguments
have been made for a broader conceptualization
of what constitutes a peaceful and secure world.
The need for holistic and integrated approaches to
addressing contemporary challenges to international
peace and security has also been duly acknowledged
by the membership of the United Nations. Resolutions
2282 (2016) and 70/262 — on the issue of sustaining
peace — which were simultaneously adopted by the
Security Council and General Assembly, respectively,
signalled the normative and conceptual shift towards
a more proactive cross-pillar and cross-sectoral
approach and strategy to preventing conflict. What
remains outstanding is our ability to define effective
17-45319

20/12/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

system-wide mechanisms that will put the strategy
into operation and foster better interaction between
the Security Council and other organs, agencies
and bodies of the United Nations in order to address
those challenges.
While the causes of crises are closely interlinked,
our responses so far remain fragmented. In today’s
globalized and interdependent world, the challenges
to international peace and security, which range from
the effects of climate change and environmental
degradation to infectious diseases and pandemics,
terrorism, transnational organized crime — including
drugs and human trafficking — nuclear proliferation,
the proliferation of small arms and weapons, genocide
and human rights violations, all require coherent
responses across pillars from all parts of the United
Nations system and from Member States.
Since the factors affecting one country quickly take
on regional and transnational overtones and have the
effect of destabilizing adjoining countries and regions,
our failure to effectively handle conflict multipliers
will continue to result in the cycle of prolonged and
aggravated conflicts, as well as compounding the plight
of peoples suffering in conflict situations and lowering
the threshold for conflict. It is therefore important to
work across the United Nations system and to break
down silos across the pillars of development, peace
and security, and human rights in order to meet those
challenges. The Security Council would no doubt
benefit from enhanced collaboration in that regard. By
working closely with the relevant organs and bodies
of the United Nations, the Council’s capacity to play a
preventive and mitigating role will be enhanced through
the exchange of formal documentation or structured
dialogues on the security implications of developmentrelated issues, including those issues that may trigger
violence, crises or conflict.
My delegation is also of the view that these
discussions should be well-situated in the current
process to reform the peace and security architecture
of the United Nations. One of the key elements in
the Secretary-General’s reform measures within this
pillar is the role envisaged for the United Nations
System Chief Executives Board for Coordination
and strengthening the Organization’s prevention
and peacebuilding work. As we await the SecretaryGeneral’s comprehensive report on the proposed reform
measures in the coming months, this might perhaps be
an opportune time to further explore how the envisaged

S/PV. 8144

restructuring and new organizational culture will lead
to enhanced collaboration with the Security Council for
a more coherent and integrated approach to addressing
contemporary challenges to global peace and security.
My delegation wishes to reiterate the need for strategic
and inclusive partnerships to be nurtured and further
developed with regional bodies, non-governmental
organizations and civil society groups that have a stake
in peace. There is much to be gained from increased
support and collaboration between the Security Council
and regional and subregional organizations, such as the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States, in developing appropriate human and
institutional capacities towards our collective efforts
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
The United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency
Response, which Ghana had the honour of hosting, and
the inception of the African-led International Support
Mission to Mali, which was the precursor to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, were two partnerships that really
made an impact in ameliorating crises situations.
The United Nations has acknowledged the
importance of taking a comprehensive and integrated
approach to complex challenges to international peace
and security in today’s world. A number of relevant
reports by high-level panels have presented us with
recommendations on how the Organization must work
to address the multifaceted and complex nature of
existing and emerging threats to international peace
and security. We have an opportunity now to apply
those far-reaching recommendations in the work of the
Organization, together with the much-needed reform of
the peace and security architecture.
Conflict prevention and the culture of prevention
need to be adopted not only by the United Nations but
by all Member States. Peacebuilding and sustaining
peace go hand in hand with Sustainable Development
Goal 16 — promoting just, peaceful and inclusive
societies. It is Ghana’s view that effective strategies
across the entire United Nations system to support the
implementation of that goal will ultimately lead to the
effective maintenance of global peace and security for
all humankind.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Ms. Sapag Muñoz de la Peña (Chile) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank Japan for having convened today’s

17-4531951/67

S/PV.8144

Maintenance of international peace and security

open debate and for the excellent work that it has carried
out as a member of the Security Council over the past
two years. We are also grateful to the Secretary-General
for his briefing this morning and for his commitment to
prevention in the work of the Organization.
The complex current challenges to international
peace and security compel us to adopt a multidimensional
approach to respond effectively and sustainably to the
threats we face, including those of a non-State and
non-military nature, while addressing their various
dimensions and underlying causes that may have a
local, regional or global impact.
In January 2015, Chile organized an open debate
(see S/PV.7361) of the Security Council on inclusive
development, inspired by our belief that peace is
a prerequisite for the promotion and protection of
fundamental rights and that, in turn, inclusiveness,
social harmony and sustainable development are vital
if peace is to be attained and maintained. This is a
refrain that we heard from many speakers today. There
was widespread agreement at that meeting that security
and development are closely interrelated and mutually
reinforcing, and that they are crucial if we are to
deliver lasting peace. The meeting also underscored the
importance of inclusion as a vehicle for political stability,
democratic governance, development and preserving
the territorial integrity of States. These in turn are
bulwarks against conflict and important for sustaining
peace. The presidential statement (S/PRST/2015/3)
adopted on that occasion answers some of the issues
that we are considering in today’s debate, and we would
urge everyone to draw upon it when it comes to forging
responses to conflict multipliers referred to in Japan’s
concept note ( S/2017/1016, annex).
The Council has gradually integrated an inclusive
approach to addressing specific groups and issues
that were once considered to be solely the purview
of development. The Council has developed a
multidimensional and systemic regulatory framework
on complex challenges in conflict and post-conflict
solutions, in conformity with resolutions 2242 (2015),
2250 (2015), 2253 (2015), 2282 (2016), which the
representative of Ghana just mentioned, 2286 (2015),
2332 (2016) and 2347 (2017), which, inter alia, address
the concerns of women, youth, human trafficking,
health care, civil aviation and cultural heritage.
With regard to peacekeeping operations, we would
draw attention to the transition from the United Nations
52/67

20/12/2017

Stabilization Mission in Haiti to the format of the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti.
The design of this transfer included a strong element
of national ownership bringing together the work of
the Security Council and numerous other stakeholders,
including the Group of Friends of Haiti. This served
as an example of how States that are not members of
the Council can contribute to solutions. The United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, intended
to help safeguard the comprehensive peace agreement
in that country, is a model of how positive interaction
with the agencies of the United Nations system and the
support of the Peacebuilding Fund can reap dividends.
With regard to the Council’s working methods, we
would recommend that the following measures be taken
to overcome the current fragmentation when it comes
to addressing the complex challenges to peace and
security — as we are urged to do by the concept note.
First, we need to strengthen the role of elected
members when it comes to drafting resolutions, and
preferably to pursue the drafting in interregional groups,
as was the case with resolution 2286 (2016), when we
also engaged in close consultation with civil society.
Second, we need to make better use of open debates
as a format, selecting topics that would encourage
a contributory analysis by the entire membership. In
order to identify areas of convergence, we recommend
that the presidency encourage interventions at open
debates by like-minded and interregional groups, such
as the Human Security Network and the Group of
Friends on Children and Armed Conflict. The Chairs
of those groups or others could also be consulted when
it comes to preparing the concept notes.
Third, we would suggest raising further awareness
of Arria Formula meetings by circulating a summary
to all Member States detailing proposed and
actual outcomes.
Fourth, we should integrate the work of subsidiary
bodies and the reports of the group of expert of sanctions
committees in the work of the Security Council when
it is considering the design of its products, in particular
with regard to transitions in missions.
Fifth, we would strengthen the ties between the
Security Council and the Chairs of the Peacebuilding
Commission configurations, while making greater use
of the Commission’s advisory role and inviting it to
participate in consultations and in Council field visits.
17-45319

20/12/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

Sixth, we would make use of the Peacebuilding Fund
to address gaps and to overcome the fragmentation in
sustaining peace. We should deepen the interaction with
the Fund, taking advantage of its advice to missions, its
interaction with local civil society and its collaboration
with regard to the empowerment of women and youth.
Seventh, as already pointed out here, it is important
to improve interaction with regional and subregional
organizations, as is increasing coherence in the work of
peacekeeping operations. By way of example, I would
mention the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire,
which successfully completed its mandate on 30 June,
and the United Nations Mission in Liberia. A similar
example pertains to the setting up of special missions,
such as the United Nations Mission for the Emergency
Response to Ebola, to which the representative of Ghana
referred, to deal with the Ebola virus emergency.
In conclusion, the new threats of intra-State
and trans-national conflict posed by various
phenomena — such as terrorism, organized crime, drug
trafficking, money laundering, weapons trafficking,
human trafficking, natural disasters, the spread of
disease and environmental degradation — require
holistic approaches, which we hope will be front and
centre in any future reconfiguration of the peace and
security architecture. We hope that the reform under
way will contribute to such a response. Only by acting
in that way can we effectively contribute to conflict
prevention and to peacebuilding in the world, which are
the founding objectives of this United Nations organ.
We would like to warmly thank the delegation of
Japan for its excellent work. Since our statement was
about working methods, we would also like to take
this opportunity to highlight the Working Methods
Handbook, prepared by Japan and known as the Green
Book, and commend the delegation on that initiative.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Castañeda Solares (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to start by thanking you,
Mr. President, and the delegation of Japan for organizing
this open debate and for presenting the concept note
(S/2017/1016, annex) to guide the discussion at this
meeting. We greatly appreciate that the presidency of the
Security Council proposed discussing this important and
crucial issue on addressing the complex contemporary
challenges to international peace and security, which
is the primary responsibility of the Security Council.

S/PV. 8144

My delegation also takes this opportunity to thank
the Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres, for
his briefing.
Since its founding, the United Nations has striven
to prevent, mitigate and resolve conflicts by means of a
series of measures, from support for respect of human
rights and inclusive development to prevention, the
establishment of peacekeeping and peacebuilding and,
in the longer term, recovery and reconstruction, in order
to implement the founding principles of the Charter of
the United Nations. For that reason, the Security Council
plays a fundamental role in addressing the numerous
conflicts by faciliting peace processes, as was the case
in my country with the United Nations Verification
Mission in Guatemala, which demonstrated that, with
efforts and political will, it is possible to work to
strengthen peace processes and democracy and, in that
way, to promote development and sustainable peace. At
the time, the Mission played an important role in the
phase following the peace process.
It is important to be clear that the withdrawal of
peacekeeping missions or special political missions
does not imply the end of peace processes or of United
Nations participation in building lasting peace in host
countries. On the contrary, as the Organization and
its Member States, we must improve and strengthen
the role of the United Nations system in supporting
the efforts of Governments and civil society to
implement the various peace agreements in order to
promote a smoother transition from peacekeeping and
peacebuilding operations, as appropriate, towards a
sustainable peace.
As a follow-up to the different collective calls for
an urgent change in the way in which we understand
peace and security mechanisms, Guatemala views with
optimism the various steps taken by Secretary-General
Guterres to promote and to discuss an internal review
in order to strengthen and improve the implementation
of the peace and security pillar entrusted to
the Organization.
My delegation is firmly convinced that prevention
and mediation must return to the forefront of the efforts
of the Organization. It is important to recall what the
Secretary-General has said in various forums, namely,
that perhaps the best prevention tool we have is the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the treaties
to which it gave rise. The rights established in the
Declaration not only identify many of the root causes

17-4531953/67

S/PV.8144

Maintenance of international peace and security

of conflict but also provide genuine solutions through
real change on the ground. At the same time, the early
participation of the Security Council, when it is united
and decisive, can effectively apply political and other
resources to deteriorating situations in the field.
The Council must also bear in mind that the lessons
learned from failures, as well as from best practices,
serve as to guide our future work. The Human Rights
Council, the International Criminal Court and the
special tribunals have a relevant role to play in that
regard in the pursuit of sustainable peace.
Guatemala’s commitment to multilateralism and
to the United Nations is an axiom of our foreign
policy. Our strong multilateral mission is based on
our conviction that global challenges, such as the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
fight against poverty, the promotion of sustainable
development, the promotion of the rule of law and
the pursuit of sustainable peace, can be effectively
addressed only in the context of comprehensive and
consistent multilateralism.
In conclusion, we therefore believe that it is
necessary that the Security Council join the efforts led
by the Secretary-General with regard to institutional
reforms in the area of peace
​​
and security and be able
to work together in order to ensure a multilateral
Organization that can solve the challenges on the
ground and adapt to the various international contexts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Botswana.
Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): My delegation joins
other representatives in sincerely congratulating Japan
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of December. We also express
our appreciation to you, Mr. President, and to your
delegation for the initiative to convene this very
important debate today. You will agree with me that we
cannot exhaust this debate today given the limited time
at our disposal, as it is a subject that involves a wide
range of cross-cutting issues that are characterized
by volatility, uncertainty, complexity and ambiguity.
Furthermore, those scenarios occur within the context
of complex interdependency, often with far-reaching
implications for humankind.
In discussing contemporary threats to peace and
security, I wish to highlight some of the issues facing
us, which include, but are not limited to, international
54/67

20/12/2017

terrorism,
cyberwarfare,
human
trafficking,
transnational organized crimes, the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons and environmental challenges,
including trans-border crime. Those issues take place
in every corner of the world and their repercussions are
felt by many, irrespective of where the incident may
have occurred. No country is ever truly immune to the
direct or spillover effects of such phenomena. Those
constantly growing trends of interconnected instability
and insecurity pose a serious threat to international
peace and security. It is therefore necessary for us
to act collectively, as members of the international
community, to address them.
As envisaged in its Charter, the United Nations has
remained a cornerstone of international and multilateral
efforts to maintain international peace and security. At
the same time, Article 24 of the Charter specifically
mandates the Security Council to play a leading role
in realizing that objective. In that undertaking, it
is incumbent upon the Council to act proactively to
identify and address security challenges before they
deteriorate into full-blown conflicts. In that regard, it
is imperative for the Council to deploy all the necessary
tools at its disposal to effectively deal with emerging
threats. It is also important that the United Nations act
as a whole and as a coordinated entity in order to derive
the maximum benefit from the utilization of its wide
range of assets.
However, we cannot place the burden of
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security solely on the United Nations. My
delegation is of the view that continental bodies such as
the European Union, the African Union, the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation, among others, should play a
critical role in safeguarding international peace and
security within their respective regions. Because they
are on the ground, they are better placed in terms of
time and space to appreciate and address security
challenges as they arise. Coordination and cooperation
at this level are vital, as they greatly enhance the global
reach of the United Nations in response to complex
emergencies and threats.
The existence of partnerships such as those
between the African Union and the European Union,
and the United Nations and the African Union, is also
a welcome development. It is incumbent on all of us
to ensure their effectiveness and fitness for the people.
Our enhanced engagement and coordination with these
17-45319

20/12/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

organizations, and their engagement and coordination
with one another, will go a long way to addressing
conflict and security challenges.
The role of subregional entities such as Southern
African Development Community (SADC), the
Economic Community of West African States and the
East African Community, among others, cannot be
overemphasized. They are critical building blocks for
the continent’s peace and security architecture. From
my own experience at SADC, we have structures — such
as the SADC Organ on Politics, Defence and Security
Cooperation and the Southern African Regional Police
Chiefs Cooperation Organization — that are tasked
with addressing peace and security challenges in the
subregion. They play a key role in conflict resolution
and management and preventive diplomacy, as well as
in negotiations and the coordination of deployments of
SADC military forces within the region.
I would be remiss if I did not highlight the
importance of individual countries’ contributions
to international peace and security, particularly
in addressing contemporary security challenges.
Individual countries have a responsibility to ensure
sound and effective institutions of governance, social
cohesion, citizen economic empowerment and a whole
range of other issues geared to improving the wellbeing of their citizens. While we advocate for the free
flow of goods and services and the free movement
of people across international boundaries, we are
cognizant of our collective accountability for effective
border management controls, which help to reduce the
incidence of crime and insecurity and thereby limit
the prevalence and scope of contemporary peace and
security threats.
Finally, Botswana attaches great importance and
value to sustainable peace in countries in our region
and beyond. We maintain that peace and security are
fundamental prerequisites for promoting economic
and social development and long-term political
stability. Against that backdrop, we must be steadfast
in our commitment to the principles of democracy,
accountable and inclusive governance, respect for the
rule of law and the promotion and protection of human
rights for all. With that, Mr. President, I thank you very
much for the opportunity you have given me.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.

S/PV. 8144

Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): The
Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes the initiative of
the Japanese presidency in convening this open debate.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
excellent briefing earlier today.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself with
the statement delivered earlier by the observer of the
European Union.
I would like to make one important point today,
which is about our firm belief that only through an
integrated approach and prompt action will we be able
to prevent conflict and sustain peace. The challenges
of the twenty-first century transcend borders. Conflicts
are compounded and the causes of conflict are
plentiful, as the President explained in his concept note
(see S/2017/1016, annex). Such compounded conflicts
demand an integrated approach on the part of the United
Nations, other international and regional organizations,
and Governments.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands has first-hand
experience with integrated approaches, whether in
Afghanistan, Mali, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo or elsewhere. We have learned, sometimes the
hard way, about the connection between root causes
and ensuing conflict. We value the importance of
partners working together while appreciating one
another’s comparative advantages and recognizing the
importance of working within their given mandates.
We therefore support the Secretary-General’s vision
for enhancing the performance of the Secretariat’s
pillars in an interconnected way. Only if we succeed
in working across these pillars and avoiding isolated
actions will we be able to address conflicts effectively.
That requires a comprehensive approach encompassing
peace, human rights and development.
Formulating an integrated response to conflicts is
not enough. The Security Council should also devote
more attention to preventing conflicts both from
occurring in the first place and from recurring in postconflict situations. That means addressing some of the
underlying causes of conflict, even if it is not the sole
or even primary responsibility of the Security Council
to deal with issues such as poverty reduction, human
rights and climate change. Where it is appropriate and
needed, the Security Council has a role to play in raising
awareness and a responsibility to call for integrated
action. The Council’s involvement in the situation in

17-4531955/67

S/PV.8144

Maintenance of international peace and security

the Gambia earlier this year was timely and successful,
and helped to preserve the country’s sovereignty.
Proper prevention also requires proper earlywarning tools for identifying emerging threats, as well
as the instruments needed to take action. Depending
on the specific situation, the Secretary-General can
rely on various parts of the United Nations system in
New York and Geneva, and in the field, to inform the
Council about what is going on.
For some issues, however, a clear focal point is still
lacking. One example is climate and security. At the
Planetary Security Conference 2017 held last week in
The Hague, Mr. Hassan Janabi, the Iraqi Minister of
Water Resources, said that his country, which is now
beginning a process of stabilization, was going through
additional painful cultural change. That change has the
potential to form the basis for new tensions, despite the
fact that it has little to do with conventional threats from
armed groups or terrorist organizations. Dwindling
water resources, due to climate change-driven drought
and related changes in rainfall patterns, will become
a major challenge. Mr. Janabi said that the more than
100,000 Iraqis who had been fighting the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant are now out of work. They will
go back to their farms, but the water shortage will make
it hard. Given the growing risk that climate change
may increase tensions within and between nations,
it is important to ensure that there is an institutional
home for this topic at the United Nations, a place where
such risks can be assessed and addressed. During
Italy’s Arria Formula meeting on 15 December, the
Netherlands, together with Sweden and other countries,
called for the establishment of such an institutional
home, and does so again today.
A final example of the importance of early-warning
tools can be seen when efforts are being made to prevent
humanitarian crises from lapsing into wider instability
and conflict. In such circumstances, reliable, real-time
data is needed to feed into early-warning and earlyaction capabilities. In that respect, I am pleased to be
able to inform the Council that in two days’ time the
Secretary-General will officially open the new United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) Centre for Humanitarian Data in The
Hague. By collecting, sharing and standardizing data,
OCHA and its partners are working together to improve
the lives of millions of people affected by conflict and
disaster and thereby avoid renewed conflict.
56/67

20/12/2017

In conclusion, we are well aware of the fact that
not all the elements relevant to this topic fall within the
Council’s mandate, but the Kingdom of the Netherlands
wants to underline the importance of prevention and
early warning when addressing complex security
challenges and will continue to do so during its Security
Council membership in 2018.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Mrs. Blokar Drobič (Slovenia): I would like to
start by thanking Japan for taking the initiative to
convene this open debate, as well as for preparing a very
comprehensive concept note (see S/2017/1016, annex).
Slovenia would like to align itself with the
statement delivered earlier by the delegation of the
European Union and would like to add a few remarks in
our national capacity.
Long-standing and newly emerging security
challenges are not only significantly impacting
international peace and security; they are also
challenging our fundamental values and principles as
enshrined in the United Nations Charter.
Slovenia welcomes the considerable engagement
in conflict-prevention issues at the United Nations and
the fact that the surge in diplomacy for peace is one of
the key priorities of the Secretary-General. We support
the proposals outlined aimed at better addressing the
changing security environment, including by bridging
the gaps between United Nations political affairs
and peacekeeping.
We agree that any reform measures need to
acknowledge the interconnectedness of the three
pillars of the United Nations and create greater synergy
among them. In this context, Slovenia believes that the
Security Council needs to better integrate peacekeeping
with development and humanitarian efforts. The United
Nations, together with its Member States, regional
organizations, non-governmental organizations and
civil-society actors, must do more to support fragile
countries, especially by helping them to enhance their
society’s resilience and security architecture.
We recognize the need to better utilize mediation
efforts, including through regional organizations and
local communities. Ending impunity for the most
serious international crimes is equally crucial. We
stress the importance of effective cooperation with the
17-45319

20/12/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

International Criminal Court and call upon States that
have not yet done so to ratify the Rome Statute.
We have noted increased political will to consider
water scarcity as a potential driver of conflict,
as also shown during the Security Council open
debate organized by Senegal in November last year
(see S/PV.7818).
Allow me to recall the highly relevant work of the
Global High-level Panel on Water and Peace, which is
chaired by the former President of Slovenia, Mr. Danilo
Türk. The Panel launched its report, together with a
range of concrete recommendations, on preventing
water-related conflict and leveraging water as an
instrument of peace. In addition, regional cooperation
is vital in removing the issue of water as a potential
cause of conflicts or as a risk amplifier.
Slovenia’s positive experience in the region of the
Western Balkans demonstrates how water can become a
source of stability and cooperation. We believe that the
successful practices in the region, for example in the
Sava River Basin, could be used as a model of waterrelated cooperation elsewhere in the world.
An important aspect of conflict prevention is also
a global commitment to ending hunger. In this regard,
Slovenia is raising awareness of the key role of bees
and other pollinators in global food security, and we
are particularly pleased that just today the General
Assembly adopted resolution 72/211, on World Bee Day.
Slovenia will continue to support activities aimed
at raising awareness of the various aspects and wide
range of contemporary challenges to international
peace and security. We hope that the Security Council
will continue to address these challenges, including in
its adopted documents.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Greece.
Mrs. Theofili (Greece): I would like first of all to
thank the Japanese presidency of the Security Council
for having organized this open debate on addressing
complex contemporary challenges to international
peace and security. It is indeed a crucial issue that
is at the core of the primary responsibility of the
Security Council to seek ways to better address today’s
complex threats to international peace and security in
a holistic manner.

S/PV. 8144

There is no doubt that today we are confronted
with an increasing number of conflicts and challenges
around the world. Crisis situations have a tendency
to last longer and have become increasingly complex
and volatile. Tackling global insecurity is a pressing
imperative, and our priority should be to pursue political
solutions in the context of a comprehensive approach to
the various challenges by combining and strengthening
our endeavours for peace and security, human rights
and sustainable development.
In this context, we would mention in particular the
adoption of the resolution on the restructuring of the
United Nations peace and security pillar (resolution
72/199). These reforms will enable the United Nations
system to better address the root causes of conflict,
focus on prevention and fully utilize the potential of
development programmes in securing long-term postconflict stability.
When it comes to regional challenges, Greece,
situated close to what continues to be an extremely
turbulent region, including the Middle East and parts
of North Africa, is a pillar of stability in the region and
spares no effort in engaging, in a practical and principled
manner, in promoting dialogue and cooperation.
In this context, we have recently undertaken a
series of initiatives, including the Rhodes Conference
for Stability and Security and the Athens Conference
on Religious and Cultural Pluralism and Peaceful
Coexistence in the Middle East, as well as the newly
established Asian Civilizations Dialogue Forum.
In particular, the Rhodes Conference focuses on a
positive agenda of cooperation between the countries
of the Eastern Mediterranean, with the aim of fostering
stability and security in the region. At the same time, the
second Athens Conference on Religious and Cultural
Pluralism and Peaceful Coexistence in the Middle
East focused on the future challenges that religious
pluralism faces in the region and proposed possible
fields where religious coexistence and pluralism could
be further developed.
At the global level, the Ancient Civilizations
Forum emphasize the need to enhance dialogue among
civilizations through continuous communication and
cooperation in order to promote understanding and
tolerance among cultures and peoples.
I would also like to mention that in the framework
of promoting peace and stability in our neighbourhood
and the broader region of the Eastern Mediterranean,

17-4531957/67

S/PV.8144

Maintenance of international peace and security

we have established a number of trilateral themes of
cooperation that include many countries in the region.
Our main objective is to develop a positive, broader and
manifold agenda of cooperation in international affairs
focusing on synergies and joint activities, especially
through culture as one of the main drivers of soft power
in international relations and other constructive areas
of cooperation such as trade, education and research.
Dealing with security challenges in another region
of our neighbourhood, the Balkans, is vital, and we
have therefore established trilateral and quadrilateral
themes of cooperation with significant actors in the
region in order to promote common priorities and
strengthen cooperation on a number of issues in line
with European democratic values and principles.
An important thematic challenge affecting my
country directly is, of course, migration. Greece
considers migration as a global phenomenon and a
challenge that demands a global response and action.
As a front-line country, Greece encourages the
streamlining and development of migration governance
within the United Nations system by making use of
existing forums while achieving coherence through
the various global and regional procedures. In this
respect, we have engaged constructively in the process
of adopting a global compact for migration, wishing to
see the cooperation among countries of origin, transit
and destination further strengthened.
At the same time, we should follow closely
challenges such as climate change, as discussed at the
Arria Formula meeting held last Friday. In this context,
we would like to commend the role of France and the
success of the recent One Planet Summit.
I wish to assure the Council that Greece will lend its
unfailing support as the United Nations endeavours to
rise to the Herculean task of creating a more peaceful,
sustainable and prosperous future, securing justice and
solidarity for all, especially for the coming generations,
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.
Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia): I thank you, Sir,
for convening this open debate and for the excellent
concept note (S/2017/1016, annex).
Again, we strongly welcome and support the
prominence of production and sustaining peace as
a policy priority and as an overarching goal of the
United Nations system. Armenia has been a consistent
58/67

20/12/2017

promoter of that concept. We are convinced that conflict
situations are detectable at a considerably early phase
because conflicts are, in essence, a reaction to the
persistent injustice, discrimination and denial of rights
that are often the root causes of a conflict.
The human rights aspect in conflict prevention
should therefore receive a prominent focus across the
entire United Nations system. All human rights are a
function of security. Early prevention rests on the premise
of detecting, recognizing and acting upon deteriorating
human rights situations. The irresponsibility of hate
speech, intolerance, xenophobia, racial and ethnic
profiling, glorification of hate crimes, especially
those led and encouraged by political leaders within a
State, should be a concern to the entire international
community and serve as a clear early-warning sign of
potential conflict and atrocity crimes.
Asymmetric threats of transnational terrorism
represent a common challenge for international peace
and security. We welcome the creation of the Office of
Counter-Terrorism. Terrorism cannot and should not be
associated with any religion, nationality or civilization.
At the same time, we should acknowledge evidence
pointing at extremists and terrorists targeting specific
communities based on their religion or ethnicity.
The atrocities perpetrated by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL), Al-Qaida and associated groups,
individuals, undertakings and entities, particularly
against ethnic and religious groups, are premeditated
and grave identity-based crimes on a massive scale. The
suffering of Yazidis, Christians and other ethnic and
religious minorities in groups, including, for example,
the indiscriminate attacks and forced displacement of
the ethnic Armenian populations of the Syrian cities of
Kesab and Deir ez-Zor must not remain unaddressed.
Armenia has been continually providing humanitarian
aid to the Syrian population to alleviate their suffering
and hardships. Furthermore, Armenia has sheltered
around 22,000 refugees from Syria and has been
implementing policies aimed at facilitating housing,
education, health care, social welfare, jobs, business
opportunities and other measures for the integration in
the new homeland.
Cyberterrorism and cybercrimes represent a
qualitatively new and significant threat to national
and international security. The evolving cyberthreats
and their unprecedented destructive capacity compel
enhanced and extensive cooperation involving not just
17-45319

20/12/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

competent Government agencies, but also the private
sector and all other stakeholders.
The regional context of conflict prevention requires
continued broad recognition and support. Division of
labour, coordination and non-duplication of efforts and
activities are the building blocks of effective utilization
of the capacity of regional organizations in conflict
prevention and conflict resolution.
Armenia consistently welcomes the support of the
international community of the United Nations and
of the Secretary-General given to the Minsk Group
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) co-Chairs in the peaceful resolution of
Nagorno Karabakh conflict. In their latest statement of
7 December, the heads of delegation of the OSCE Minsk
Group co-Chair countries reiterated their commitment
to mediating a peaceful settlement of the conflict based
on the core principles of non-use of force or threat
of force, territorial integrity and the equal rights and
self-determination of peoples. They also welcomed
the resumption of the high-level dialogue between
the Presidents of Armenia and Azerbaijan in Geneva
on 16 October, as well as the meeting of the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of Armenia and Azerbaijan on
6 December in Vienna under the auspices of the OSCE
Minsk Group co-Chairs. They also urged acceptance
of the expansion of the existing office of the Personal
Representative of the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office and
the implementation of the decisions adopted during
the summit in Vienna and St. Petersburg in 2016.
Armenia remains fully committed to negotiations for
the exclusively peaceful settlement of the Nagorno
Karabakh conflict within the internationally agreed
format of the OSCE Minsk Group co-Chairmanship
and based on the agreed basic principles and main
elements presented as an integrated whole.
In conclusion, Armenia remains a committed
contributor to United-Nations-led peace operations. A
platoon of 32 Armenian peacekeepers is deployed in
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. Armenia
also supports the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali by contributing
one staff officer. Armenia steadily develops its
peacekeeping capabilities in accordance with the pledge
made by its President at the 2015 world leaders summit
on United Nations peacekeeping to establish a special
explosive ordnance disposal, counter-improvisedexplosive-device company, as well as level-II field
hospital. Armenia has also joined as a founding State

S/PV. 8144

the Vancouver communiqué and Vancouver principles
on peacekeeping and the prevention of the recruitment
and use of child soldiers adopted on 14 November on the
margins of the United Nations Peacekeeping Defence
Ministerial Conference. Within the framework of its
partnership with NATO, the Armenian peacekeeping
contingent is also engaged in peace support missions in
Kosovo and Afghanistan.
We recognize and support the efforts of the
Secretary-General to enhance the effectiveness of the
architecture and the working methods of the peace
and security pillar of the Secretariat. The complex and
diverse challenge to peace and security require a holistic
approach and alignment of all three pillars of peace and
security, development and human rights, both in terms
of policy formulation and operational activities.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Yardley (Australia): I thank the presidency
of Japan for convening this debate, as well as the
Secretary-General for his remarks.
Long-term, comprehensive solutions to conflict
and crises remain elusive. Addressing increasingly
complex contemporary challenges to international
peace and security requires change in our approach.
As we advance reform of the United Nations system
and adapt our tools and policies, we must adopt new
ways of working. Today, I will address three areas that
Australia sees as particularly important: a focus on
prevention and sustaining peace, women’s participation
in peacebuilding, and current efforts towards United
Nations reform.
First, prevention approaches must become
embedded across all United Nations operations and
programmes, and across pillars, in line with the
resolutions on sustaining peace. This cannot be led
only from the top; all staff across the Organization need
to show leadership to embed these approaches, as well
as be empowered to do so. Planning and programming
must account for, adapt and respond to conflict
risks. Respect for human rights, as well as integrated
humanitarian and development programmes, are core
to these efforts.
Secondly, our efforts to support peaceful societies
must be inclusive. We welcome the joint United NationsWorld Bank study on conflict prevention and support
its focus on how successful prevention is inclusive,

17-4531959/67

S/PV.8144

Maintenance of international peace and security

based on broad coalitions reaching into civil society
and the private sector.
There is clear evidence that the meaningful
participation of women in peace processes leads to
more durable outcomes. In our efforts to address
complex security challenges and sustain peace, we
must continue to strive to secure women’s full political
and economic participation. We acknowledge the
practical steps undertaken by the Department of
Political Affairs, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Peacebuilding Support Office in
2017 to improve women’s participation in peacebuilding
and peacekeeping.
Finally, Australia strongly supports the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts towards reform, including reform of
the peace and security pillar of the United Nations,
and we are pleased that these reforms have advanced
to the next stage today. The Security Council’s ongoing
support for the peace and security pillar reforms is
vital. To overcome fragmentation, empower the field
and improve United Nations effectiveness in assisting
efforts to sustain peace, these reforms are needed.
We must improve coordination and cooperation
between departments and agencies, between field and
Headquarters, and between policy and programmes.
Cultural, process and structural reforms based on the
sustaining peace resolutions are all crucial. Our reform
objective should be to deliver a nimble, innovative
United Nations that engages with conflict risk,
rather than merely to bring about structural changes
at Headquarters.
We must prioritize prevention and inclusive
peacebuilding to improve our ability to address
contemporary conflict issues. Australia strongly
support the Secretary-General’s plans to take forward
an ambitious reform agenda. Our words are pointing us
in the right direction but we need our actions to follow.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I should like to thank you, Sir, for having
convened and selected the topic of today’s debate
at a time when the Organization is going through
important change.
I should also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his statement, which confirms his unwavering
commitment to the cause of peace. I would like to
60/67

20/12/2017

reassure him and the Security Council of Morocco’s
full support in all their efforts to promote international
peace and security.
The growing number and complexity, changing
nature and disastrous consequences of conflicts force
us to reconsider the way in which our Organization
tackles them. It is clear that the three pillars of the
United Nations are interlinked. It is also recognized
that mediation and conflict prevention are underutilized
tools that undoubtedly hold significant promise. Taking
such an approach is necessary to realize the objective
of lasting peace, which is not a new aim but one that is
gaining ground daily. It is in this regard that we welcome
the reform process under way, including its important
focus on the need for a comprehensive approach. We
hope that the review process under way will not only
enable the Organization to work in a more effective
way, but will find a new way of working with greater
transparency and enhanced collaboration with Member
States and troop-contributing countries.
Some speakers have referred in detail to the various
underlying causes of conflicts and emerging challenges
to peace and security in the world. I will not therefore
cover the same terrain, but would like to focus on the
following five points.
First, Morocco is very active with regard to the
impact of climate change on peace. The most optimistic
projections predict major shocks that will deeply
affect our countries — desertification, migration and
coastal erosion, to name just a few. In this regard, we
welcome that the Security Council attaches growing
importance to these issues. We were among the
organizers of the Arria Formula meeting held last
Friday on the topic “Preparing for security implications
of rising temperatures”.
Secondly, terrorism threatens international
peace and security in multiple operational contexts.
As experience has shown, peacekeeping operations
cannot fight against this scourge, especially if they
remain constrained within conventional peacekeeping
mandates. The question facing us now is how we should
respond to and address this scourge. The report of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see
S/2015/446) recognized that peacekeeping operations
were not conceived for counter-terrorism activities and
that multinational forces would be more appropriate. In
this regard, Member States called for such operations
to be established when needed. The Group of Five for
17-45319

20/12/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

the Sahel received the political support of the Security
Council. We must now ensure that it receives all the
logistical and financial support it requires.
Thirdly, other drivers of conflict, such as climate
change and transnational organized crime, demand
a tailored, holistic and coordinated response that
is inclusive, taking into account the specific needs
of young people and women. Multi-dimensional
peacekeeping missions have always been equipped with
comprehensive mandates theoretically to ensure that
they could tackle the root causes of conflict. It remains
to be seen, however, whether such multidimensional
missions have the material and human resources to
achieve their challenging tasks. Unfortunately, we must
recognize that to date this has not been the case.
Fourthly, mission planning remains a serious
problem, while it is difficult to grasp how after more
than 70 years of experience in peacekeeping that
we find ourselves in situations where a significant
proportion, if not the majority, of troops deployed to
the field lack adequate and appropriate uniform and
equipment. We must go beyond political calculations
and commit in good faith because we are all ultimately
working towards peace and stability in the world.
Fifth, coordination is another major factor.
Conflicts are no longer solved by a single actor as in
the past. Effective coordination among various United
Nations entities present on the ground is essential,
finally making the one United Nations concept a
reality. There is likewise a need to coordinate other
actors — regional and subregional organizations,
international financial institutions, and various
bilateral and multilateral partners. In certain cases,
there are more than 10 actors, each with its own agenda.
To address this situation, the United Nations must be
able to take the lead since it is the Organization with
greatest legitimacy and expertise to take on the role of
coordinator or, if necessary, designate a co-lead where
this would help settle the conflict.
In conclusion, I
two recommendations.

should

like

to

share

First, to deal with the recurrent problem of
resourcing shortfalls, it would be useful to be able to
quantify in financial terms the various tasks foreseen in
mandates. A detailed briefing on the costs of the various
aspects of a mandate before and during negotiations on
its renewal would undoubtedly be extremely helpful in
ensuring mandates are coherent and realistic. Secondly,

S/PV. 8144

troop-contributing countries have a gained experience
and knowledge of conflicts that is clearly useful but
which remains to date lamentably unutilized. We are
working closely with all actors involved to revitalize
triangular cooperation, which we are convinced
has immense potential. We welcome the interest of
certain Council members in this issue and hope that
significant changes can be made to the way in which
the Security Council, troop-contributing countries and
the Secretariat interact.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Lebanon.
Mr. Abbas (Lebanon): Lebanon welcomes your
introduction, Sir, of this important topic for open
debate at the Security Council this month. Conflicts
within and among countries have proliferated in the
recent decades in many parts of the world. We agree
with the notion advanced in the concept note for this
meeting that conflicts have become more complex in
the modern world, aggravated by driving factors such
as climate change, underdevelopment, poverty, forced
displacement, cyberwarfare and espionage, terrorism
and violent extremism. However, this should not
distract us from addressing the root causes of conflict,
many of which have become protracted, such as foreign
occupation and aggression.
Today Lebanon faces many of these complex
humanitarian, economic, social, political and security
challenges. In addition to the almost-daily Israeli
violations of our sovereignty and of resolution 1701
(2006), which continue to threaten Lebanon’s stability
and security, since 2011 Lebanon has been host to more
than 1.2 million refugees from neighbouring Syria,
adding to more than 400,000 Palestinian refugees
who have come to the country at different intervals
since 1948.
This has compounded many of the challenges facing
my country and led to a significant decrease in the
country’s gross domestic product (GDP) growth, higher
unemployment and poverty levels, and overstretched
infrastructure in multiple factors, including health,
education, housing, electricity, waters, sanitation
and transport. The World Bank estimates that the
cumulative cost Lebanon’s economy of the ongoing
crisis in Syria stood in 2015 at around $18 billion in
terms of lower GDP growth in addition to $4.2 billion
in terms of lower revenues. Furthermore, Lebanon is at
the forefront of the global fight against terrorism — a

17-4531961/67

S/PV.8144

Maintenance of international peace and security

challenging menace that has undermined the security
and stability of my country for many years, but against
which the Lebanese Government and people have stood
firm and steadfast and were able to achieve a series of
resounding victories last summer.
The United Nations has been an important partner
in those efforts, whether through the United Nations
Interim Force, the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, the
United Nations Development Programme or other
entities of the United Nations development system.
In conclusion, we believe that it is worth sharing
the experience of Lebanon in that context. In October
2016, the Government of Lebanon and the United
Nations system signed a pioneering United Nations
strategic framework for the period 2017-2020 to replace
the previous United Nations Development Assistance
Framework. The new framework recognizes that, in view
of the multi-dimensional challenges facing Lebanon and
the multiple mandates under which the United Nations
operates in the country, the Organization must follow a
whole-of-Lebanon approach, which would leverage and
integrate the diverse expertise, capacities and resources
of the United Nations to support the Government of
Lebanon in meeting its priorities and managing security,
political, governance and socioeconomic challenges to
stability. That approach also aims to support Lebanon
on the path to longer-term sustainable development, in
accordance with the vision, principles and goals of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nepal.
Mr. Kafle (Nepal): I have the honour to convey
Nepal’s appreciation to the Japanese presidency of the
Security Council for convening today’s timely and
important initiative. I also thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive briefing and his emphasis on
peace diplomacy.
We live in a world where everything but human
beings travels freely without any geographical
hindrances. We have witnessed the movement of
information, cultures, ideas and capital. which has
made a positive contribution to our quality of life.
However, contemporary, non-traditional sources of
complex challenges, such as climate change, pandemics,
transnational organized crime, drug trafficking,
trafficking in persons, and natural disasters, among
62/67

20/12/2017

others, have transcended geographical boundaries with
severe ramifications.
Similarly, tensions, deepening inequalities within
societies, political exclusion and poor governance
have also been found to fuel intraState conflicts. The
factors spurring conflicts within a country also have
the capacity to exacerbate regional and global peace
and security. Moreover, such factors are interdependent
and interlinked as in a domino effect. Complex and
multi-layered threats require a multidisciplinary
response. It is also true that no one country can deal
with such threats on its own. Only concerted and
comprehensive efforts at the regional and global levels
can meaningfully address those challenges.
Studies
have
established
the
hazardous
consequences of climate change and their security and
economic implications. Climate change and natural
disasters will increase the number of environmental
migrants. It is the shared responsibility of all States
Members of the United Nations to ensure a secure
future for environmental migrants. My country,
Nepal, is one of the hardest hit in that regard. Effects
have included a shifting snow-line, floods caused by
glacial-lake outbursts, the extinction of rare flora and
fauna, and excessive pressure on fresh water and food
security. The Security Council has the duty to play its
part in holistically addressing climate change, with a
strong political message showing its commitment.
The Council members that contribute to
greenhouse-gas emissions must lead others by example.
It is equally important to garner political support for
ongoing climate-change frameworks and to enhance
international cooperation for capacity-building in the
least developed countries, which are most vulnerable to
climate change.
Apart from environmental threats, human
activities continue to add to the list of emerging
challenges. Terrorism, organized crime, separatism
and drug trafficking, among others, are often used as
tools by some groups for their benefit, jeopardizing the
safety and security of others. People are themselves
the ultimate source of many of the threats. We must
therefore focus on empowerment through education, as
well as on non-military tools of conflict prevention and
resolution, as envisaged in Chapter VI of the Charter
of the United Nations. Preventive measures, such as
early-warning systems, mediation and peacebuilding
17-45319

20/12/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

efforts, are effective in preventing local tensions from
escalating into large-scale conflicts.
As a country that provides troops to peacekeeping
missions, Nepal believes that as peacekeepers carry
out their mandate to protect civilians, their safety
and security must also be ensured. The Council could
increase its engagement with other intergovernmental
organizations and relevant regional institutions in
that endeavour. Similarly, national capacities could be
enhanced to ensure the rule of law and the provision of
public services.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that the
ultimate focus should be on protecting people from
emerging threats by empowering them with resources
and capacities, resolving local conflicts and making
full use of indigenous wisdom, and putting people first
in conflict prevention and resolution, as well as by
engaging all three pillars of the United Nations — peace,
development and human rights.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representatives of the Maldives.
Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): At the outset, I would
like to thank Japan, which holds the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of December, for
convening today’s debate on the theme “Maintenance
of international peace and security: addressing
complex contemporary challenges to international
peace and security”.
The debate is most timely, for it provides an
important opportunity to examine emerging challenges,
in particular the non-traditional security threats to
international peace and stability. As we approach the
end of the year, it is important to recognize that 2017
was an extraordinary year in the history of the United
Nations. In its resolution 2349 (2017) of 31 March, the
Security Council recognizes that climate change has
an adverse impact on security. With that resolution,
we have surpassed the tipping point in the debate on
climate change and security — the moment at which
we put behind us the question of whether or not climate
change poses a security threat.
It is now time for the Council and the General
Assembly to clearly spell out how the United Nations
can take practical measures in responding to climate
change and other non-traditional security threats,
which could include requesting the Secretary-General
to prepare regular periodic assessment reports that

S/PV. 8144

could serve as a type of early-warning mechanism
about both proximate and long-term threats. The reports
should be presented to both the General Assembly and
the Security Council, and should contain cutting-edge
analysis about the threats that a particular region or
country faces.
The Security Council and the General Assembly
could also consider examining the feasibility of
establishing a regular coordination mechanism,
through which all the principal bodies of the United
Nations and the relevant United Nations agencies,
such as the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change or the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, could contribute to the design of conflict
prevention, peacemaking and peacekeeping operations.
Another encouraging development in 2017 was
the Council’s increasingly progressive approach to
its conceptualization of security. That approach was
most visible in the Council’s decision to redefine the
mandate of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti in order to assist the Government of that country
to maintain order and uphold the rule of law. Strong
institutions are the key to preventing internal conflicts
and to resolving ongoing conflicts. As such, one way
in which peacekeeping operations can help countries to
create peace is by assisting in the establishment of a set
of institutions that can deliver peace dividends to every
corner of the country. Small States are most vulnerable
to non-traditional and emergency security threats. That
is a fact that the General Assembly has long recognized
in, for instance. its resolution 44/51 of 8 December
1989, which the Maldives sponsored.
As the Security Council takes a more progressive
view in considering such threats, it is absolutely
necessary that small States, particularly the small
island developing States (SIDS), have a seat on the
Council. Yet, over the past 72 years, only eight SIDS
have served on the Council. The Maldives is determined
to change that and give a voice to SIDS. We hope to get
elected to the Council for the term 2019-2020 in order
to represent SIDS on the Council, contribute to the
shaping of decisions that affect the smallest members of
the international system and help the Council to forge
meaningful partnerships that can result in the crafting
of shared solutions for a shared destiny.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tuvalu.

17-4531963/67

S/PV.8144

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Laloniu (Tuvalu): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the 12 Pacific small island
developing States (SIDS). At the outset, I would like to
thank the delegation of Japan for holding this important
debate on addressing complex contemporary challenges
to international peace and security.
The Pacific SIDS firmly believe that climate
change is the most pressing contemporary security
challenge facing the world today. In 2009, our group
led a campaign in the General Assembly to address
the security implications of climate change, which
culminated in the unanimous adoption of General
Assembly resolution 63/281. That resolution called on
all relevant organs of the United Nations to intensify
their efforts in that area.
That was followed by a landmark report (A/64/350)
by former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon in 2009,
entitled, “Climate change and its possible security
implications”, in which he labelled climate change as
a threat multiplier and identified numerous channels,
such as food and water insecurity, natural resource
scarcity, exposure to extreme events and human
migration, through which climate change has the
potential to destabilize societies.
The Pacific SIDS are encouraged that this once
highly sensitive issue has been taken up on many
occasions in this Chamber. It is now well understood
that the impacts of climate change are happening faster
and are more severe than most scientists had previously
projected, which has profound implications for human
societies. The threat from climate change is facing us
now. We are already seeing dangerous impacts on our
countries and communities, with the most vulnerable
among us bearing the largest burden.
With new statistical methods at their disposal,
scientists are finding the finger prints of climate change
on many extreme events. In the Pacific, Nauru and our
Micronesian neighbours have been hit with historic
droughts in recent years. Record-breaking cyclones
have become an annual occurrence, even in places
where they were previously quite rare. And let us never
forget the three hurricanes this year that devastated
the homes of so many of our small island brothers and
sisters in the Caribbean.
In 2016, more than 24 million people were displaced
owing to storms, extreme heat and floods. That is three
times more than the number of people fleeing conflicts,
as reported by the United Nations Development
64/67

20/12/2017

Programme. In fact, the 10 largest displacement events
in 2016 were climate-related. Moreover, with the
sea level rising, many millions more will be forced
to migrate.
The actions agreed to under the Paris Agreement
on Climate Change notwithstanding, climate change is
not going away. There will be no return to a normal
climate in our lifetimes. In fact, the situation will
continue to deteriorate, even if we achieve our global
goals. We are operating in the context of a progressively
worsening baseline, with extreme events projected
to occur at a frequency and magnitude that is well
outside the historical experience of our countries and
communities. We must also take seriously the potential
for abrupt climate change — a rapid and irreversible
state change caused by the crossing of climate tipping
points. The spectacular collapse of Arctic sea ice over
the past decade and a half will probably not be the last
example of that phenomenon.
However, it is the response of human systems to
those impacts that is potentially the most dangerous
and least understood. Industrial production, transport,
food and water distribution, and finance are complex
and interrelated systems, which, as we saw during the
global economic crisis, are often quite fragile. It is
not just environmental tipping points that we need to
worry about.
The Japanese presidency has asked for proposals
on how the United Nations system can better address
complex contemporary challenges to international
peace and security. The Pacific SIDS are calling for the
Secretary-General to appoint a special representative
on climate and security. We think that such a special
representative, supported by a well-resourced office,
could help us manage climate risks more effectively.
Such a post should have three initial responsibilities:
first, to provide an update on the former SecretaryGeneral’s 2009 report on the security implications of
climate change, based on our latest understanding,
including an assessment of the capacity of the United
Nations system to respond to the security implications
of climate change; secondly, to produce a new report,
in cooperation with the relevant scientific bodies, that
identifies and analyses potentially dangerous tipping
points at the nexus of climate and security, along with
recommendations for improving our monitoring and
response; and lastly, to help interested vulnerable
17-45319

20/12/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8144

countries develop preliminary climate- and securityrisk assessments.

to working with you and all Member States to further
improve and refine our proposal.

That mandate should grow over time to include
facilitating regional and cross-border cooperation on
issues that might be affected by climate change, engaging
in preventive diplomacy, as appropriate, and supporting
post-conflict situations in which climate change is
a risk factor that could undermine stability. Such a
special representative of the Secretary-General should
help to coordinate the efforts of the relevant United
Nations bodies in that area, such as the Department
of Political Affairs, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the International Strategy for
Disaster Reduction, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, and the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.

In closing, I would like to address two common
concerns that are often expressed with regard to our
proposal. Some countries do not support any expansion
of the Security Council’s mandate. The Pacific SIDS
are sympathetic to that concern, as the Security
Council is not a representative body. The appointment
of a special representative of the Secretary-General
would not affect the mandate of the Security Council.
Instead, that individual would serve the SecretaryGeneral as the title implies. However, we do see value
in keeping the Security Council informed about the
security implications of climate change, since it is
a growing factor in the conflict situations that the
Council already addresses.
Some countries also have concerns about the
securitization of climate change, fearing that it will
lead to greater militarization. That is precisely the
dynamic that we think a special representative could
help us to avoid. If we do not proactively address the
security implications of climate change, then the onset
of climate crises will make it more and not less likely
that some will opt for reactive military responses.
The military branches of many Governments
with global reach have been analysing that issue
for more than a decade, mostly behind closed doors.
Bringing the issue before the United Nations through
a special representative of the Secretary-General
would provide the opportunity for all to engage in that
critical discussion.
I thank you again, Mr. President, for organizing
this important debate. The Pacific SIDS look forward

Mr. Ataíde Amaral (Portugal): Portugal fully
aligns itself with the statement delivered earlier by
the Deputy Head of the Delegation of the European
Union, and would like to make further comments in its
national capacity.
More than ever, multilateralism is essential in
addressing new and old threats to peace and security, as
they become increasingly global. Beyond the traditional
factors that threaten international peace and security,
including territorial disputes, other kind of threats
are challenging our stability and our current pursuit
of prosperity and development. Climate change, food
insecurity, the scarcity of water, pandemics, terrorism,
organized crime, cyberattacks and all kinds of illicit
trafficking, including in human beings, human organs,
weapons, narcotics and cultural goods, are some of the
contemporary challenges and risks that we face. Intense
and lasting conflicts often cause severe humanitarian
crises that not only generate deep suffering and
indignity for the victims, but also spread insecurity and
distress to surrounding regions.
Given their transnational nature, those types
of challenges can be overcome only through the
cooperation and effective action on the part of the entire
international community. Portugal believes that lasting
peace can be achieved only if the root causes of conflicts
are addressed, including underdevelopment and
extreme inequality. Complex contemporary challenges
require the continuous adaptation of our mechanisms,
better coordination and early action to address threats
at the national, regional and international levels. The
prevention of conflicts at the earliest possible stage is
crucial in order to avoid instability leading to conflict.
In that context, we acknowledge the SecretaryGeneral’s firm commitment to conflict prevention,
and we support his reform proposals. A comprehensive
approach to peace and security reform based on
prevention and a resurgence of diplomacy is needed as
part of our common effort to achieve sustaining peace.
The integration of a gender-balance perspective is also
a priority for my country. Within that framework, an
ever-stronger relationship among the General Assembly,
the Security Council and the rest of the United Nations
system, including the Peacebuilding Commission,

17-4531965/67

S/PV.8144

Maintenance of international peace and security

will strengthen our collective capacity to prevent
conflicts. To break the conflict cycle, it is important
that the Security Council hold early consultations on
situations of imminent risk and take collective action to
prevent violence.
In conclusion, new and more complex challenges
to international peace and security require a systematic
and comprehensive approach. Only the United Nations,
through its various institutions and bodies and its
universality, is in a position to respond adequately.
Portugal stands ready to be part of that United Nations
effort and cooperate with the Security Council in
fulfilling its mandate.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): I thank the Japanese
presidency for organizing this open debate on a subject
that has particular resonance in a year during which
we have committed to a resurgence in diplomacy to
bring about peace. We thank the Secretary-General for
his overview on the magnitude and implications of the
challenges facing the international community.
Bangladesh subscribes to the view set forth in the
concept note (S/2017/1016, annex) that the comprehensive
goal and processes of sustaining peace are aimed at
dealing with the complex contemporary challenges to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
We emphasize that emerging new challenges have the
potential to further exacerbate protracted conflicts and
create multiplier effects across national borders. We
are encouraged to see the Security Council’s increasing
interest in pursuing peace in a holistic, cross-sectoral
manner. From our national perspective, we wish to
underline the five following points.
First, we consider conflict prevention to be, first
and foremost, a national responsibility that can be
supported by responsive and functioning institutions,
the promotion of human rights and the rule of law, and,
most importantly, sustainable development. The active
participation of all segments of society, including
women and youth, is fundamental to mitigating the
potential drivers of conflict, as well as elements having
a propensity to act as spoilers.
Secondly, the United Nations has a critical role to
play in facilitating and monitoring the implementation
of internationally agreed commitments to support
Member States in establishing the necessary conditions
66/67

20/12/2017

in response to their needs and requests. The United
Nations analytical capacity should help identify any
structural or systemic drivers of conflicts, including
the growing challenges posed by terrorist and violent
extremism, climate change, irregular migration and
transnational organized crimes, among others. The
United Nations norm-setting procedures need to be
responsive to rapidly evolving challenges, such as
climate change, security and cybersecurity, among
others, and find ways to build consensus for the greater
public good rather than for the satisfaction of shortterm political or financial considerations.
Thirdly, the ability to objectively decipher the
early-warning signs of conflict, which usually manifest
themselves in hatred or intolerance, socioeconomic
exclusion, systematic discrimination and persecution
on ethnic or religious grounds, should give the
United Nations an edge in devising context-specific
engagement strategies. The range of tools at its disposal
for the pacific settlement of disputes needs to be
deployed with sensitivity to the realities on the ground
and in consultation with the relevant national, civil
society and humanitarian actors. The repeated failure
or limitation to do just that was perhaps most evident
once again in the textbook case of ethnic cleansing that
we have been witnessing in Myanmar’s Rakhine state
in August and September.
Fourthly, as highlighted by the 2015 reviews of
the United Nations peace and security architecture,
the Organization’s conflict-response strategies need
to be situated within the broader framework of finding
political solutions to conflicts. As a contributor to the
increasingly complex United Nations peacekeeping
operations, Bangladesh recognizes the need to
manage expectations on all sides, including through a
comprehensive, nationally owned and internationally
backed approach to building and sustaining peace. We
hope that the organizational reform envisaged under
the United Nations peace and security pillar will help
further reinforce the primacy of politics in the context
of peace operations.
Fifthly, the currently fragmented United
Nations response strategies need to be remedied
through incremental work in clarifying the various
conceptual and mandate-related issues, fostering
regular consultations across the principal organs, and
mobilizing enhanced and adequate resources, while
avoiding unnecessary competition and duplication.
While the Security Council need not remain confined
17-45319

20/12/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

to a strict definition of its mandate, it should also find
ways to enhance its interface with the other principal
organs so as to leverage their respective strengths and
mandates. Meaningful cooperation with the relevant
regional and subregional organizations needs to be
pursued in a shared, strategic direction.
It is worth reminding ourselves that the most
effective bulwark against conflict, hostility, war and
the illegitimate use of force should be constructed
within the minds of men, women, boys and girls by
promoting an enduring culture of peace. Imbued by
the maiden pronouncement by the father of our nation,
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, at the United
Nations in 1974 — “friendship to all, malice to none”
(see A/PV.2243) — we are pursuing our foreign policy
imperatives. During and beyond this International Year

S/PV. 8144

of Peace, Bangladesh will continue to work towards
realizing our Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina’s vision
for regional and international peace. We look forward
to the successful holding of the high-level event on
sustaining peace to be convened by the President of the
General Assembly in April 2018.
The President: I thank all of the representatives of
Member States who have participated and shared their
valuable thoughts on today’s important agenda item.
I also wish to extend my thanks to other members of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 4.20 p.m.

17-4531967/67
