UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1996/48
20 December 1996
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH, FRENCH
AND RUSSIAN

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3727th meeting of the Security Council, held on 20 December 1996 in
connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Croatia", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral of 5 December 1996 (S/1996/1011 and Corr.1), submitted pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1019 (1995) on Croatia.
"The Security Council acknowledges notable progress in the
humanitarian situation, in particular measures taken by the Government of
Croatia to meet the most urgent humanitarian needs of the Croatian Serb
population.
"Although the security situation has improved slightly, the Security
Council, however, expresses its concern at continued acts of harassment,
looting and physical attacks against Croatian Serbs and, in particular,
involvement by Croatian uniformed military and police officials in a number
of those incidents. It calls upon the Government of Croatia to intensify
its efforts to improve the security situation and to ensure adequate
security conditions for the local Serb population including the urgent
re-establishment of a functioning court system in the former sectors North
and South.
"The Security Council is deeply concerned that in spite of its
previous requests there has been little progress on the issue of the return
of the Croatian Serb refugees and urges the Government of Croatia to adopt
a comprehensive approach in order to facilitate the return of refugees
originating from Croatia to their homes of origin throughout Croatia. It
deplores the continued failure by the Government of Croatia to safeguard
effectively their property rights, especially the situation where many of
those Serbs who have returned to the former sectors have been unable to
regain possession of their properties. The Council calls upon the
Government of Croatia to apply immediately proper procedures to the
question of property rights and to stop all forms of discrimination against
the Croatian Serb population in the provision of social benefits and
reconstruction assistance.
96-37307 (E)

201296

/...

S/PRST/1996/48
English
Page 2

"The Security Council is deeply concerned at reports that the new
amnesty law is not being implemented in a fair and equitable manner. It
underlines that equitable application of that law is vital for building
confidence and promoting reconciliation in Croatia as well as for the
peaceful reintegration of the Region of Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and
Western Sirmium.
"The Security Council stresses the importance of the commitments
undertaken by the Government of Croatia in relation to the Council of
Europe, including its signature of the Framework Convention for the
Protection of National Minorities and expects that the Government of
Croatia will implement those commitments fully and without delay.
"The Security Council reiterates its call upon the Government of
Croatia to cooperate fully with the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and to conduct investigations into and the prosecution of all
persons accused of serious violations of international humanitarian law,
especially those committed in the course of military operations in 1995.
"The Security Council will remain seized of the matter and requests
that the Secretary-General continue to report on the situation, in any case
no later than 10 March 1997."

-----
