A/68/789–S/2014/163

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
7 March 2014
Original: English

General Assembly
Sixty-eighth session
Agenda item 37
The situation in Afghanistan

Security Council
Sixty-ninth year

The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 68/11
and Security Council resolution 2096 (2013), in which the Council requested me to
report on developments in Afghanistan every three months.
2.
The report provides an update on the activities of the United Nations in
Afghanistan, including significant humanitarian, development and human rights
efforts, since the issuance of my previous report, of 6 December 2013 (A/68/645S/2013/721). It also provides a summary of key political and security developments
and regional and international events related to Afghanistan. The ann ex contains an
assessment of progress made towards benchmarks and indicators since the issuance
of my report of 5 March 2013 (A/67/778-S/2013/133), in line with Security Council
resolution 1868 (2009).

II. Relevant developments
3.
On 17 January, four members of the United Nations family in Afghanistan
were killed in an attack on a restaurant in Kabul. The Taliban claimed responsibility
for the assault, which took the lives of our colleagues Vadim Nazarov (United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)), Wabel Abdallah
(International Monetary Fund) and Nasreen Khan and Basra Hassan (United Nations
Children’s Fund), together with 17 other Afghan and international civilians. The
years of conflict in Afghanistan have brought tragedy to many. Here , I pay special
tribute to the dedication of these international civil servants. Given the planned
transfer of responsibility for support for UNAMA from the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to the Department of Political Affairs, my Under Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Jeffrey Feltman, paid a familiarization visit
14-25215 (E) 110314

*1425215*

A/68/789
S/2014/163

to Kabul and Mazar-e Sharif between 13 and 15 February. He delivered a message
of sympathy following the 17 January attack and expressed appreciation for the staff
of UNAMA.

A.

Political developments
4.
Preparations for the upcoming elections remain on track for the scheduled
polling date of 5 April. The formal campaign period for the presidential elections
began on 2 February and that for provincial councils on 4 March. Vigorous political
activity can be observed throughout the country.
5.
On 5 January, President Hamid Karzai convened a meeting of all 11 presidential
candidates at which he stressed the need for transparent elections and emphasized
his commitment to non-interference by the Government in the process. Since the
start of the campaign period, candidates’ banners and billboards have lined the
roadways and large-scale rallies have been taking place in Kabul and throughout the
country. A unique feature compared with previous elections in Afghanistan has been
the number of televised debates, nine as at 25 February, providing candidates with
opportunities to explain their views on diverse topics.
6.
Election-related violence included an assassination attempt on vice -presidential
candidate Ismail Khan, formerly Minister of Water and Energy and Governor of
Herat, on 24 January. This was followed by the fatal shooting of two members o f the
campaign team of presidential candidate Abdullah Abdullah in Herat on 1 February,
with a third killed in Sari Pul on 7 February. The convoy of Mr. Abdullah came
under gunfire when returning to Kabul from Nangarhar on 19 February; he was
unhurt. Despite those incidents, a strategic threat to the elections has not emerged.
In a significant political development that occurred in early January, the leader of
the armed opposition wing of Hezb-e Islami, Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, instructed
supporters to participate in the elections. On 16 February, a spokesperson for the
group stated that the party supported the presidential candidacy of former senior
party official Qutbuddin Helal, who is standing as an independent candidate.
7.
Technical preparations for the elections remain further advanced than those for
previous polls held in Afghanistan. By 31 January, the Ministry of the Interior
completed a security risk assessment of 7,168 polling centres initially proposed by
the Independent Election Commission. The Ministry concluded that Afghan security
forces could secure 94 per cent of polling centres, although 796 of the m were
considered to be high-risk. On 19 February, the Commission, having considered this
security advice and drawn on its own assessments, announced a list of 6,775 polling
centres, with 21,663 polling stations (12,705 for men and 8,958 for women). The
movement of electoral materials to the provinces began on 12 February.
Furthermore, by 14 February the Commission’s top-up registration exercise had
distributed an additional 3.5 million voter cards to those who had reached 18 years
of age, lost their voter cards or moved since the holding of previous polls.
Approximately 35 per cent of those receiving new cards were women. In order to
support a maximum franchise, this exercise will continue at the provincial level
until two weeks prior to polling day.
8.
On 6 January, the Independent Electoral Complaints Commission referred
allegations of serious human rights violations, war crimes and/or corruption aga inst
five presidential candidates to the Attorney-General’s Office for further

2/36

14-25215

A/68/789
S/2014/163

investigation. On 15 January, the latter announced that the files had been closed
owing to a lack of evidence. Scrutiny by the Commission of the eligibility of the
2,713 provincial council candidates continued. On 26 January, the Commission
announced 25 disqualifications based on educational and/or age criteria, with an
additional 19 on 16 February. This new institution continued to establish its
infrastructure and organizational capacity. An interim strategic and operational plan
was presented to donors on 16 January, and procedures for the registration, filing
and adjudication of electoral challenges and complaints were published on 4 February.
On 11 February, President Karzai approved the appointment of 102 provincial
complaints commissioners. Of concern is the low number of women appointed (only
six of the total) despite the efforts made to increase female representation.
9.
On 22 January, the Media Commission, a temporary bod y established for the
electoral period, issued amended regulations governing the conduct of media
entities during the elections, and on 29 January it launched a series of 10 regional
workshops to explain its mandate and regulations to media practitioners. Electoral
observation will be undertaken mainly by Afghan groups, complemented by
international missions at the request of Afghan authorities. As at 2 February, the
Independent Election Commission had accredited 1,027 domestic observers (from
53 domestic observation entities) and 106 international observers (from
3 international observation entities), as well as 135 political party agents (from
24 parties). A total of 519 media representatives (375 domestic and 144 international)
have also been accredited. Between 13 and 24 January, a European Union
exploratory team visited Afghanistan, and on 23 January the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe published its exploratory team report, which
foresees the deployment of a 15-member election support team.
10. Progress towards the establishment of a formal peace process with the armed
opposition remained limited. On 22 December, a statement attributable to the
Taliban denied reports that the former deputy leader Mullah Abdullah Ghani
Baradar, who remains in Pakistan following his release from prison, was authorized
to engage in formal dialogue on its behalf. On 12 February, a former Taliban -era
official, Agha Jan Mutasim, announced that several leaders of the movement had
met in Dubai, United Arab Emirates, and agreed to launch an “intra-Afghan
dialogue” to include the Government of Afghanistan, the Taliban and other insurgent
groups. On 15 February, Afghanistan’s High Peace Council, followed a day later by
the Afghan National Security Council, welco med Mutasim’s announcement. On
19 February, a Taliban statement denied participation in the Dubai meeting or
engagement in any type of peace talks with Afghan authorities and stated that
Mutasim was not currently an official of the movement and did not represent it.
11. As at 31 December, the joint secretariat of the Afghanistan Peace and
Reintegration Programme reported that a total of 7,796 individuals had joined the
Programme and that 164 small grants projects in 25 provinces had been approved,
providing short-term employment opportunities. In continuing efforts to support an
environment conducive to peace, a High Peace Council delegation visited Saudi
Arabia between 28 December and 2 January to attend an Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC) meeting of religious scholars. There was a positive response
from OIC to the Council’s proposal to form a working group of international ulema
to counter religious narratives that fuel militant violence in Afghanistan. On
21 January, the Council’s women’s committee launched a nationwide campaign,
entitled “Afghan Women’s Call for Ceasefire and Peace”, to collect 300,000

14-25215

3/36

A/68/789
S/2014/163

signatures demanding the cessation of armed hostilities. UNAMA meanwhile
continued to facilitate local dialogue to mitigate inter-ethnic and intertribal tensions
and to build confidence among communities. Gatherings were held in Jawzjan,
Kunduz, Logar, Maidan Wardak, Paktya and Takhar Provinces, with the participation
of local government officials, traditional community leaders and civil society. I n
January, UNAMA also launched a series of seminars to promote the role of Afghan
ulema in supporting the peaceful conduct of elections, drawing together clerics and
religious scholars from Badghis, Ghor, Herat, Kunar, Laghman, Nangarhar and
Nuristan Provinces.
12. Afghanistan’s bilateral security agreement with the United States of America
remained unsigned. President Karzai continued to assert the conditions he had
enumerated at the conclusion of the consultative loya jirga in November, including
the official launch of a peace process. On 21 December, negotiations were initiated
between the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and Afghanistan on a
status-of-forces agreement to provide a legal framework for a post -2014 training
and advisory mission. NATO has stated that this can be concluded only after the
signature of a bilateral accord with the United States.
13. On 13 February, the Government of Afghanistan released 65 prisoners
previously transferred to its authority by the United States. The Embassy of the
United States in Kabul condemned the release of what it termed “dangerous
detainees” linked to serious crimes, as contrary to commitments under a 2012
memorandum of understanding. On 17 February, Abdul Raqib Takhari, a former
Taliban minister of repatriation who had been listed pursuant to the 1988 Security
Council sanctions regime, was killed in Peshawar. The Government of Afghanistan
described him as a “martyr of peace” and transported his body to his home province
of Takhar for burial.

B.

Security developments
14. The security situation in Afghanistan remained volatile. The United Nations
recorded 20,093 security incidents in Afghanistan in 2013, making the year second
only to 2011 in terms of the level of violence seen since the fall of the Taliban
regime. Of those incidents, 70 per cent were reported in the east, the south-east and,
in particular, the south. Kandahar Province was the site of 13 per cent of all
incidents occurring in 2013. Tactically, armed clashes and improvised explosive
devices represented 75 per cent of total incidents in 2013, with armed clashes up
51 per cent compared with 2012. Afghan forces have proved to be capable of
defending territory from attacks by anti-government elements and regaining ground,
although with significant casualties. One example is a 23 February insurgent attack
in Kunar Province, in which at least 19 Afghan National Army soldiers were killed,
with 6 remaining missing. The increment in armed clashes is understood to be a
consequence of greater operational tempo on the part of Afghan security forces and
focused attacks by anti-government elements on Afghan forces during the transition.
Throughout 2013, provinces in the east and south faced intensified attacks from an
array of groups, including Tehrik-e-Taliban, Lashkar-e-Tayyiba and Lashkar-iJhangvi, in addition to the Afghan Taliban. In northern Afghanistan, the Islamic
Movement of Uzbekistan continued to operate in remote and mountainous districts
and to present a serious challenge to peace, security and stability. The tactical use of
suicide bombing by the armed opposition continued, with 107 such incidents

4/36

14-25215

A/68/789
S/2014/163

occurring in Afghanistan in 2013, of which 18 were in Kabul, compared with 101 in
2012, of which 7 were in Kabul.
15. As of mid-January, the personnel of the Afghan National Army numbered
193,427, which included 7,300 military personnel serving in the Afghan Air Force.
Remaining shortfalls were largely at the strategic and budget management levels,
along with specialized capabilities including aviation, the countering of improvised
explosive devices, and intelligence. The attrition rate, at some 34 percent during
2013, continues to be a major concern. On 8 January, the Ministry of the Interior
opened its first specialized training school on the defusing of improvised explosive
devices, with the aim of instructing approximately 1,500 police personnel annually.
On 14 January, Colonel Jamila Baez was appointed police chief of a district in
Kabul, the first female to have been appointed to such a post. With only about 1 per
cent of police personnel being women, on 21 January the Ministry launched a
strategy for better integration of female personnel into the Afghan National Police ,
with protection measures to prevent abuse. The Ministry is also to train 13,000
female searchers to work in polling centres on election day. As of the end of 2013,
the United Nations-administered Law and Order Trust Fund for Afghanistan
channelled the salaries of 145,199 police.
16. Separately, the Afghan Local Police security initiative continued to expand,
with 27,000 personnel in 142 districts by mid-February, with plans to expand to
30,000 by the end of 2014. Nine per cent of all security incidents in 2013 were
directed against its personnel. Often stationed in volatile areas and sometimes
deployed in roles for which they are ill equipped and insufficiently trained, they can
represent an easy target. There are reports from many communities of improved
security owing to the presence of the Afghan Local Police. At the same time,
UNAMA continued to document human rights violations committed by some
members of the Local Police, including summary execution and punishment,
intimidation, illegal searches and extortion. Between 1 November 2013 and
31 January 2014, UNAMA recorded 14 civilians killed and 18 injured by the Afghan
Local Police, a fourfold increase compared with the same period in 2012/13.
17. As regards security-related developments that have a negative impact on both
the Afghan population and the ability of the United Nations to carry out mandated
tasks and activities, the reporting period saw unprecedented numbers of security
incidents. This was at least partly the consequence of abnormally mild weather
conditions, which meant that the operations of all parties were less hampered than
normal. From 16 November 2013 to 15 February 2014, 4,649 security incidents
were recorded, representing a 24 per cent increase compared with the same period in
2012/13. Thirty-five suicide attacks were recorded between 16 November 2013 and
15 February 2014, compared with 17 during the same period in 2012/13. Ten of
these took place in the capital, compared with five during the same period in the
previous year. The 17 January coordinated attack on a Kabul restaurant, which
claimed the lives of four members of the United Nations family, was the deadliest
attack on foreign civilians since 2001: 13 international and 8 Afghan civilians were
killed. The Taliban took responsibility for the attack. Another 21 security incidents,
directly or indirectly affecting the United Nations, were recorded between
16 November 2013 and 15 February 2014. Most were criminal acts or acts of
intimidation directed at national staff. Two United Nations convoys were fired upon
in Nangarhar, injuring three police escorts, and a UNAMA helicopter sustained
slight damage under small arms fire en route to Gardez.

14-25215

5/36

A/68/789
S/2014/163

18. Throughout 2013, the number of incidents involving mines and explosive
remnants of war increased, with 455 casualties, including 129 deaths, recorded,
compared with 367 casualties and 91 deaths in 2012. During the reporting period,
mine action partners supported by the United Nations cleared 28 battlefields and
214 minefields in 31 communities, with an additional three districts declared mine free. An estimated 4,171 minefields remained across 33 provinces. In addition to
addressing the legacy of previous conflict, the United Nations is developing a
strategy with the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) to dispose of the
explosive remnants of war from military bases, firing and demolition ranges, sites
where air munitions have been used and recent battlefield sites. Key to this strategy
will be a definition of the scope of the issue. To date, ISAF has provided the United
Nations with coordinates for 231 airdrop and battlefield sites and 331 firing ranges.

C.

Regional cooperation
19. Afghanistan continues to actively engage its neighbours and to promote
regional cooperation. This includes its lead role in the Istanbul Process on Regional
Security and Cooperation for a Secure and Stable Afghanistan, the pursuit of
strengthened political dialogue, and progress on confidence -building measures. On
17 January, India hosted a senior officials’ meeting in New Delhi. “Heart of Asia”
member States and supporting countries and organizations focused on issues of
security, including the movement of extremist elements and the importance of
regional energy cooperation for economic development and stability, as well as on
reviewing progress on the six agreed confidence-building measures and funding
modalities for the Process. Between 2 and 11 February, as part of the disaster
management confidence-building measure, Japan hosted officials from Kazakhstan,
Pakistan and Turkey to share information and best practices. B etween 26 and
27 February, Afghanistan hosted a terrorism financing seminar as part of the
counter-terrorism confidence-building measure. Preparations are also under way for
the sixth Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan, to be hosted
in Kabul on 26 March.
20. There are also ongoing efforts to strengthen bilateral ties between Afghanistan
and other countries in the region. On 8 December, President Karzai visited Tehran
and agreed with the President of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Hassan Rouhani, that
their countries would work towards a comprehensive friendship and cooperation
pact covering long-term political, security, economic and cultural cooperation and
regional peace and security. On 26 February, on the sidelines of a meeting of th e
Parliamentary Union of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation held in Tehran, the
Chair of the Wolesi Jirga met with the speaker of the Majlis of the Islamic Republic
of Iran. On 12 December, President Karzai visited India, where, together with Prime
Minister Manmohan Singh, he emphasized Afghanistan’s commitment to regional
cooperation, integration and development, including through the Istanbul Process.
The two leaders also pledged support, together with the Islamic Republic of Iran, for
the development of new trade and transit routes. This was followed by a visit of the
Minister of External Affairs of India to Kandahar on 15 February to inaugurate the
Afghanistan National Agricultural Sciences and Technology University with
President Karzai. On 7 February, on the sidelines on the XXII Olympic Winter
Games in Sochi, Russian Federation, President Karzai met the President of China,
Xi Jinping, who affirmed China’s willingness to continue to assist Afghanistan’s

6/36

14-25215

A/68/789
S/2014/163

reconstruction and encourage investment. He also reiterated support for smooth
presidential elections and an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned national reconciliation
process. On 22 February, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of China visited Kabul
and met with President Karzai and other senior officials. O n 13 February, President
Karzai travelled to Ankara for the eighth Trilateral Summit with the President of
Turkey and the Prime Minister of Pakistan. A joint statement welcomed the
“positive momentum” in bilateral relations between Afghanistan and Pakistan,
including strengthened trade and economic relations. The need for continued
regional and international development cooperation in support of the stabilization of
Afghanistan was underscored. On 22 February, the Minister of Finance of Pakistan
led a high-level delegation to Kabul for the ninth session of the Afghanistan Pakistan Joint Economic Commission and also visited a number of projects in
Afghanistan completed with Pakistani assistance.
21. My Special Representative, Ján Kubiš, continued his mandated regional
cooperation outreach activities. On 13 December, he visited Ashgabat, where he met
with the President of Turkmenistan, Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedov, and discussed
the importance of humanitarian access and infrastructure projects to Afghanistan.
On 22 January, he attended a meeting of Deputy Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
members of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization held in Moscow, and discussed
shared threats, including drug trafficking and terrorist groups, as well as the need to
increase cross-border trade and investment. Between 23 and 25 February, he visited
Islamabad for consultations with the Government of Pakistan.

III. Human rights
22. On 8 February 2014, UNAMA released its Annual Report 2013 on Protection
of Civilians in Armed Conflict. The report documented 2,959 civilian deaths and
5,656 civilian injuries (8,615 civilian casualties) in 2013, a 14 per cent overall
increase compared with 2012, with a 7 per cent increase in the number of civilian
deaths. The report attributed 74 per cent of all civilian casualties in 2013 to
anti-government elements (2,311 civilian deaths and 4,063 injuries) and 11 per cent
to pro-government forces (8 per cent to Afghan forces and 3 per cent to international
military forces, with 341 deaths and 615 injuries). Ten per cent of the total was
attributed to ground engagements between anti-government elements and
pro-government forces with civilians killed in the crossfire, and the remaining 5 per
cent resulted mainly from explosive remnants of war. Both of these sources of
civilian casualties represented growing trends in 2013.
23. Between 1 November and 31 January, UNAMA documented 572 civilian
deaths and 1,066 civilian injuries, reflecting an increase of 15 per cent in civilian
casualties compared with the same period in 2012/13. Anti-government elements
were responsible for 76 per cent of civilian casualties and pro -government forces for
9 per cent during this period. The remaining 15 per cent of civilian casualties could
not be attributed to any party, stemming primarily from ground engagements, crossborder shelling or explosive remnants of war.
24. The Country Task Force on Monitoring and Reporting on Children and Armed
Conflict continued to receive reports of incidents involving grave violations of child
rights. Between 1 November and 31 January, 104 children were killed and 254
injured as a result of conflict. The detonation of improvised explosive devices was

14-25215

7/36

A/68/789
S/2014/163

the leading cause of child casualties, resulting in 48 deaths and 67 injuries. Ground
engagements, which include crossfire, shooting, artillery, rocket, mortar and hand
grenade attacks, killed 37 children and injured 133. Unexploded ordnance, explosive
remnants of war and landmines claimed the lives of 13 children and injured 41.
25. On 8 December, UNAMA released a report entitled “A way to go: an update
on implementation of the law on elimination of violence against women in
Afghanistan”. The report, which was based on consultations with 200 officials and
the monitoring of nearly 500 cases of violence against women in 18 provinces
between October 2012 and September 2013, contained mixed results. The
registration of reported incidents had increased by 28 per cent compared with the
previous 12-month period, yet the use of the 2009 law as a basis for indictment and
conviction had increased by only 2 per cent. Overall, the number of criminal
indictments filed by prosecutors in cases of violence against women had decreased.
On 1 March, the Deputy Minister of Women’s Affairs launched the Government’s
own report on the status of the implementation of the law in line with its
commitments under the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework. Based on
research conducted in 32 of Afghanistan’s 34 provinces, it echoed many of the
Mission’s findings. The availability of baseline data is a critical element in the
development and implementation of a government action plan to address identified
gaps. Concerns were expressed over article 26 of the criminal procedure code, as
approved by the National Assembly, which barred the questioning of family
members of the accused as witnesses, thus preventing the effective prosecution of
many cases of violence against women. On 23 February, President Karzai endorsed
the code and then amended the language in article 26 that barred the testimony of
relatives, through legislative decree.
26. On 28 January, the findings of the five-yearly accreditation review of the
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission were published, with a
decision on its status deferred for one year. The International Coordinating
Committee of National Human Rights Institutions, while expressing great respect
for the Commission’s work and effectiveness, noted with concern the Government ’s
process of appointing new commissioners, the staff gender ratios and the
dependence on donor funding. The Committee stressed the need for the Commission
to address those concerns with the Government of Afghanistan by November 2014,
failing which it would be recommended for a downgrading to “B” status.
27. UNAMA continued to visit Afghan-run detention facilities to observe the
treatment of conflict-related detainees. During the reporting period, 54 places of
detention run by the National Directorate of Security, the Afghan National Police,
the Central Prisons Directorate and the Afghan National Army in 20 provinces were
visited. Afghanistan’s general prison population grew from 12,000 in 2008 to 29,000
in January 2014, with a growing number of hunger strikes over conditions of
detention as well as inconsistent application of prisoner releases. Female prisoners
in Mazar-e Sharif staged a three-day strike in January, claiming that male prisoners
accused of serious crimes had been released while their cases, many involving
“moral crimes” unsupported by the law, were not being addressed. During the same
month, 22 prisoners in Ghor Province protested their sentences. UNAMA and
specialized agencies are working to improve training and prison infrastructure , with
an initial focus on Takhar, Jawzjan, Kunduz and Kabul Provinces.

8/36

14-25215

A/68/789
S/2014/163

IV. Implementation of the Kabul process and coordination of
development assistance
28. On 15 January, Afghanistan’s national budget for the fiscal year 1393
(21 December 2013 to 20 December 2014) was approved by the lower house of the
National Assembly, or Wolesi Jirga. Of a total of $7.6 billion, 65 per cent is
allocated to operating costs and 35 per cent to development. The security sector
alone absorbs $3.4 billion. On 11 February, the Ministry of Finance announced the
allocation of $1 million to five provinces under its pilot provincial budgeting
programme. The outcome of the pilot will be used to evaluate prospects for the
implementation of a more general, decentralized fiscal policy.
29. The participants in the 29 January special meeting of the Joint Coordination
and Monitoring Board assessed progress made in the fulfilment of the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework commitments and initiated a forward -looking agenda in
anticipation of a ministerial development conference on Afghanistan to be held later
in 2014. UNAMA facilitated civil society engagement with the process, as well as
discussions between the Government and the international community on the
preparation of a joint report on progress made in terms of hard deliverables. To
encourage continuity of the Afghan economic and development agendas during the
political transition, the 11 presidential candidates were invited to attend the meeting
as observers. International representatives reaffirmed their long-term commitment to
Afghanistan while linking this to continued momentum on good governance and a
rights-based agenda, in particular protection of the gains made in the areas of human
rights and women’s rights. Accelerated economic and development progress,
including the meeting of key anti-corruption commitments and International
Monetary Fund benchmarks, together with efforts to address the illicit economy,
were stressed as critical to Afghanistan’s greater self-reliance. The Government
reassured international partners of its commitment to the electoral timetable and, in
turn, sought improvements in donor accountability and commitment to its aid
management policy. Nearly all presidential candidates pledged to continue the
progress made under the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework.
30. The World Bank provided an overview of Afghanistan’s current economic
outlook. Afghanistan remains extraordinarily aid -dependent. After a bumper
agricultural harvest in 2012, growth slowed to an estimated 3.1 per cent in 2013 ,
with revenue collection weakening to 9.6 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP).
The latter is understood to be due both to the economic slowdown and to continued
weakness in enforcement. Economic uncertainty is also seen, for the first time, in
the 43 per cent decline in the number of newly registered firms in the first seven
months of 2013. Formidable challenges remain in the areas of poverty reduction, job
creation and service delivery. Per capita GDP remains the lowest in Asia and among
the bottom 20 in the world, literacy levels stand at approximately 25 per cent, and
there is the pressure of some 400,000 new entrants to the labour market every year.
On 19 January, in a bid to increase the country’s skilled workforce, the Ministries of
Education and of Labour, Social Affairs, Martyrs and Disabled, together with the
United Nations, launched Afghanistan’s first technical and vocational education and
training strategy, aimed at building the necessary human resources for the country.
31. The Mission’s rule-of-law efforts are increasingly focused on land disputes
and management. In January, at the request of the Afghanistan Land Authority,
UNAMA began co-chairing a land management working group. The group brings

14-25215

9/36

A/68/789
S/2014/163

together international donors and implementers of land reform and land -related
programmes, advocating workable solutions to protracted disputes that have
contributed to displacement in many parts of the country.

V. Humanitarian assistance
32. On 16 December, the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Valerie Amos, launched the global humanitarian
plans for 2014, including a funding request of $406 million for Afghanistan. The
Common Humanitarian Action Plan for Afghanistan estimates that 5.4 million
people will require access to health services this year, including emergency trauma
care, which is a top priority, given needs that currently dramatically exceed response
capacity. The Plan also prioritizes the provision of assistance to 2.2 million people
assessed as very severely food insecure. The third group identified as having acute
unmet needs are internally displaced persons.
33. In 2013, 124,000 persons were recorded as newly displaced as a result of
conflict, reflecting a 25 per cent increase compared with 2012. This brought the
cumulative total of internally displaced persons in Afghanistan recorded by the
United Nations to more than 630,000, from 20 of the 34 provinces. Helmand,
Maidan Wardak, Faryab and Nangarhar Provinces recorded the highest levels of
displacement, reflecting increased ground engagements. Moreover, continuing
drought in the western region contributed to the displacement of some 1,000
families at the end of 2013, many initially to Chaghcharan, in Ghor Province, and
then to Herat. Between mid-December 2013 and mid-February 2014, winter
assistance was provided to vulnerable populations, including 35,000 internally
displaced persons, in Wardak, Nuristan, Ghor, Ghazni, Paktya and Faryab Provinces
and to another 30,000 people in informal settlements in and around Kabul, Mazar -e
Sharif and Herat. On 11 February, the Government of Afghanistan, with United
Nations support, launched the national policy on internal displacement. It set forth
the roles and responsibilities of various Government ministries and agencies and
their development and humanitarian partners, including the United Nations. An
implementation strategy is now to be developed. The return of refugees to
Afghanistan declined by 59 per cent in 2013 compared with 2012, with 38,766
Afghan refugees voluntarily repatriating.
34. Vaccination campaigns continued to work towards the elimination of polio in
Afghanistan, one of the last remaining countries reporting the disease. In 2013 , there
were 14 reported cases down from 37 in 2012 and 80 in 2011. Since mid -December,
three campaigns have been conducted in the 41 districts at highest risk, resulting in
the vaccination of more than 2.7 million children under 5 years of age. One of these
was conducted in Kabul, where a child was confirmed to have contracted the disease
in early February, the first case to have been recorded in the capital since the fall of
the Taliban regime. The polio programme has enjoyed access to otherwise
inaccessible areas.
35. Between January and December 2013, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs registered 283 security incidents, involving humanitarian
personnel, facilities and assets across 33 provinces. These had a combination of
deliberate and accidental impacts, resulting in the death s of 38 personnel, 29 arrests
and detentions of staff, 50 staff injuries and 84 staff abductions. This included the

10/36

14-25215

A/68/789
S/2014/163

brief abduction on 21 January of 67 deminers in Herat, the largest number of
personnel involved in a single incident in recent years.
36. On 22 January, the Common Humanitarian Fund was formally established with
more than $30 million committed by donors by mid-February. This fund channels
unearmarked contributions towards needs-based assistance, with priority given to
the most critical needs identified in the Common Humanitarian Action Plan.

VI. Counter-narcotics
37. On 6 and 23 December, the counter-narcotics police of Afghanistan seized
64 kilograms of heroin and nearly one metric ton of opium in Kabul. The intercepts
were a result of Afghan intelligence-led operations that increased tenfold in 2013
compared with 2012. On 20 January, the counter-narcotics police identified and
dismantled a methamphetamine laboratory in Herat Province, the third of its kind to
have been identified in Afghanistan in the past year. Seizures of synthetic drugs rose
from 8 in 2010 to 54 in 2013.
38. Led by the Governor of Badakhshan, a new counter-narcotics committee for
the border district of Eshkashem met between 31 December and 4 January, bringing
together government officials, development organizations, civil society and
religious scholars. It was established in a follow-up to last year’s AfghanistanTajikistan cross-border ministerial conference on drug control and livelihoods,
facilitated by the United Nations, which was aimed at better linking the
communities in Badakhshan, Afghanistan, to those of Tajikistan’s autonomous
province of Gorno-Badakhshan and Khatlon Province. The establishment of similar
groups is progressing on the other side of the border, with the ultimate goal of joint
committees to facilitate trade and build trust between cross-border communities.
39. On 17 January, the new Minister of Counter-Narcotics met with the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Yury Fedotov, in Vienna
and emphasized that, without increased commitment by the international
community, it would be difficult to achieve lasting success. On 28 and 29 January,
the Ministry of Counter-Narcotics organized a Good-Neighbourly Relations
Declaration conference in Kabul. Ministers and representatives of counter-narcotics
institutions in China, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Pakistan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan
and Uzbekistan participated. Greater exchange of information and improved joint
simultaneous border operations were encouraged. On 10 February, the Minister of
the Interior held a donors’ conference on counter-narcotics in Kabul. Counternarcotics is one of the Minister ’s top three priorities, and he urged the international
community to continue to build the capacity of law enforcement agencies in th at
area.

VII. Mission support
40. Following the closure of 10 of its field offices over the past 18 months,
UNAMA maintains a permanent field presence in 13 provinces. Consolidated field
offices continue to provide a unique national platform for mandat ed outreach and
monitoring activities. Despite security challenges, field offices engage on a daily
basis with communities and officials at the provincial and district level s, including

14-25215

11/36

A/68/789
S/2014/163

in areas where the Mission does not have a permanent presence. Significant efforts
are being made to maximize the use of the Mission’s reduced fleet of armoured
vehicles and to maintain — and even, in some cases, increase — the number of road
missions undertaken. UNAMA also provided support for more than 40 visits outside
Kabul carried out by the diplomatic community in 2013. The closure of provincial
reconstruction teams and other international military bases across the country has
had an impact on the level of logistical support available to United Nations field
personnel, including through decreased maintenance of a number of regional
airfields. In addition, staff members no longer have access to the level of medical
care or safe havens previously available to them in the event of emergencies.
41. Following a reduction of 243 posts in 2013, UNAMA currently has 1,515
personnel (with a 6 per cent vacancy rate), comprising 345 international and 1,170
national staff. In addition, there are 71 United Nations Volunteers, 16 military
advisers and three police advisers. On 11 January, UNAMA participated in the first
meeting of the steering committee of the Kuwait Joint Support Office to further
clarify governance, management and resource allocation issues. The enterprise
resource planning project, Umoja, was launched in the Mission on 1 March,
following months of preparations.

VIII. Observations
42. A legitimate political transition is the foundation for stability in Afghanistan.
Next month’s landmark elections will mark the first transfer of power in
Afghanistan from one elected president to another. Efforts remain on track for
presidential and provincial council elections to be held on 5 April in accordance
with Afghanistan’s legal and constitutional framework. These polls will not be
without flaws; however, if credibly conducted, with a result that is widely accepted,
they will provide a mandate for a new leadership to address the country’s many
challenges in ways that strengthen stability and reinforce national unity.
43. Afghanistan’s electoral management bodies are in the lead, and the efforts of
the Independent Election Commission have ensured smooth progress, with technical
arrangements more advanced than those for any previous poll. The Independent
Electoral Complaints Commission has faced a major challenge in working to
strengthen institutional capacity, including a presence in each of the country ’s 34
provinces, while carrying out its substantial responsibilities at the same time. Its
role in transparently and impartially adjudicating electoral complaints will be
critical. Observation will be another important element in building trust in the
electoral process, and I encourage domestic observers, as well as candidates and
party agents, to ensure wide geographic coverage. I welcome those international
organizations that will field observer missions. While the United Nations does not
have a role in the administration or adjudication of these elections, it will, in line
with its mandate and at the request of Afghan authorities, continue to provide
technical assistance to and facilitate coherence in international support for the
process.
44. My Special Representative continues to meet with all stakeholders in support
of the inclusiveness and integrity of the process. Efforts among contenders to build
mutual understandings, while they must not replace the people’s voice at the ballot
box, are welcome in guarding against a “winner-takes-all” scenario. I welcome

12/36

14-25215

A/68/789
S/2014/163

what, to date, has been a robust but respectful campaign. Candidates as well as
electoral authorities hold enormous responsibility in helping to ensure that the
electoral process promotes stability and national unity. I urge candidates and their
supporters to comply with electoral laws and to pursue complaints through
mandated institutions.
45. Come 5 April, I encourage all eligible Afghan citizens to make their voice
count in the country’s future. The participation of women — not only as voters, but
also as candidates, electoral workers and observers — will be a key measure of the
representativeness of these elections. State institutions and security forces must
remain impartial, and I welcome President Karzai’s clear instructions in this regard.
Media freedom and balanced coverage are equally essential to a fair contest.
Security will be critical in ensuring that voters have t he confidence to turn out, and
the very real challenges in this regard should not be underestimated. Afghan security
institutions are in the lead, and the Ministry of the Interior, together with national
and international partners, has been proactive in security planning to support a
maximum franchise. Elections are the exercise by citizens of their rights, and I call
on all parties to the conflict to respect their obligations in this regard.
46. Afghanistan faces a complex conflict, with a nexus of armed groups and
organized criminal networks pursuing simultaneous and sometimes competing local,
national and transnational agendas. A peace process or even direct talks between the
Government of Afghanistan and major armed opposition elements are unlikely
before the elections. The widespread desire for peace, however, is clear from the
discourse of the election campaigns, as well as from the positions of diverse Afghan
religious, tribal and civil society groups. It is essential that efforts continue to put in
place arrangements to, in the short term, prevent and mitigate the ever-increasing
toll that the violence is taking on civilians. Continuing engagement should also
assist a new Government’s efforts to move swiftly in initiating the first steps
towards longer-term solutions. Times of uncertainty can heighten community
rivalries and feelings of marginalization, which can be exploited by insurgents. The
Mission’s community-level dialogue and confidence-building, including a recent
focus on ulema’s contribution to peace, is a low-profile but important contribution.
The good offices of the United Nations in support of Afghan -led reconciliation will
remain at the disposal of a future Government.
47. Afghanistan’s place in the region will be vital to long-term stability and
sustainability as the presence of the wider international community draws down. I
continue to be encouraged by the increased recognition of shared mutual interests by
Afghanistan and Pakistan, which I hope will further expand and extend to concrete
actions in support of peace and stability, underscored by economic cooperation.
Growing regional engagement through complementary bilateral, regional and
multilateral forums is welcome. The shared nature of the challenges — and
opportunities — that Afghanistan presents to the security and stability of the entire
region appears widely understood as regional forums, such as the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization, turn their attention to support for Afghan solutions. The
Istanbul Process is distinct in that Afghanistan is at the heart of the mechanism.
Increasingly, substantive dialogue is emerging in this forum on regional stability and
energy security measures, and the United Nations will continue to provide support
to regional confidence-building efforts. I hope that preparations for the ministeriallevel meeting to be held in Tianjin, China, in August will provide the opportunity to

14-25215

13/36

A/68/789
S/2014/163

pursue practical results, and I welcome China’s active role as host and promoter of
regional cooperation.
48. Elections, as in any country, currently consume much of the political space.
The economic sustainability of Afghanistan, however, remains pressing and cannot
be ignored. The special meeting of the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board
held on 29 January reinforced the importance of continuity in progress on mutual
commitments made in Tokyo, including addressing the reform, good governance and
human rights agenda, as well as the growing fiscal gap between government revenue
and expenditure through robust efforts to increase revenue. An appropriate
regulatory framework is another key component of confidence, notably progress on
the adoption of anti-money-laundering, counter-terrorism financing and mining
legislation, all of which are commitments under the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework. In this environment, any rapid decline in the exceptional levels of aid
provided to Afghanistan carries grave risk, and predictability on the part of the
international community in meeting financial commitments made in Tokyo and
Chicago in the coming years will be equally essential. I welcome the recognition by
Afghanistan’s presidential candidates of the need to maintain momentum on mutual
reform commitments and, in particular, the need for greater attention with regard to
a broad-based, inclusive and sustainable development and poverty reduction agenda.
The emphasis of candidates on job creation for Afghanistan’s burgeoning youth
population is equally important. Given that Afghanistan’s economic sustainability is
at stake, preparations for the ministerial development conference planned for later in
the year must not be business as usual. There is a need for a prioritized and
sustained approach to Afghanistan’s development, and the United Nations will
continue to assist with the coordination of international aid in support thereof.
49. A key focus in the preparations for the ministerial meeting must be efforts to
strengthen the licit economy and undercut the burgeoning illicit economy. Opium
production in Afghanistan hit a new high in 2013, with the supply of and demand
for narcotics threatening the health and well-being of the population, the economy
and the institutional fabric of the country and the region. As other sectors contract,
and as insurgents rely increasingly on funding from the drug trade, there is a real
risk of the emergence of a narco-State. Comprehensive approaches to tackling this
scourge are a shared responsibility requiring robust political will on the part of
Afghanistan, the region and the wider international community.
50. The progress that Afghanistan has made in protecting and promoting human
rights since 2001 has been an important contributor to stability, however fragile.
Amid the uncertainty of transition, many Afghans, particularly women, fear that
human rights achievements risk being forfeited for the sake of short-term political
expediency. Greater commitment to the implementation of the law on the
elimination of violence against women remains a critical government responsibility,
with prosecutions and convictions under this landmark legislation remaining low. I
welcome the Government’s first report on progress on the implementation of the
law. Another noteworthy development is the commitment of the Minister of the
Interior to increasing the number of female police officers and to ensuring adequate
support for them. I welcome the endorsement by President Karzai of the criminal
procedure code — the culmination of many years of work — as well as his
intervention to ensure that perpetrators of violence, particularly against women, are
held accountable. Steps such as these will contribute to confidence, domestic and
international, in Afghanistan’s future. In this regard, I call on Afghan authorities to

14/36

14-25215

A/68/789
S/2014/163

take all necessary measures to support the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights
Commission in fulfilling its critical role as an effective and independent institution.
Supporting Afghan efforts to strengthen human rights and the rule of law will
remain a priority for the United Nations. Across the United Nations system, t hose
elements and agencies engaged in support for the rule of law are increasingly
working together to streamline and strengthen efforts.
51. Afghanistan remains in the bottom decile of the world ’s least developed
countries. Humanitarian needs are foreseen to rise, including through civilian
casualties and the displacement of conflict-affected populations. In this context, the
coordination of humanitarian assistance will continue to be a core component of the
work of the United Nations in Afghanistan. The 2014 Common Humanitarian Action
Plan reflects a more targeted approach to meeting the most acute needs , and I call
upon donors to maintain their commitments. The abduction of 67 mine clearance
workers serves as another reminder of the dangerous operating en vironment. There
is no evidence that humanitarian workers are being systematically targeted ;
however, the nature of their work means that needs are often greatest where risks are
highest. The access of vaccination workers has been facilitated by local lead ers, and
this must be sustained if the global goal of the eradication of polio by 2018 is to be
achieved.
52. Uncertainty dominates Afghanistan’s final year of transition and has an impact
on political, security, economic and social developments. The inter national presence
will be dramatically reduced, and Afghanistan’s future leadership is not yet decided
upon. In this context, it is critical that predictability and confidence, where feasible,
be reinforced. The United Nations has been a force for continui ty in Afghanistan for
decades. Its countrywide presence and its good offices, human rights, coordination
of international aid and humanitarian assistance functions will remain important.
The precise ways in which the Organization can best support Afghanist an and its
people will necessarily evolve to reflect changing circumstances. When there is
greater clarity regarding the political, security and economic impacts of
Afghanistan’s final transition year, that will be the time to address, together with the
Government of Afghanistan, the role of the United Nations in greater depth. I would
thus request the Security Council to extend the mandate of UNAMA, due to expire
on 19 March, for a further 12 months. In so doing, I reiterate the commitment of the
United Nations to a sustained partnership with Afghanistan. I also call upon Member
States to continue to provide the resources required to maintain our engagement and
activities across the country.
53. I again pay tribute to the lives and dedicated service of our four fallen
comrades and express my deep condolences to the families they leave behind. The
17 January attack reminded us once again of the dangers faced by United Nations
national and international staff members. The targeting of a civilian location break s
every established law and norm of war, and I reiterate my strongest condemnation of
such acts. All parties to the conflict must fulfil their obligations with respect to the
protection of civilians. I thank all personnel in Afghanistan, under the leadersh ip of
my Special Representative, Ján Kubiš, for their continued commitment in support of
the people of Afghanistan.

14-25215

15/36

A/68/789
S/2014/163

Annex
Progress achieved against benchmarks
I.

Security
Benchmark: sustainable Afghan security institutions and processes capable of
ensuring peace and stability and protecting the people of Afghanistan
Indicators of progress

Increase in the number of national police
and national army personnel mentored,
trained and operational according to an
agreed structure

Metrics

• As of mid-January, the personnel of the Afghan
National Army numbered 193,427, including
7,300 military personnel serving in the Afghan
Air Force. As of the end of 2013, the Afghan
National Police had 145,199 personnel
• On 8 April 2013, the Ministry of the Interior
issued its 10-year vision for the Afghan National
Police and the Ministry, outlining plans for
civilian policing, community engagement and the
recruitment of women police. In January 2014,
the Ministry also issued its strategy for the
management of women police, to provide
guidance on their protection. Both initiatives
reflected technical advice from the international
community and UNAMA

Development of and progress in a plan for
a phased and conditions-based transition to
an Afghan security lead

II.

• The President approved the fifth and final
tranche of the transition on 18 June 2013

Peace, reintegration and reconciliation
Benchmark: national dialogue and regional engagement to pursue constructive
and inclusive processes to foster a political environment conducive to peace
Indicators of progress

Development and implementation of
inclusive national and regional processes
to enhance peace, reintegration and
reconciliation efforts

16/36

Metrics

• At the end of December 2013, a total of
7,796 anti-government elements were enrolled
in the Afghanistan Peace and Reintegration
Programme, including 693 commanders/leaders.
Since the beginning of the programme, 164 small
grants projects have been approved in
25 provinces, benefiting communities through
the development of infrastructure and providing
short-term employment opportunities for
community members and reintegrees

14-25215

A/68/789
S/2014/163

Indicators of progress

Metrics

• To support the Government’s efforts to stabilize
key areas, the United Nations-supported National
Area-Based Development Programme continued
in 2013, with 22 projects completed in
10 provinces. These projects benefited
94,182 people, including by providing
ex-combatants with alternative economic
opportunities
• From 8 to 11 January 2013, President Karzai,
accompanied by the Chair of the High Peace
Council, visited Washington, D.C., and discussed
with the President of the United States of
America and other officials the furtherance of the
peace process
• Participants in the third International Conference
for Islamic Cooperation for a Peaceful Future in
Afghanistan, held in Istanbul on 4 and 5 March
2013, called for the settlement of differences
through dialogue and negotiations. The follow-up
conference, held in Kabul on 8 April 2013,
explored practical measures to implement what
had been endorsed in Istanbul. The religious
scholars participating in the Conference
denounced suicide attacks as un-Islamic
• On 18 June 2013, the Taliban issued a statement
indicating its willingness to pursue a political
solution to the conflict in Afghanistan. An office
for talks was opened in Doha, in the presence of
designated Taliban officials and the Qatari
authorities. The Taliban’s use of the name and
symbols of its former regime at the opening
ceremony triggered a strongly negative reaction
from the Government of Afghanistan and wider
Afghan society. On 19 June, the Government
declared that dialogue would be postponed
pending guarantees that the process would be
fully Afghan-led. Subsequently, the office was
temporarily closed
• In response to a request made by President
Karzai during an official visit to Pakistan on
26 and 27 August 2013, seven Taliban prisoners
were released on 7 September 2013, and Mullah
Baradar was released on 21 September 2013

14-25215

17/36

A/68/789
S/2014/163

Indicators of progress

Metrics

• A High Peace Council delegation travelled to
Islamabad from 19 to 21 November 2013, where
they met with the Prime Minister and other
Government officials to work on previously
agreed initiatives. During a visit to Kabul on
30 November 2013, the Prime Minister of
Pakistan renewed commitments to the facilitation
of talks with the Taliban
• In 2013, UNAMA organized four mediation
skills training courses for 73 prominent Afghan
stakeholders in four provinces and supported
seven local peace initiatives, which resulted in
21 local dialogue events held in nine provinces.
Those initiatives produced five declarations or
interim agreements in support of reconciliation
or confidence-building measures between
communities
• The development of the national action plan for
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) to
enhance women’s role in conflict prevention and
participation in the peace process continued, with
United Nations technical and financial assistance
being provided to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Increased ability by Afghan authorities to
gather and provide substantiated, updated
and accurate information to the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011)

• In 2013, the Government of Afghanistan
provided substantiated, updated and accurate
information to the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011),
including an annual report on the status of
reportedly reconciled individuals who had been
delisted in the course of 2012
• On 16 April, the Committee approved the listing
of an individual for manufacturing improvised
explosive devices for the Taliban and for
constituting a threat to the peace, stability and
security of Afghanistan

Increased public support for the peace
process through engagement at the
community level and with civil society

18/36

• In 2013, 1 provincial peace committee was
established, bringing the total of such committees
to 33. The number of provincial joint secretariat
teams implementing the Afghanistan Peace and
Reintegration Programme increased to 33

14-25215

A/68/789
S/2014/163

Indicators of progress

Metrics

• The first meeting between the High Peace
Council and political parties was held on
16 April 2013, to discuss ways to achieve unity
among various layers of Afghan society in
support of the peace process. A similar meeting
was held on 2 May 2013 with the Cooperation
Council of Political Parties and Coalitions of
Afghanistan
• In April and May 2013, the High Peace Council
held meetings with Afghan civil society
representatives to establish a forum to address
the concerns of civil society groups and promote
inclusivity in national peace dialogues
• On 4 July 2013, the High Peace Council
participated in a conference, entitled “Discussing
the Social Peace Strategy”, organized by a forum
of civil society groups. It was agreed that the
Council’s joint secretariat and the forum would
jointly establish a mechanism for the
implementation of the strategy
• A joint High Peace Council and ulema
conference was held in Kabul on 4 August 2013
to discuss ways to expand outreach through
mosques and religious centres to promote peace
and tolerance
• During Peace Week, in September 2013, the
High Peace Council organized a regional
conference on the role of women in the peace
process, in Jalalabad; an international ulema
conference on Islam, peace and tolerance, in
Kabul; and a High Peace Council and civil
society joint gathering, in Kabul. In addition,
some 120 outreach events, attended by more than
25,000 people, were held throughout the country
to promote peace and reconciliation

14-25215

19/36

A/68/789
S/2014/163

III.

Governance and institution-building
Benchmark: extension of Government authority throughout the country through
the establishment of democratic, legitimate, accountable institutions, down to the
local level, with the capacity to implement policies and to be increasingly capable
of sustaining themselves
Indicators of progress

Increased ability by Afghan authorities and
independent electoral institutions to
manage and conduct genuine and periodic
elections, with due regard to women’s
participation and constitutionally
guaranteed quotas

Metrics

• The National Assembly ratified the legal
framework for future elections, comprising the
electoral law and the law on the structures, duties
and authorities of the Independent Election
Commission and the Independent Electoral
Complaints Commission. The laws were
endorsed by the President in July 2013. The new
legislation reduced the quota for women in
provincial councils from 25 per cent to 20 per
cent
• The voter registration update commenced on
26 May 2013, and, as at 14 February 2014, a
total of 3,507,682 voter cards (34.6 per cent to
female voters) had been issued to those who had
reached 18 years of age, lost their voter cards or
moved since the holding of the previous polls
• Afghan national security forces expressed
confidence in the securing of nearly 94 per cent
of the 7,168 polling centres proposed by the
Commission for the 2014 elections. On
19 February, the Independent Election
Commission announced its list of 6,775 polling
centres for election day, expressing similar levels
of confidence
• On 31 July, the nine Commissioners for the
Independent Election Commission were formally
appointed. The Independent Electoral Complaints
Commission was established on 15 September,
followed by the appointment of its five
Commissioners and the authorization of the
Commissions’ initial budgets on 23 September.
The Commissioners for both electoral bodies
were appointed on the basis of a formal
consultative process mandated in the electoral
legislation. The Independent Election
Commission completed its operational plan,
which provides a detailed overview of the
processes that ensure that all necessary activities
are identified and sequenced and that those
activities meet all deadlines set out in the

20/36

14-25215

A/68/789
S/2014/163

Indicators of progress

Metrics

elections law, regulations, procedures and
guidelines
Establishment of a monitoring and
evaluation committee and development of
anti-corruption benchmarks

• On 28 September 2013, the Independent Joint
Anti-Corruption Monitoring and Evaluation
Committee released its fourth six-month report,
covering January to June 2013. In the report, the
Committee noted that progress had been made
but that further efforts were needed, including
the recovery of Kabul Bank assets. The
Committee added 36 new recommendations
to its existing list of 74
• On 21 October 2013, the Committee called on
the National Assembly to improve the mineral
law to better protect the mining sector against
corruption. Legislators incorporated the
Committee’s recommendations into the draft law
on increasing transparency and accountability in
the sector
• On 27 January 2014, the Committee released five
reports identifying significant vulnerabilities to
corruption in various sectors of government,
including the distribution of land to repatriates,
pension payments and appointments to the civil
service

Empowerment of anti-corruption
institutions to oversee a whole-ofgovernment approach to anti-corruption

• In the first quarter of 2013, the High Office of
Oversight and Anti-Corruption established an
anti-corruption committee within each ministry
to enhance coherence and greater outreach
in the implementation of the Government’s
anti-corruption policies. Each committee receives
technical support and training from the Office
• In September 2013, the National Assembly
approved the national audit law, mandating the
Supreme Audit Office to undertake audits of
government institutions
• On 9 December 2013, the Government launched
the Afghanistan Integrity Initiative, a United
Nations-backed anti-corruption project. The
initiative is aimed at strengthening the capacity
of administrative systems to tackle corruption
and will be implemented by the Ministries of
Education and Justice together with the Supreme
Audit Office and citizens’ groups

14-25215

21/36

A/68/789
S/2014/163

Indicators of progress

Metrics

Annual publication of asset declarations of
public officials

• The Government’s High Office of Oversight
registered the assets of 2,975 government
officials during the reporting period. The Office
has published information on the “asset
registration” of 44 senior government officials,
and asset verification has been completed for
33 high-level government officials, including
the President, Vice-Presidents, ministers and
governors. The verification of the asset
declarations of an additional 32 senior officials is
under way

Increased capacity of civil servants at the
central, provincial and district levels to
discharge functions and deliver services

• In 2013, the Civil Service Training Institute
delivered training on management, computer
skills, English-language proficiency, planning
and finance/accounting to 5,150 civil servants
• In 2013, the Independent Directorate for Local
Governance trained staff of 7 provincial
government offices, 29 district government
offices and 8 municipality offices on planning
and reporting, budgeting and human resources
management. The Directorate also established
resource centres in Bamyan and Jawzjan
provinces to provide public information on the
status of the administration

22/36

Increased transparency and effectiveness of
civil service appointments

• Merit-based recruitment of district governors
continued, with 49 new district governors
appointed in 2013. This brought the total number
of district governors recruited through this
process to 231. The overall total of deputy
provincial governors recruited under this system
has remained 32 since January 2013

Strengthened civil service reform
supported by a comprehensive approach to
capacity-building and donor-funded
technical assistance

• In 2013, five proposals were submitted by the
Ministries of Agriculture, Irrigation and
Livestock; Public Health; Communication and
Technology; Commerce; and Rural
Reconstruction and Development to the
Capacity-building for Results Programme
managed by the World Bank. The proposal from
the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and
Livestock has been approved by the programme ’s
advisory group and is currently being finalized
by its steering committee in advance of
implementation and the disbursement of funding

14-25215

A/68/789
S/2014/163

Indicators of progress

Metrics

• The United Nations and the World Bank
committed to the progressive alignment of
salaries for 6,000 to 7,000 government staff
currently paid through their funds, with an
agreed government scale for national technical
assistance
Implementation of the subnational
governance policy and development of
subnational regulatory, financing and
budgetary frameworks

• The municipality law is under review by the
Cabinet. Pending its finalization, the Independent
Directorate for Local Governance led the
development of municipal action plans to
improve revenue generation
• The national policy for governance and
development at the district and village levels was
approved by the Cabinet on 30 December 2013.
The amended provincial council law was adopted
by the lower house of the National Assembly on
4 January 2014. The local government law was
endorsed by the Cabinet and is awaiting the
approval of the National Assembly
• In 2013, authorities in all 34 provinces
completed one-year provincial development
plans

Development and publication of criteria for
administrative boundaries

• National and international institutions continue
to use the 2009 internal boundary data set as
stipulated by the Independent Directorate of
Local Governance and the Geodesy and
Cartography Head Office

Establishment of adequate infrastructure
for functioning government institutions,
especially at the subnational level

• The Independent Directorate of Local
Governance completed the construction of
4 provincial and 11 district administrative
buildings and 6 provincial residential buildings

Establishment of credible and accessible
judicial and penal systems that respect and
uphold the human rights of all citizens

• On 23 February 2014, the President signed the
criminal procedure code as approved by both
houses of the National Assembly
• In January 2014, the criminal law reform
working group, chaired by the Ministry of
Justice, finalized 220 articles of the draft penal
code. The current penal code is being revised to
incorporate all criminal laws enacted since 2001,
including counter-terrorism, anti-corruption,
anti-money-laundering and anti-humantrafficking laws

14-25215

23/36

A/68/789
S/2014/163

Indicators of progress

Metrics

• In 2013, the Director-General of the Central
Prisons Directorate signed 114 operational prison
directives to improve the implementation of
prison management and administration, as well
as promoting human rights regulations
• The national priority programme entitled “Law
and Justice for All” was endorsed at the meeting
of the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board
on 29 June 2013
• The Ministry of Justice increased the number of
legal aid offices to 31 in 2013. The offices are
staffed by 101 legal aid lawyers, an increase
compared with 84 in 2012. An additional
42 lawyers are provided through the Justice
Sector Development Programme of the
Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund
• In 2013, the provision of legal aid services by
non-governmental organizations decreased, with
the number of lawyers declining to an estimated
208 from 236 in 2012
• The number of lawyers registered with the
Afghanistan Independent Bar Association
increased from 1,500 in December 2012 to
approximately 2,000 in December 2013
• Following the formal transfer of the Central
Prisons Directorate to the Ministry of the Interior
in 2012, the pay review process for the
Directorate was completed on 23 October 2013,
to achieve parity in salary with the police and
improve staff retention
• The Central Prisons Directorate, in liaison with
other national and international stakeholders,
developed the Ministry of the Interior’s 10-year
vision for the Directorate, which was launched
on 30 June 2013. The Ministry, with United
Nations support, provided coordination and
technical assistance in the development of a
series of progressive two-year strategic plans that
support the implementation of the vision
• In response to a 33 per cent increase in the prison
population since 2012, three new prisons for men
and two for women became operational in 2013,
along with three juvenile rehabilitation centres

24/36

14-25215

A/68/789
S/2014/163

IV.

Human rights
Benchmark: improved respect for the human rights of Afghans, in line with the
Afghan Constitution and international law, with particular emphasis on the
protection of civilians, the situation of women and girls, freedom of expression
and accountability based on the rule of law
Indicators of progress

Reduction in the number of incidents of
unlawful use of force and intimidation of
civilians, through compliance by relevant
actors with international law

Metrics

• In 2013, conflict-related violence killed 2,959
civilians and injured 5,656, a 14 percent increase
in total civilian casualties compared with 2012.
Anti-government elements were responsible for
2,311 civilian deaths and 4,063 injuries, an
increase of 4 per cent compared with 2012.
Pro-government forces were responsible for
341 civilian deaths and 615 injuries, a 59 per
cent increase compared with 2012. Unattributed
ground engagements between anti-government
elements and pro-government forces resulted in
160 civilian deaths and 720 injuries, a 64 per
cent increase compared with 2012
• In 2013, the United Nations-led Country Task
Force on Monitoring and Reporting on Children
and Armed Conflict documented 1,694 child
casualties. A total of 545 children were killed
and 1,149 children were injured, an overall
increase of 42 per cent compared with 2012
• The Government continued the tracking of
civilian casualties through the civilian casualties
tracking cell in the Presidential Information
Coordination Centre
• To reduce civilian casualties from explosive
remnants of war, in December 2013 the
International Security Assistance Force
established procedures to support the marking
and clearance of military installations, including
firing ranges
• In 2013, the Taliban reported, in its regular
monthly statements, 277 incidents of civilian
casualties resulting from operations of
pro-government forces. UNAMA was able
to verify 174 of these incidents through its
reporting on conflict-related violence

14-25215

25/36

A/68/789
S/2014/163

Indicators of progress

Metrics

• The United Nations continued extensive
monitoring and advocacy efforts to strengthen
compliance with international law and UNAMA
recorded a 39 per cent decrease in civilian
casualties from pressure-plated improvised
explosive devices in 2013
Improved awareness by Afghans of their
rights and by the Government of its
obligations

• Following the issuance of presidential decree
No. 169 to address allegations of the torture and
ill-treatment of conflict-related detainees, the
Ministry of the Interior, the National Directorate
of Security and the Attorney-General’s Office
strengthened the training of their personnel,
including the introduction of human rights
modules at both the Directorate and Afghan
National Police academies
• In 2013, UNAMA published four public reports:
two on the protection of civilians, one on the
implementation of the law on the elimination of
violence against women and one on the treatment
of conflict-related detainees in Afghan custody.
In conjunction with the reports, UNAMA carried
out advocacy activities with various stakeholders
and the media to raise awareness among the
Afghan population
• The Government continued efforts to implement
the action plan to protect children from the
impact of the conflict and to prevent underage
recruitment by armed forces. In May 2013, the
United Nations submitted an official response to
the Government’s annual progress report and
assisted in the development of a 15-point plan to
expedite the implementation of the action plan by
the Government
• On 3 October 2013, the United Nations and
UNAMA organized the “Global Open Day on
Women, Peace and Security”, under the aegis of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). The
event was focused on the theme “Political
participation is everyone’s right: women as
voters and candidates”

26/36

14-25215

A/68/789
S/2014/163

Indicators of progress

Improved impact of, and support for, legal
and policy measures to combat violence
against women and girls

Metrics

• In 2013, both the Afghanistan Independent
Human Rights Commission and UNAMA issued
reports that addressed the implementation of the
law on the elimination of violence against
women. The reports noted progress and
continuing gaps in the enforcement of the
law by police, prosecutors and courts. The
implementation of the law was discussed at the
special meeting of the Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board held in January 2014
• Commissions for the elimination of violence
against women have been established in
32 provinces, in accordance with the provisions
of the law on the elimination of violence against
women, and the Ministry of Women’s Affairs
worked with local authorities in 11 provinces to
improve the implementation of the law, with
United Nations technical support
• Beginning on 25 November 2013, as part of the
16 Days of Activism against Gender Violence, an
initiative to raise awareness on ending violence
against women, the Ministry of Women’s Affairs
and the Ministry of Labour, Social Affairs,
Martyrs and Disabled conducted, with United
Nations support, a nationwide campaign on early
and child marriage
• A coordinated multisectoral response to genderbased violence continued to be developed in 2013.
The integration of professional assistance and
referral services into the health sector has been
initiated by the Ministry of Public Health, with
support from the United Nations Population Fund

Improved awareness of, and support for,
legal and policy measures related to
combating impunity and furthering
transitional justice

• In February 2013, civil society groups, supported
by UNAMA, launched the second phase of the
Afghan People’s Dialogue on Peace, which is
aimed at supporting inclusive dialogue to
produce local road maps for peace. By the end of
2013, the process had facilitated 187 focus group
discussions with 4,572 people representing a
broad social spectrum
• On 24 July 2013, the women’s committee of the
High Peace Council held a conference for gender
focal points from all ministries and directorates
to discuss women’s political participation and
their role in promoting the peace process

14-25215

27/36

A/68/789
S/2014/163

Indicators of progress

Metrics

• In December 2013, the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women (UN-Women) released a report, entitled
“Like a bird with broken wings: Afghan Women
Oral History, 1978-2008”, on its Afghan Women
Oral History initiative, covering 30 years of
conflict. The testimonies of Afghan women
contained in the report aim to provide a “voice to
those denied a place in official history” and share
their personal experiences, whether as victims or
witnesses, to contribute to reconciliation and
change
Government fulfilment of reporting
requirements on international human
rights covenants and conventions and
implementation of the recommendations
from the Human Rights Council universal
periodic review of Afghanistan

• In December 2012, the Government of
Afghanistan, with United Nations support,
successfully requested a 10-year extension of
the time frame for meeting its obligations under
article 5 of the Anti-Personnel Mine Ban
Convention. The implementation of a 10-year
action plan commenced in April 2013 to remove
all known remaining landmine contamination by
2023
• On 10 July 2013, Afghanistan presented its
combined initial and second periodic reports
on the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women. The
Government and civil society delegations, with
United Nations support, presented their findings
and responded to the queries of the Convention’s
Committee
• In November 2013, the Government submitted
its second report to the universal periodic review
mechanism of the Human Rights Council. The
report addressed the Government’s progress in
implementing the 117 recommendations made by
the Council in 2009
• In December 2013, the Ministry of Justice, with
United Nations support, conducted consultations
with government ministries and institutions to
prioritize the implementation of its commitments
under the Convention on the Rights of the Child

28/36

14-25215

A/68/789
S/2014/163

Indicators of progress

Increased capacity and commitment of the
Government of Afghanistan and the
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights
Commission, as the Afghan national
human rights institution, to respect,
protect, fulfil and promote human rights

Metrics

• Following the five-year review of the
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights
Commission by the International Coordinating
Committee of National Human Rights
Institutions on 18 November 2013, the
Subcommittee on Accreditation decided to defer
the re-accreditation of the Commission until the
Committee’s second session of 2014 to allow the
Commission to address concerns raised regarding
its appointment processes, gender staffing ratio
and financing
• In 2013, the Afghanistan Independent Human
Rights Commission published reports on
violence against women, the situation of
children, rape and honour killing, citizens’
access to justice and the conditions of the elderly
in Afghanistan
• In 2013, the Afghanistan Independent Human
Rights Commission, with United Nations
support, continued to enhance its efforts to
monitor and address child rights violations.
Following training for the Child Rights Unit
undertaken in the first half of 2013, the number
of child rights violations recorded by the
Commission rose from 21 in the second quarter
of 2013 to more than 200 by the end of 2013

V.

Economic and social development
Benchmark: government policies supported by the international community that
promote sustainable economic growth and contribute to overall stability
Indicators of progress

National priority programmes are designed
and implemented with international
support and endorsement

Metrics

• In June 2013, the Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board endorsed the national priority
programme entitled “Law and Justice for All”,
bringing the number of endorsed national priority
programmes to 21, out of a total of
22 programmes
• On 3 July 2013, the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework senior officials’
meeting was held in Kabul. It was noted that
both the Government and the international
community had made progress in meeting their
commitments, but that greater efforts were

14-25215

29/36

A/68/789
S/2014/163

Indicators of progress

Metrics

needed on outstanding issues, including aid
effectiveness, human rights, integrity in public
finance and inclusive growth
• Following these two events, the Government
established a national priority programme
implementation technical working group. The
group is currently reviewing five national
priority programmes to ascertain best practices
on financial modalities to apply to the
implementation of the other programmes
More equitable distribution of development
assistance and Government expenditure
throughout Afghanistan

• The Ministry of Finance has developed a
provincial budgeting policy. The policy, now
before the Cabinet for review, is aimed at
balancing the role of the central Government
while strengthening the ability of provincial and
district authorities to improve direct service
delivery
• As at 11 February 2014, a total of 23 provinces
were participating in the ongoing pilot provincial
budgeting programme, led by the Ministry of
Finance. The programme provides allocations of
$3 million to the most underdeveloped provinces
and $1 million to more developed ones. It is
focused on the development of local capacity to
plan for urgent development needs, particularly
in areas that have seen the closure of provincial
reconstruction teams

Increased revenue collection and
sustainable growth based on Afghan
resources

30/36

• The World Bank’s January 2014 Global
Economic Prospects report shows a slowdown of
Afghanistan’s growth in gross domestic product
from 14.4 per cent in 2012 to 3.1 per cent in
2013. The slower economic growth is expected
to continue in the first half of 2014. As a result,
revenue collection is estimated to have declined
from 10.3 per cent of gross domestic product in
2012 to 9.6 per cent in 2013, according to a
World Bank presentation made at the special
meeting of the Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board held in January 2014

14-25215

A/68/789
S/2014/163

VI.

Regional cooperation
Benchmark: sustained and effective regional coordination in support of
prosperity, peace and stability
Indicators of progress

Improved coordination of regional bodies
and increased regional investments

Metrics

• On 20 March in Ashgabat, the Presidents of
Afghanistan, Turkmenistan and Tajikistan signed
a memorandum of understanding on the
establishment of railroads linking the three
countries
• On 29 March, participants in the eleventh
ministerial meeting of the Asia Cooperation
Dialogue, held in Dushanbe, discussed ways to
enhance regional connectivity to promote trade,
investment, transit and people-to-people contacts
• On 26 April in Almaty, participants in the third
ministerial conference on the Istanbul Process
adopted implementation plans for the six
confidence-building measures. The declaration
adopted at the conference stressed the political
nature of the process but emphasized the need for
demonstrable progress in agreed activities and
called for interim, ad hoc funding by participants
• On 9 July, progress was made on the
Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India gas
pipeline project, with a contract signed in
Ashgabat between Afghanistan and
Turkmenistan on the sale and purchase of gas
• On 13 July in Kyrgyzstan, a meeting of the
Council of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization reaffirmed
support for Afghanistan as an independent,
peaceful, neutral and prosperous State free from
terrorism and drug-related crime. The central
role of the United Nations in international efforts
to support Afghanistan was also reaffirmed
• On 4 August, President Karzai visited the Islamic
Republic of Iran and a memorandum of
understanding on strategic cooperation between
the National Security Council of Afghanistan and
the Supreme National Security Council of the
Islamic Republic of Iran was signed

14-25215

31/36

A/68/789
S/2014/163

Indicators of progress

Metrics

• On 10 and 11 September, a delegation of the
Pakistan Senate Standing Committee on Defence
met with Afghan counterparts to review security
issues and cooperation
• On 12 and 13 September in Bishkek, President
Karzai attended the thirteenth summit of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization and
committed to the further strengthening of
relations with the organization
• On 16 and 17 September in Islamabad,
participants in the fourth session of the
Intergovernmental Council on the Central AsiaSouth Asia Electricity Transmission and Trade
Project adopted three resolutions establishing
contract structures and procurement and finance
committees
• On 26 September, the seventh round of the
Pakistan-Afghanistan parliamentary dialogue
was held in Islamabad
• On 21 October in Dushanbe, the Presidents of
Afghanistan and Tajikistan signed an agreement
on demining, border crossing protocols and
insurance cooperation
• On 30 October, Afghanistan, the Russian
Federation and Tajikistan signed a protocol on
border cooperation
• From 12 to 15 December, President Karzai
carried out an official visit to India. During the
visit, discussions were focused on enhancing the
implementation of the two countries’ strategic
partnership agreement and regional integration
and development, including through the “Heart
of Asia” process
• On 19 December, a parliamentary delegation
from Pakistan visited Kabul. Parliamentarians
from both sides suggested that Afghanistan and
Pakistan sign a strategic cooperation partnership
agreement

32/36

14-25215

A/68/789
S/2014/163

Indicators of progress

Metrics

• On 17 January 2014, India hosted the senior
officials’ meeting of the Istanbul Process on
Regional Security and Cooperation for a Secure
and Stable Afghanistan, held in New Delhi.
Progress achieved in terms of the six agreed
confidence-building measures and their proposed
funding modalities was discussed

VII.

Partnership between the Government of Afghanistan and the
international community
Benchmark: coherent support by the international community for Afghan
priorities within an Afghan-led coordination framework
Indicators of progress

Increased percentage of aid aligned with
the Afghanistan National Development
Strategy and Government priorities

Metrics

• The Government issued two guidance notes to
support the implementation of its aid
management policy: one on alignment with the
national priority programmes (in March 2013)
and one on on-budget modalities (May 2013)
• A task force led by the Ministry of Finance was
established in 2013 to advocate and mobilize
support for the implementation among the
Government, the donor community, other
multilateral partners, civil society and the private
sector of the commitments set out in the New
Deal for Engagement in Fragile States. The
Ministry, together with the United Nations, is
conducting a study to examine the five
peacebuilding and State-building goals of the
New Deal
• In 2013, an on-budget modality for transferring
funds within the Government to strengthen the
financial management capacity of provincial and
district-level support for the payment of salaries
under the “Education for All” national priority
programme was established with support from
the United Nations as part of its programme for
the enhancement of literacy

14-25215

33/36

A/68/789
S/2014/163

Indicators of progress

VIII.

Metrics

Improved accountability of procurement
and contracting on behalf of the
Government and the international
community

• In November 2013, the Government held a highlevel national procurement conference to address
public procurement-related impediments to
budget execution, service delivery and the
achievement of development outcomes. The
conference concluded with a declaration on the
public procurement law, outlining national and
international stakeholders’ affirmation of their
responsibility to uphold the principles of
transparency, accountability and fairness in
public procurement

Strengthening of the Joint Coordination
and Monitoring Board in support of the
Kabul Process and as a means of regular
review of progress on Afghan priorities
and mutual commitments

• Participants in the special meeting of the Joint
Coordination and Monitoring Board held on
29 January 2014 assessed the progress made in
the implementation of the deliverables of the
Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework and
underscored the need to accelerate progress
on key indicators, including anti-corruption
measures, the implementation of the law on the
elimination of violence against women and the
meeting of International Monetary Fund
benchmarks

Counter-narcotics
Benchmark: sustained trend in the reduction of poppy cultivation, narcotics
production and drug addiction
Indicators of progress

Decrease in poppy cultivation, narcotics
production and addiction rates

34/36

Metrics

• Opium poppy cultivation in Afghanistan
increased in 2013, surpassing all previously
recorded levels. The cultivation amounted to
some 209,000 hectares, representing a 36 per
cent increase compared with 2012. Opium
production in 2013 rose to some 5,500 tons, a
49 per cent increase compared with 2012. The
number of poppy-free provinces decreased from
17 in 2012 to 15 in 2013. The vast majority
(89 per cent) of the total opium cultivation in
2013 was recorded in nine Provinces in
Afghanistan’s southern and western regions:
Helmand, Kandahar, Farah, Uruzgan, Nangarhar,
Badakhshan, Badghis, Daykundi and Nimroz

14-25215

A/68/789
S/2014/163

Indicators of progress

Metrics

• There were no new data available in 2013 to
indicate a decrease in addiction rates within the
country. However, the Government has
continued the implementation of the drug
demand reduction strategy and the national
strategic framework for HIV and advocated with
the World Bank and the Global Fund to Fight
AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria for the
continuation and expansion of HIV prevention,
treatment and care services
• The provision of drug treatment services
increased to cover approximately 32,000
individuals through 101 treatment services in
28 provinces. In 2013, the increase in services
included the establishment and strengthening
of harm-reduction services through 57 centres in
11 provinces. These initiatives in community
and prison settings were focused on treatment
services for vulnerable groups, including female
drug users, spouses of male injecting users and
adolescent drug users
Increase in effective interdiction and
counter-trafficking efforts

• In 2013, the counter-narcotics police conducted
3,243 operations, seizing 7,157 kilograms of
heroin, 23,979 kilograms of morphine, 115,650
kilograms of opium, 31,926 kilograms of
hashish, 13,697 kilograms of cannabis and
11 kilograms of methamphetamine. In addition,
65,187 litres of liquid precursors and 45,806
kilograms of solid precursor materials were
seized. The counter-narcotics police also assisted
with the eradication of 7,348 hectares of opium
poppy and dismantled 71 heroin manufacturing
laboratories. These activities led to the arrest of
3,081 suspects, with 25 counter-narcotics police
being killed and 74 wounded
• The Regional Intelligence Working Group on
Precursors continues to enhance regional
cooperation in the fight against precursor
trafficking. In 2013, five investigation cases of
precursor chemicals, amounting to 141,055 litres,
recommended by the Working Group were
reviewed and backtracking investigations
launched

14-25215

35/36

A/68/789
S/2014/163

Indicators of progress

Metrics

• In 2013, seven coordination meetings within the
framework of the Triangular Initiative and the
Afghanistan-Kyrgyzstan-Tajikistan Initiative
resulted in agreement on a number of
recommendations, including with respect to
joint/simultaneous operations. Afghan law
enforcement agencies carried out six joint
operations with Tajikistan, resulting in the
seizure of 430.4 kilograms of narcotic drugs
• Under the Triangular Initiative, the Maritime
Regional Security Initiative, aimed at
strengthening maritime cooperation between the
Islamic Republic of Iran and Pakistan, resulted in
the seizure of more than 7 tons of narcotic drugs
Increase in licit agriculture and related
private capital investment in areas
previously used for poppy cultivation

• In 2013, the Ministry of Counter-Narcotics
played a key role in incorporating counternarcotics objectives into the national priority
programmes, including the development of a
monitoring mechanism to measure the increase in
licit agriculture and related private capital
investment
• In 2013, the Ministry of Counter-Narcotics took
steps to revise and enhance the national drug
control strategy to develop thematic policies
• Twelve small-scale livelihood projects managed
by the Ministries of Counter-Narcotics and of
Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock together
with the United Nations are being implemented
in the northern and western provinces of
Afghanistan to support an increase in licit
agriculture, including a land stabilization project
that benefits 6,372 families

36/36

14-25215
