Retolatlone adopted on the reporll of the Special Polldcal Committee
' The Working Group is composed of the following Member
States: FltANCB, GHANA, JAPAN, LEBANON, NORWAY, TRINIDAD
AND ToBAOO, TuuEY, UNITED KINoDoM oF GREAT BRITAIN
AND N01tnmRN lllLAND and UNITED STATES oF AMERICA,

26'70 (XXV). Comprehensive review of the whole
queatlon of peace-keeping -operalions in all
their aapect11
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2006 (XIX) of 18 February 196S, 20S3 A (XX) of 1S December 1965,
2249 (S-V) of 23 May 1967, 2308 (XXII) of 13 December 1967 and 2451 (XXIII) of 19 December
1968,
Recalling in particular its resolution 2576 (XXIV)
of 15 December 1969, in which it requested the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations to continue its work and to submit to the General Assembly
at its twenty-fifth session a comprehensive report
on the United Nations military observers established
or authorized by the Security Council for observation
purposes pursuant to Council resolutions, as well as
a progress report on such work as the Special Committee miaht
able to undertake on any other models
of peace-Keeping operations,
Having received and examined the report of the
Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations of
1 October 1970,'
Noting with regret that the mandate entrusted to the
Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations has
not as yet been fulfilled,
Conscious nevertheless that the problems with which
the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations
has been faced are of a fundamental nature and _that
the Special Committee believes that more time is
required,
Realizing that problems of such a fundamental
nature require further consultations within the context
of the United Nations in order to enable the Special
Committee on Peace-keeping Operations to fulfil its
mandate,
Bearing in mind the concern of Member States, as
expressed in solemn declarations adopted on the occasion of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the United
Nations, over the need to reach an early agreement for
carrying out United Nations peace-keeping operations
consistent with the Charter of the United Nations,
1. Takes note of the report of the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations;
2. Stresses the importance of achieving agreed guidelines to enhance the effectiveness of United Nations
peace-kee_Ping operations consistent with the Charter
and to this end urges the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations to accelerate its work;
3. Instructs the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations to mtensify its efforts with a view
to completing, b).' 1 May 1971, its report on the
United Nations nnlitary observers established or authorized by the Securitr. Council for observation purposes
pursuant to Councll resolutions and to determine, in
the light of the progress achieved by that date, whether
alternative methods are advisable for the early fulfilment by the Special Committee of its mandate to
reach an agreement on peace-keeping operations in
conformity with the Charter;

oe

• Ibid,, Twenty-fifth Session, Annexes, agenda item 36,
document A/8081.

11

4. Notes with interest the suggestions, J)!oposals
and documents submitted on this item during the preaent session and transmits to the Special Committee
on Peace-keeping Operations the records of the debates
on the item at this session, together with the documents put forward in the course of those debates;
S. Requests the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, in the course of its further deliberations, to study carefully and to take full account of
the views expressed and the suggestions, proposals and
documents submitted at the present session, and to
report on them to the General Assembly at its twentysixth session, as appropriate, within the context of
its work;
6. Directs the Special Committee on Peace-keepina
Operations to submit to the General Assembly at its
twenty-sixth session a comeleted comprehensive report
on the United Nations military observers establlsned
or authorized by the Security Council for observation
purposes pursuant to Council resolutions, as well u
a progress report on any other models of peace-keeping
operations.
1921st pltnary ,Mettn,,
8 December 1970.

2671 (XXV). The pollclee of apartheid of the
Government of South Afrlca1
A

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the work of the Special Committee
on Apartheid, 8
Considering it essential to intensify United Nations
efforts to promote concerted international action for
the elimination of apartheid in South Africa,
Recognizing the need for greater co-ordination of
efforts by the United Nations towards this end and
for the elimination of duplication, in order to utilize
the resources for a more effective international campaign against apartheid,
1. Requests the Special Committee on Apartheid
constantly to review all aspects of the policies of
apartheid in South Africa and its international repercussions, including:
(a) Legislative, administrative and other racially
discriminatory measures in South Africa and their
effects;
( b) Repression of opponents of apartheid;
( c) Efforts by the Government of South Africa to
extend its inhuman policies of apartheid beyond the
borders of South Africa;
( d) Ways and means of promoting concerted international action to secure the elimination of apartheid,·
and tc report from time to time, as appropriate, to
the General Assembly or the Security Council, or
both;
2. Draws the attention of all United Nations organs
concerned to this decision, so that any undue duplication of efforts may be avoided;
T The decision of the General Assembly to shorten the name
of the Special Committee on the Policies of Apartheid of tho
Government of the Republic of South Africa (see "Other
decisions" below, p. 37) has been taken into account in the
present resolution.
e See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fifth
Session, Supplement No. 22 (A/8022/Rev.1).
