TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR

MEETING: 23 AUGUST 1968

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Puge

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1444) . . . . . . . , . , . , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . .

1

Letter dated 21 August 1968 from the representatives of Canada, Denmark,
France, Paraguay, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/8758) . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . , , . , . . . . . . . . . , . . I .

3

S/PV. 1444

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Sent&y Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN

HUNDRED

AND FORTY-FOURTH

MEETING

Held in New York, on Friday, 23 August 1968, at 5 p.m.

!
1
7

President: Joao August0 DE ARAUJO CASTRO
(Brazil).

camouflage for the accomplishment of their hidden aims.
That is what happened in the days when attempts were
made, under the United Nations flag and under cover of the
high authoritative name of this Organization-which
was
created to strengthen world peace and to guarantee the
peace of all peoples-to achieve their imperialist aims, to
perpetrate their bloody misdeeds in Korea, for example.
Attempts were repeatedly made to use the United Nations
and shelter behind its high authority, behind the United
Nations Organization’s blue flag of peace in other cases as
well. That is why the originators of the unsuccessful scheme
have sought a new diversionary manoeuvre.

Present:

The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (VAgendall444)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter dated 21 August 1968 from the representatives
of Canada, Denmark, France, Paraguay, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8758).

5. Having failed in the Security Council, the representatives of the Western countries are now engaging in a
new provocatory action essentially designed to achieve the
same ends. There’s no doubt about it, this action is
detrimental to the cause of peace and international security, and is directed against the interests of Czechoslovakia, of the Czechoslovak people, and against the
countries and peoples of the whole socialist community.

Adoption of the agenda
1. The PRESIDENT: The provisional agenda for this
afternoon’s meeting is before the Council in document
S/Agenda/1444. If I hear no objrction, I shall take it that
the agenda is adopted.

6. The imperialist Powers and their monopolistic propaganda organs have decided to take advantage of the
temporary situation in and around Czechoslovakia for their
own nefarious ends. They decided to act on the principle: if
they have thrown us out of the door, maybe we can sneak
back through the window. This, as is well known, is a
method characteristic of people of a very specific category.
And those are the methods they have decided to use in this
case,

2. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): Mr. President, yesterday, or, to
be more exact, early this morning at the previous meeting
of the Security Council, the Soviet delegation already set
forth its views and expressed its opinion concerning the
new draft resolution [S/8767] 1 which, on the initiative of
certain delegations, was submitted by the representative of
Canada.

7. As a result of such tactics a new draft resolution has
emerged, submitted by the representative of Canada behind
whom-there’s no doubt about it, everybody knows it, it is
no secret-we can clearly perceive the aims of the United
States representative first and foremost, while further in the
background also looms the shadow of the representative of
the United Kingdom.

3. After the detailed debate on the question of the
so-called situation in Czechoslovakia, imposed on the
Security Council contrary to all common sense, without
any real need for it, and in contravention of the Charter
and the rules of procedure, and after the failure of the
attempt to impose a resolution on the Security Council, a
new attempt is now being made to employ diversionary
tactics and drag not only the Security Council, not only the
United Nations Organization, but even the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations into this scheme which is
being launched by certain Powers in connexion with the
events in Czechoslovakia.

8. Although the wording of this draft is different from
that of the draft resolution presented previously which was
rejected by the Council, nevertheless this draft is in essence
derived from the same aims hostile to the socialist camp
and to the peoples of the socialist countries. It is based on
the same slanderous inventions,
misrepresenting
the true
situation in Czechoslovakia. This draft resolution constitutes a new attempt by the imperialist Powers to
interfere in the internal affairs of Czechos!ovakia and in the
common affairs of the countries of the socialist community
which are both able and in a position to settle any problem
arising in their mutual relations within the framework of
the friendly fraternal co-operation of the socialist countries.

4. Thus, an open, direct and cynical attempt is being made
by the imperialists to impose on the Council the customary
imperialist practice of using the United Nations as a
1 See1443rd meeting,para. 293.
1

the Council in document S/Agenda/1444.Wehave not yet
adopted the agenda,so it is under discussion.
1 understand
that the representativeof the Soti@ Union hasobjections
to the adoption of the agenda. If there are no other
comments,I think the normal way to proceedwould befor
the Presidentto put the provisional agendaasit appears
in
documentS/Agenda/l444 to the vote.

9. But, as I have already pointed out, the most odious
feature of this new scheme of the sponsors of the new draft
resolution is that, in this case, there is an attempt to drag
the Secretary-General of the United Nations-this figure
highly esteemed by all of us, this outstanding political
leader who occupies that important international post by
the common consent of us all-into the accomplishment of
these same plans motivated by the desire to support the
forces of reaction and counter-revolution in Czechoslovakia. It is with these objectives in view that the present
draft resolution provides that the Secretary-General shall
appoint his representative to carry out duties which, under
the Charter and according to the most elementary rules of
international law, can only be regarded as direct interference in the internal affairs of a Member State of the
United Nations, under the flag and protection of the United
Nations and of its Secretary-General.

15. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translatedfrom Russian):Point of order.
16. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representativeof the
Soviet Union on a point of order.
17. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): But who suggestedthat tile
questionbe settled by a vote, Mr. President?
18. The PRESIDENT: Before callingon the representative
of the United States, I should like to draw attention to the
proceduralsituation as I seeit. When a documentisbefore
us, and when I say, “if I hear no objection I shallt&e it
that the document is adopted” and then I hear a
objection, the only way for the Presidentto proceed
normally, unlessthe objection is withdrawn, is to proceed
to a vote. I seeno other way of settlingthe situation,

10. Obviously, according to established practice and the
rules of procedure, after the rejection this very day, 23
August, of the above-mentioned draft resolution hastily
concocted by the Anglo-Americans, it is impossible to put
to the vote any new draft on the same question-a draft
which they are trying to justify by the same unsubstantial
arguments as those previously rejected by the Security
Council. The essence of the matter and the aims of the
sponsors of these proposals are not altered in the least just
because the sponsors of the draft act in a way described in
the well-known Russian proverb: “Pour the same soup, but
a bit thinner”.

19. Mr. BALL (United Statesof America): I seeno reasell
why we should play the same bad comedy every other
night. We had this problem before us, I think, two ni@
ago.The Soviet Union objected to the inscriptionof certain
items on the agenda, and then, when it come to the
question whether the Council shouldexpressits will ontile
inscription of those items, the Soviet Union took the
position that it did not want to vote.

11. The Soviet delegation, on instruction from the Soviet
Government, has declared repeatedly in this Council that
the Soviet Union has considered and continues to consider
the discussion of the question imposed on the Security
Council and inscribed on the agenda earlier as unjustified,
wholly without foundation, and contrary to the Charter of
the United Nations. Consequently, not a single Article, not
a single Chapter of the Charter of the United Nations
provides any basis for consideration of this question, and
this was essentially confirmed by last night’s meeting.

20. Now, I see no alternative except the oneyou have
expressed, Mr. President; and to clarify the procedural
situation I make a formal motion that, sincewehaveheard
an objection from the Soviet representative,thismatterof
the adoption of the agendashouldnow be put to avote.
21. The PRESIDENT: Before proceedingto the vote,1
call on the representativeof the Soviet Union.

12. The new diversionary attempt which is being made is
just as contrary to the United Nations Charter as was the
draft submitted by the United States and some other
countries and which was rejected at last night’s meeting.
This time, a new attempt is being made to impose a
decision on the Council at any price; a decision which,
apart from anything else, is designed, in violation of the
Charter, to deprive the socialist countries of the possibility
of-or rather, to hinder the socialist countries from-settling
the problems which have arisen among them in a calm and
peaceful atmosphere.

22. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet SocialistRepublics)
(translatedfrom Russian):Mr. President,duringthe debate
on the question,imposedon the Councilby the delegations
of the United States and the United Kingdom,we have
already been repeatedly convinced that the most absurd
comedieswere being performed here by the American
representative. He is the one who has bee11
the leading
comedianhere. So much for comedies.
23. As for the substanceof the matter, I did not conclude
my remarksby a formal proposalfor a vote; consequently,
I did not insist on a vote, nor make a proposalfor one.
Therefore, it seems,Mr. President,that you did not exactly
understand my objections. I object in principle to a
discussionof this question, but I do not proposethat it be
put to a vote.

13. In the light of all these considerations set forth in the
brief statements of the Soviet delegation yesterday and
reiterated today, the Soviet delegation sees no basis for
discussing this matter in the Security Council, and it
addresses an appeal to the President of the Counci!
requesting that this opinion and view of the Soviet
delegation be taken into account.

24. Mr. American delegate, your impatienceis utterly
incomprehensible.Yesterday you lost your patience;butal
leastkeep it today.

14. The PRESIDENT: I wish to clarify the procedural
situation. I thought that the provisional agenda was before
2

25. Therefore, I should like to think that, in accordance
with the practice in the work of the Security Council in
such cases, the President will make matters clear to the
representative who has expressed his views concerning a
matter of principle, and ask whether he is proposing a vote
or whether he insists on a vote. This would be the correct,
normal, logical practice and a long established one in regard
to the work of the Security Council. But at this point the
American representative, losing his patience as usual, breaks
in. Our experience in the discussion of this question has
shown that he has some sort of special inclination, some
fondness for voting. Vote, vote, vote at any price, and as
fast as possible. This became particularly apparent at last
night’s meeting. Either he wanted to go to sleep, in view of
the lateness of the hour, or else he had some other, more
weighty reasons. But let us leave that to his conscience.

adoption of the agenda, in this case, or on a given issue. But
if someone does not press for a vote, it does not mean
automatically that he withdraws his objection in principle.
33. The PRESIDENT: While I think that in certain cases
there are objections to the agenda and objections to the
vote. So I think that the simplest way for me to proceed is
to say that if I hear no objections I shall take it that the
agenda is adopted. Are there any objections?
34. As I hear no objection, the agendais adopted.
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 21 August 1966 from the representatives of
Canada, Denmark, France, Paraguay,the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/6758)

26. Therefore, I stress once again that I do not insist on a
vote, I do not propose a vote, and I see no grounds for the
American delegate again to show his impatience, his
particular fondness for voting, and for insisting on voting.
Unless a proposal is introduced not to inscribe the question
on the agenda, there is no reason to vote.

35. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
previously taken by the Security Council, I now propose, if
there is no objection, to invite the representatives of
Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria and Poland to take seats at the
Council table.

27. Mr, BALL (United States of America): Let me say
first that I do have a great fondness for votes. We have a
democratic tradition in this country, and I can well
understand the allergy which my Soviet colleague feels for
the resort to democratic processes.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. Tarabanov,
(Bulgaria) and Mr. L. Kasprzyk (Poland) took places at the
Council table.

28. On the matter of procedure I think the situation is
this-if I may make a suggestion to you, Mr.President.
There has been an objection, The normal way to resolve an
objection is to have an expression of view by the Council. If
the Soviet representative does not wish to have an
expression of view by the Council on his objection, then he
should withdraw his objection, I think it is as simple as
that.

!

36. The PRESIDENT: In addition, I should like to inform
the members of the Security Council that I received a letter
a short time ago from the Deputy Permanent Representative of Yugoslavia, which reads as follows:
“Upon instructions from my Government, I have the
honour to inform you that in accordance with Article 31
of the Charter, I should like to participate in the debate
on the question now before the Security Council.

29. The PRESIDENT: I should like to state that I agree
with the representative of the Soviet Union to the extent
that in some cases, although objections have been raised,
representatives have stated that they do not press for a
vote. But in those cases it is obvious that the representatives
do not insist on their objections. We could proceed that
way if there is a general agreement. However, a motion has
been proposed by the representative of the United States
that we vote on the agenda. If the representative of the
United States drops his motion and agrees that we should
proceed without a vote, with the understanding that the
representative of the Soviet Union does not press for a vote,
we could consider the agenda as adopted.

1
I

//
“(Signed) Zivojin JAZIC
“Deputy Permanent Representative”
37. In view of the contents of this letter I propose now, if
I hear no objection, to invite the representative of
Yugoslavia to take a seat at the council table, in order to
participate without vote in the discussion.
At the invitation of the President, Afr. 2. Jazic,
(Yugoslavia) took a place at the Council table.
38. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will now
continue its consideration of the question before it. Before
I give the floor to the first speaker on my list, I should like
to draw attention to document S/8767, a draft resolution
submitted at the last meeting by the delegations of Brazil,
Canada, Denmark, France, Paraguay, Senegal, the United
Kingdom and the United States.

30. I shall thus again state that if I hear no objection I
shall take it that the agenda is adopted,
3 1. Mr. TARDOS (Hungary): I feel that my knowledge of
procedure is considerably less than yours, Mr.President.
But I feel that there is a slight disagreement between US
now.

39. The first speaker on my list is the representative of
Canada.

32. It seems to me that someone may have an objection in
principle to the discussion of a matter but that, at the same
time, it may not be necessary to insist on a vote-on the

40. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): In the early hours of this
day I had the honour to introduce a draft resolution,
3

i

we are concerned primarily with the fate of nations,
whatever may be their political, economic or SOCid system,
which may be subject to outside intervention. Fourth, we
have acted only as loyal members of the Security
Council.

contained in document S/8767, which would provide for
the immediate dispatch to Prague by the Secretary-General
of a special representative to seek the release and ensure
the personal safety of the Czechoslovak leaders under
detention and report back urgently.

47. I think this sets forth the Canadian position clearly, 1
will only add that I hope members of this Council will now
be able to give serious consideration to the humanitarian
proposal which was put forward in the name of eight
delegations, and that our consultations will enable us to
obtain the maximum support for some action which, if
implemented, might have the effect of providing some
assurance which is now lacking about the intentions of the
Soviet Union and its associates in respect to the treatment
of acknowledged leaders of Czechoslovakia.

41. As I explained at that time, members of this Council
cannot help but be concerned about the fate of acknowledged leaders of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic. In
the light of the armed invasion of Czechoslovakia by the
Soviet Union and some of its Warsaw Pact allies, this
proposal is essentially a humanitarian one and, as I said
earlier today, it represents the minimum the Council can do
in the light of the blocking of more substantive action by
the Soviet Union through the use of its veto.

48. The PRESIDENT: I understand that the representative
of Hungary has asked for the floor to speak on a point of
order, and I call on him for that purpose.

42. Mr. President, as you rightly noted in referring to this
draft resolution, which is now being distributed, it is tabled
on behalf of eight Member States, who are acting in this
case with the utmost seriousness and determination to have
some positive action taken by this Council if at all possible.

49. Mr. TARDOS (Hungary):
My point of order is
prompted by the statement of the representative of Canada,
He emphasized to us at great length the humanitarian
character of the proposal before the Council. He is one of
the co-sponsors who introduced this draft resolution;
therefore, we have to take at face value the characterization
given by the co-sponsors, and it seems to me that to deal
with humanitarian questions the United Nations has some
other Councils and bodies and, therefore, that this proposal
would belong to them and not to the Security Council.

43, The representative of the Soviet Union, Ambassador
Malik, unfortunately immediately took exception to this
straightforward,
uncomplicated, humanitarian proposal,
putting the whole issue to the Council in the context of a
“dirty game”, charges which he repeated today with
further, I may say, embellishments. He went on to describe
me as “the main spokesman and representative of AngloAmerican circles” [1443rd meeting, para. 31OJ. This may
have been intended as a compliment, or it may not have
been, but whatever it is I want to make it quite clear that it
is not accurate.

50. Mr. BERARD (France) (translated from BenchJ: 1
should like to explain briefly the position of my delegation,

44. I am very proud of the fact that 1 was authorized and
requested by representatives from four continents-not the
very narrow Anglo-American group, but the four continents-to introduce the draft resolution now circulated in
the document to which I have referred. It must be
recognized that the overwhelming weight of world opinion
does not accept the Soviet version of events in Czechoslovakia in the last three days.

51. Nothing, in fact, has happened as yet to calm the
feelings of international opinion, shared by our Govern.
ments, at the announcement of the arrest by the foreign
military forces which have invaded and are occapyisg
Czechoslovakia, of Mr. Dubcek, the First Secretary of tire
Czechoslovak Communist party, Mr. Cernik, and several
other political personalities and senior public officials of
that country, We still have no news of these officials. Sonic
press agency reports suggest they may have been taken by
force to an unknown destination; others have stated that
they have been molested. In any case, it seems they are sot
free either to communicate with their countrymen, or to
travel, nor to carry out their official duties.

45. Now I have no intention of following the representative of the Soviet Union, whose personal qualities I
greatly respect, in an exchange of incivilities and accusations in which he has tried to characterize as an “illegal”
intervention the legitimate interest of members of this
Council in the intervention undertaken by the Soviet Union
and some of its allies in the internal affairs of Czechoslovakia. I shall let the records of the Council speak for
themselves in answer to this contention by our Soviet
colleague.

52. We would be the first to rejoice greatly if it could be
established beyond question that this information is iacor.
rect. In the meantime, internatibnal opinion remains deeply
troubled concerning the fate of these persons. That is why
the French delegation has joined the co-sponsors of the
draft resolution asking the Secretary-General to send a
special representative to Prague immediately with a mission
to seek the release and ensure the safety of these
Czechoslovak public figures.

46. I will only say this, however, as regards the Canadian
position. First, we have scrupulously avoided any interference of any kind in any aspect of the developments in
Czechoslovakia. Second, we have no interest in promoting
unrest in Central Europe or anywhere else by efforts to
influence the type of government which may exist there.
What is at issue here is not whether Czechoslovakia should
be a communist State. The issue has been, and continues to
be, the inadmissibility under the Charter of intervention in
the internal affairs of any State by any other State. Third,

53. Such a measure, the essentially humanitarian aspect of
which, I may say in turn, needs no emphasis, is justified by
a situation we cannot disregard. Therefore the French
delegation hopes that the draft resolution before US will
receive
the widest possible support from the members of
the Council.
4

54. Mr. BORCH (Denmark): I have asked to speak to
make a few remarks with regard to the Danish attitude to
the draft resolution contained in document S/8767, presented by the representative of Canada this morning.

of all independent States, whatever may be their geographical size or political importance.
61. Speaking for my country, I wish to affirm in the
strongest possible terms that our sole concern and preoccupation in this matter is the preservation of and respect for
the principles and concepts which form the very foundation
of international law and order, as enshrined in the United
Nations Charter, This is the sole and inescapable consideration which determined our attitude in this matter and
shaped the position of principle which we have taken
regarding the call for the immediate withdrawal of foreign
military forces from the territory of a sovereign Member
State of the United Nations Organization.

55. The Council, as a result of the negative vote of the
Soviet Union, could not adopt the draft resolution presented to this Council yesterday by eight countries from
Africa, North America, Latin America and Europe. That
draft resolution applied to the political situation arising
from the illegal occupation of Czechoslovakia by forces of
the Soviet Union and certain of its allies in the Warsaw
Pact. In the circumstances, my delegation considered that
the next step must be an effort to have the Council
pronounce itself on the humanitarian aspects of the
intervention in the internal affairs of Czechoslovakia. I
refer, first and foremost, to the arrest of leading personalities in the lawful Czechoslovak leadership which clearly
enjoys the support and confidence of the overwhelming
part of the people of that country.

62. During our debate on this item, repeated references
have been made to the cold war and to the existence of
military blocs, an existence which is itself but the direct
and inevitable consequence of the former development. It is
needless for me to say that Ethiopia has had nothing to do
with these unfortunate developments of the post-war era.
On the contrary, Ethiopia finds itself in the forefront of
that group of countries which has rightly and justifiably
come to assume the name of non-aligned, a group which has
deliberately kept itself out of involvements and commitments of all military pacts. We have refused to recognize
the division of the world into spheres of influence, zones of
interest or military camps, because we feel that such
policies are based on out-dated concepts of power politics,
which we consider ngt to be in keeping with the universal
spirit and collective responsibility of the United Nations
Charter and with the mortal dangers of our atomic age.

56. It was therefore not only with pleasure but as a matter
of necessity that my delegation joined the group of
sponsors of the draft resolution introduced this morning.
This draft resolution is, indeed, very brief and certainly
directed to the point. It really needs no belabouring.
57. I must say that I have listened with regret to the first
reactions to this draft resolution by the representative of
the Soviet Union, I do not want to engage in any way in
polemics, but I must say I find it very difficult to
communicate on a matter of this sort, I, however, leave it
with confidence to the judgement of all those who listen to
what intervention is-your invasion of Czechoslovakia or
our request to the Secretary-General to dispatch to Prague a
special representative to seek the release and ensure the
personal safety of the leaders under detention.

63. And so, whenever and wherever a crisis faces the
world, we endeavour to look at it through the perspective
of the United Nations Charter when we try carefully to
examine and scrutinize it, making United Nations principles
and the cause of world peace our sole inspiration and
guideline. This, I repeat, is the consideration and preoccupation that has guided and that will always continue to
guide our policy on all matters and problems that, in our
view, affect international peace and security.

58. At this stage I think it is absolutely essential for the
Council that we act with a sense of urgency and efficiency,
and that we adopt the draft resolution before us as soon as
possible and with as broad a support as possible. In this
respect, may I express the hope that it will find an even
broader support than the draft resolution of this morning,
SO that others may lend their invaluable support to the
defence of the elementary rights and interests of the true
representatives.

64. Turning now to the draft resolution submitted by
eight delegations, and contained in document S/8767, first
of all, I wish to say that my delegation has full confidence
and faith in the Secretary-General and fully recognizes the
value of his peace-meking role in all situations of world
difficulty and crisis. The unique position of his office,
coupled with the respect and acceptability that he enjoys
within the community of nations, gives to the SecretaryGeneral and to the high office which he so ably occupies a
special standing and importance in playing a unique role in
the essential process of the peaceful settlement of international disputes.

59. Lij Endalkachew MAKONNEN
(Ethiopia): AS the
Council prepares to consider yet another proposal regarding
the grave matter under consideration, I ask for your
indulgence, Mr.President, and that of my colleagues to
restate and explain our basic approach to and position on
this grave issue of the situation in Czechoslovakia. I do this
because I sense the emergence of all sorts of interpretations
and insinuations which have tended to ascribe to the
actions of one or another of us significances or motives
which are both incorrect and irrelevant.

65. On the other hand, we cannot fail to realize that, for
the Secretary-General’s efforts to be at all effective and
successful, the special mission we entrust to him, and
through him to his special representatives, must enjoy the
widest possible, if not the unanimous, support of the
membership of the Security Council. To entrust the
Secretary-General with a mission based on controversy and
divided counsel would amount to putting him in the

60. Attempts have been made, for instance, to characterize and categorize the actions of some of US as having
been dictated by considerations other than the earnest
desire to uphold the principles of the Charter, thereby
defending the right to independence and territorial integrity
5

history or literature, but are apparently conjured up out (
illogical fantasy. They are certainly not true products (
Russian culture, for it is significant that in the rich an
brilliant tradition of the Russian novel, which the wltej
world reveres and respects, there is a strong tradition p
realism.

embarrassing position of having to do the impossible, with
all that this can imply in terms of the prestige and special
character of his high office.
66. It is with these basic considerations in mind that my
delegation has studied the proposal presented by the
delegation of Canada, co-sponsored by seven other delegations. While in basic agreement with the suggestion that
the Secretary-General’s good offices be utilized in the
peaceful settlement of this, as of all, disputes, we hesitate
to restrict his choice of action and initiative by any
resolution which would tend to be limitative in defining the
terms and scope of the Secretary-General’s peace-Faking
role. My delegation therefore reservesits right to intervene
on the subject later on, as our debate proceeds.

70. But I found a quite different theme in what the SoGe
representative had to say last night; it is a theme not 0
realism but of fantasy, for he conjured up two prlncipa
fantasy figures. First was the imperialist, an obsessivefigltn
who stalks through prose of the Soviet representstivf
montonously, rearing his head every sentence or two, ~hal
is this strange shadow figure? As far as I have been able10
perceive, an imperialist, quite clearly, is anyone the Sovig[
Union does not like-anyone with a mind of his OWB,
anyone with a will of his own. There is also a second
fantasy figure-the counter-revolutionary. Now, who is the
counter-revolutionary? Well, quite obviously he is anyone
who gets in the way of the Soviet Union’s aggressive
designs.

67. Mr. BALL (United States of,America): The controlling
interest of the Security Council tonight must necessarily be
the freedom and welfare of the people of Czechoslovakia,
and in the press which we have all been reading so avidly
there are indications of negotiations that are now going on
between some representatives of the Government of Czechoslovakia and the Government of the Soviet Union.
There is a suggestion that out of these negotiations may
come some agreement, and if it should be that the Soviet
Union, particularly when it is confronted, as it has been,
with a very overwhelming expression of world public
opinion, has second thoughts about the action it has taken,
second thoughts which would permit it to come to an
understanding with the Government of Czechoslovakia, so
that the people of that beleaguered country were able to
salvage the freedom to live their own lives, to organize the
political arrangements of their own choosing-then obviously this Council should do nothing to interfere with that
hopeful and commendable process.

71. The dreams of the Soviet representative are rich arld
vivid. They are filled with variegated figures that never
existed on land or sea, and all of this would not be very
serious if it remained only in the realm of fantasy and
fiction, of dreams and talk. But there is much more to it
than that. For the Soviet Union has begun to apply these
epithets to the legitimate leaders of the Czechoslovak
Government, and to talk as though the leadership of thal
Government were peopled by grotesques of this kind. Thus
the matter is serious, for history has shown that whenthe
Soviet Union has denounced individuals subject to its
physical power as imperialists or counter-revolutionarier,
those individuals have all too often disappeared.
72. Stalinist terror, we are told, has vanished long ago,Yet
even now when the Soviet Union speaks of certain
Czechoslovak leaders as counter revolutionaries one cannot
help but be deeply concerned. And this concern is given
foundation and reality by the shocking information which
has come from many presumably authoritative sourcesthat
several of the leading members of the Czechoslovak
Government have been arrested-“detained” is the nicer
word. A day or two ago, I think it wason Wednesday,the
representative of the United Kingdom addressed some
questions to the representative of the Soviet Union
[1442nd meeting/, and he asked specifically for information
as to the fate and welfare of certain individuals. He asked
specifically, as I recall, for assurancesthat those individuals
would not be harmed and that their freedom would not be
taken away from them [ibid., para. 131, but we have had
no answers, we have had no reply, and that obviously only
deepens the concern we all feel.

68. But we cannot be at all sure that that is going to
happen. In fact I would suggestthat the prognosis based on
experience is not very encouraging, and meanwhile we must
all feel a deep and honest concern for the brave men who,
in defence of freedom, of decency, of their country’s
honour, are defying the tanks and the troops-including, I
may say, those of the East German military who are
invading Czechoslovakia again, this time as agents of their
ancient Russian enemy. We must in all conscience feel
concern for these men, for their fate and for their future,
for there is a history and logic to give us that deep concern.
69. Last night, during the long and, if I may say so,
squalid interval when the Soviet representative wasseeking
‘by the sheer lever of his own extraordinary verbosity to
hold back the solemn condemnation of this Council, he
disclosed many things-many things, that I suspect, he did
not intend to disclose: among them was the conception
which he holds, and which I think it is fair to assume his
Government holds, of what the world is, the nature of the
cosmos in which we live. What came through crystal clear
was that the Soviet representative and his Government
dwell in a strange land of dim lights and dark shadows
which bears only a distant relationship to the reality with
which the rest of us are familiar. For the dark forest of the
Soviet night is apparently filled with strange and grotesque
figures quite unrecognizable to men who live in freedom.
These are not figures, I may say, drawn from Russian

73. I hope that I have confused vocabulary with intention;
I hope that I have not over-emphasized these visions which
have been conjured up and which have a certain historica!
background which gives them a rather terrifying credence.
But I think that we who have the responsibilities aS
members of the Security Council are obligated now to do
everything possible to assure the welfare of these leadersof
the Czechoslovak Government whose only fault is that &t’Y
did stand for freedom when freedom wasbeing taken aWaY
from their people.
6

74. Therefore, my Government whole-heartedly supports
the draft resolution which is before us today. It seems to us
that it would be the best way in which we could secure the
welfare of these leaders, barring of course, some very
specific assurances given to us by the representative of the
Soviet Union, which have not been forthcoming. The best
way that we can assure the security and welfare of these
leaders of the Czechoslovak Government is by requesting
the Secretary-General to send a special representative who
can determine the facts, who will carry with him the
prestige of the Secretary-General-the prestige of his office,
and the prestige of his person-in order to ensure the release
of these men, in order to ensure their personal safety, and I
can assure you that we will all sleep better and with
less-troubledconscienceswhen we receive word on the
return of the representativeof the Secretary-Generalthat
theseindividualshave been releasedandthat they aresafe.

whole world stigmatizesimperialismand its bloody misdeedsin the courseof many yearsand decades.
78. Therefore, do not attribute dislike and hatred of
imperialism to the Soviet Union alone, We have suffered
too much from imperialismto like it. We lost over 20
million human lives during the Second World War in the
struggle against imperialism. We lost 670,000 million
roubles of our national wealth in the territories destroyed
by Hitlerite imperialism.The four years of war when the
Soviet peoplefought for its freedomandindependence,for
the freedom and independenceof the fraternal peoplesof
Poland, Czechoslovakia,Hungary, Romania, Albania and
many others, those four years of war cost us 1 trillion
890,000 million roubles! That’s the price we paid for
freedom and independencein the fight againstimperialism;
that’s how we know what imperialismis, that’s why we
understandthe nature of imperialismand so passionately
hate imperialismand fight it. Weare proud of this, for any
human being at any point on the globe, whereverhe may
live, whatever the colour of his skin, whateverhis religion,
whatever political convictions he adheresto-communist,
royalist, socialist, social democrat, and so on and so
forth-nobody will openly declarethat he likesimperialism,
that he caresfor imperialism.

8 5. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translatedfrom Russian): Mr. President,yesterday and at
the beginning of today’s meeting the Soviet delegation
expressedits point of view, its opinion and its position
concerningthis new schemeby the sponsorsof the draft
resolutionto drag this question into the Security Council,
and showedthat, after failing in their first scheme,they will
stop at nothing,but haveshifted to a newline of action and
are attempting to apply new diversionarytactics. This is a
secondarytactic and methodsasunworthy asthe previous
one arebeingemployed.
76. In the statement that he hasjust completedMr. Ball
declaredthe real intentions of the sponsorsof this new
action with utmost clarity. He presentshimselfhere in the
role of a protector concernedwith the freedomandwelfare
of the Czechoslovakpeople. But who believesthis?, He
himself announcedduring the previousdiscussion
that he is
an enemyof socialismand communism.The Czechoslovak
people,who have chosenthe socialistform of development,
have no need of the care and protection of the representative of American monopoly capital who is accustomedto
dictate, command,exploit and pillage,andwho presentsall
that as freedom, Instead of hypocritically talking about
concern over the Czechoslovakpeople, Mr. Ball ought to
show concern in other directions, The peoples of the
socialistcountries will take care of themselves;
they do not
needthe representativesof monopoly capital to look after
them. Suchconcernis a rope around the neck.
77. Mr. Ball has tried to present matters here asthou&
anything the Soviet Union doesnot like is imperialism.But
Mr. Ball has really gone too far here in his inventions.
Mr. Ball, it seemsyou have a public opinion researchpoll
system:Gallup, Harris and a numberof others.Take a poll.
Put the question not only to your citizens, but to
everybody presenthere: who likes imperialism?It’s a short
question: three words. Do you really think that only the
representativeof the Soviet Union will give a negative
responseto this question? I am profoundly convinced,
Mr. Ball-you, representative of the large-scalefinance
capital of the United States-that a negative reply to this
questionwill be given by the representativeof Algeria, the
representativeof Burma, all the representatives
of the Arab
countries,all the representativesof the Asian countries,and
all the representativesof the Latin Americancountries.The

79. And we are proud that any patriot of any country in
all the earth’s continents who fights for freedom and
independenceagainstimperialism,againstimperialistaggression and intervention is calleda communistby imperialist
propaganda.Your propaganda,the Pentagon,and all who
are waging the bloody war of aggression
in Viet-Nam call
the entire Viet-Namesepeople communists;those people
who are courageouslydefending the freedom ,and independence of their homeland, who wish to be free and
sovereign, you call them all communists.It is not so.
Naturally, not all the hundredsandthousandsof killed and
wounded heroic Viet.Namesepatriots, all thosefighters for
the interestsof their homeland,its freedom,its honour, its
dignity and its independenceare communists.But they are
all patriots. All of them cherish the interests of their
people. Your newspapers,your communiques
call them all
communists,all of them without exception. We, as communists,are proud of this. It meansthat, accordingto YOU,
as representatives of imperialist powers, anybody who
fights by any meanswhatever againstimperialismis a
communist. All honour and glory to thesepatriots, even
though they are not communists.We are always on their
side in heart, in soul and mind and with somethingmore
substantialaswell. You’re feelingthat in Viet-Nam.
80. You cast doubt on the announcementabout the
counter-revolutionary forces discoveredin Czechoslovakia.
I am sorry that in view of’ the latenessof the hour
yesterday, that is, duringlast night’smeeting,you evidently
got tired and left the meeting, andin any caseyou left this
chamberwhen I wasnamingnamesand givingspecificfacts
about these counter-revolutionaries;when, giving concrete
names and facts, I showed the ties of these countcrrevolutionarieswith your Central IhtelhgenceAgency and
with the British intelligenceservices.You did not hearthis.
I do not want to hold us up and take the time of the
membersof the Councilto repeatit. I suggest
you readthe
record, especially this part of my statement,and you will

7

people’s affairs, in the affairs of the socialist countries
which, as I have stressed many times, are capable of settling
all their affairs themselves, withoutyour
interference,

see the facts and concrete data on how the counterrevolutionaries, with the aid of the American intelligence
and the incitement and suggestions of American propaganda and its organs endeavoured to overthrow the socialist
system in Czechoslovakia, to tear Czechoslovakia from the
community of socialist countries and turn it into an
obedient tool of your imperialist policy.

84. The Canadian representative spoke here trying to
present his proposal as a purely humanitarian move,
Mr. Ambassador, representative of Canada, whom are you
trying to delude? Yourself!
Well, that is your business,
Nobody can stop you from deluding yourself. But deluding
others-that is most regrettable, undesirable, and sometimes
more than undesirable. All the facts, the official statements,
and the speeches of the representatives of the socialist
countries have pointed out and demonstrated why the
representatives of the United Kingdom and the United
States are so anxious to interfere in the Czechoslovsk
question. It has been shown on the basis of concrete facts
that their bet on reaction and counter-revolution has been
beaten by the common efforts of all the socialist countries,
That is why they are so dissatisfied, angry, nervous, aad
even, as Mr. Ball told us today, cannot sleep soundly.

81. Citing the clandestine radio transmitters which disseminate insinuations, slander and falsehoods from Czechoslovakia, you try to spread hostile versions of the
situation in Czechoslovakia and about the socialist countries of Eastern Europe. We have official information that
the President of Czechoslovakia is in Moscow at present
with a large group of Czechoslovak ministers and is holding
talks with the Soviet Government about the settlement of
the problems which have arisen. And this will be accomplished without your interference, Mr. Ball, and without
the interference of your Government. The less you interfere
in this business, the less you try to exploit the CzechoSlovak question to the hilt in your imperialist interests-to
cover up the bloody aggression in Viet-Nam, to cover up
the terror and cruelties being adopted by the aggressor
towards the Arab population on Arab territories enslaved
by a foreign aggressor who is an occupier, to divert
attention from the hostility and hatred towards Cuba being
spread daily in your country, to cover up the misdeeds of
the Cuban reactionaries in your own country from which
not only Cuban patriots and revolutionaries, but many
foreign missions in your country and particularly in New
York, are beginning to suffer as evidenced by the fact that
more than ten foreign missions have suffered damage by
explosives in New York City itself, where the international
organization, the United Nations, has its headquarters-the
less you do all this, the better it will be for all peoples. And
you are not even in a position to handle this rabble of the
Cuban counter-revolution, They are the ones you like. You
wine them, dine them, clothe them, equip them, protect
them and afford them freedom of action. Can the American
police and its secret organizations possibly be so helpless, so
impotent that they can’t handle that gang of bandits, of
counter-revolutionaries?

85. Therefore everybody can understand the aims of both
the first action and of that first resolution submitted by
you, Mr. Ignatieff. The intent and aims of the second
resolution are just the same. True, it is milder, more flexible
and in a more covert form. But, no matter how you may
explain the lofty, noble, supposedly humanitarian aims of
this draft resolution, the substance is the same, The
substanceof the resolution is interference in the &echo.
Slovakquestion, contrary to the interests of the peoples
of
this country, contrary to the common interests of the
peoples of all the socialist countries and the socialist
commuriity.
86. Mr. Ignatieff, you mentioned polemics which have
taken quite a sharpform here, at this table. But who started
this? The co-sponsorsof your draft resolution, Mr. Balland
Lord Caradon. In the last few days they havebroughtinto
the Security Council, as I have already had the honourto
point out, the evil stench of the worst days, the very
coldest days of the cold war. The initiative they took was
such that, naturally, neither the Soviet delegationnor the
delegationsof the other socialist countries could ignorethis
slander, insinuation, these attacks, these coarse epithets
which aroused legitimate protests against the American
representative from the representative of Hungary, the
representativeof Poland, and from many others. So much
for polemics.

82. You asked: what is counter-revolution? Well, this is
concrete counter-revolution,
which you nourish, which
commits misdeeds not only against Cuban patriots, against
the Republic of Cuba, and prepares subversion with your
protection, but which also disturbs the normal life and
work of foreign representatives in your country. The same
kind of counter-revolutionaries also appeared in the 231
Club in Czechoslovakia, in the heart of the country, in the
capital, linked to British and American intelligence and
performing tasks aimed at undermining the socialist system
and designed to return Czechoslovakia and its people once
more to the fold of capitalism and imperialism.

87. Mr. Ball, speaking here and losing all senseof
proportion, spared no epithets, no slanderousinventions
againstthe socialistcountries and their peoples.Therefore
we could but answerhim in kind. And if he continuesthat
practice here, he shallalways receive a fitting rebuttal.
88. The representativeof Denmark stressed,practicallyas
his main argument,that the draft is brief. But a lot canbe
said even in a brief phrase. I apologize for makinga
personalreference, but I recently had a medicalcheck-up
with a highly experienced American doctor. After all the
tortures to which he subjected me in order to determinethe
state of my health, he said: “Mr. Ambassador,I’ll tell You
briefly: you are a very healthy person.” “Doctor”, I
replied, “you have said a whole lot.” Therefore, both ia s

83. Of course, we understand your nervousness, and you
showed it here at this table, especially yesterday. But this
matter does not depend on you. The peoples of the socialist
countries, as I said earlier, will manage their own affairs
without the interference of imperialists and monopolists.
You said you would like to sleep soundly. Go right ahead,
sleep in peace. Nobody is touching you, nothing is
threatening you provided you do not meddle in other
8

short phrase and in a brief draft resolution a great deal may
be said. And everything that was not accomplished by
yesterday’s long, extensive, wordy draft which was not
accepted by the Security Council, which was rejected, is all
concealed here in this short one. That is why the Soviet
delegation opposes this draft as it opposed a discussion of
it, and will certainly take its position accordingly when we
come to a vote on it. ,~,,2
4,’
89. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I had not
thought it necessary to speak in support of the draft
resolution of which my delegation is a co-sponsor, The
draft has been ably presented, well supported, and easily
understood. I can imagine that the representative of the
Soviet Union, who has no affection for brevity, should feel
uneasy about the clarity and simplicity of the language
which is there set out. But it did not seem to be necessary
to speak further to such a simple proposition, particularly
because I had spoken before-yesterday-on
this particular
subject.

approaching one of the great purposes of this generationthe purljose of disarmament-were able to work together
day-by-day throughout a considerable period, as if we were
members of the same mission, to achieve the same
purposes.
94. To suggest that there is an animus or an ill will
directed against the Soviet Union is a travesty of the truth;
and, indeed, when we speak of the tragedy we think of the
tragedy for Czechoslovakia, certainly, and the tragedy for
Europe. But we are, all of us, concerned primarily perhaps
at the tragedy that the effort which appeared to be making
such progress in the world, of better understanding between
East and West, has been driven back by the evil action
which is now being taken. And this is no concern only of
members of this Council; this is a concern of people
throughout the world. Rightly so: it is not only for the
Soviet Union to be concerned with Czechoslovakia; we all
have a right to be concerned for the progress of freedom
and for the right of the duly selected leaders of any people
to continue to act and to speak and to work in the .posts for
which they have been chosen.

90. I want to appeal to the representative of the Soviet
Union to be ready to believe that we are serious in this
matter. I would hope that he would come to understand
that we-all of us, I think-feel
deeply on the question
which has been raised. I would remind him of the questions
I put to him yesterday morning. They were very simple and
very short. I said then: “Let Ambassador Malik tell us now
that the President and the First Secretary of the Communist Party, and other acknowledged leaders of Czechoslovakia are free and safe. Let Ambassador Malik confirm
that they will not be arrested and will not be molested. Let
him confirm that they will be permitted to continue to
speak and work for their people ” [1442nd meeting,
paru. 131.

95. We are about what we put to him; we are serious in
what we put forward. We asked a simple question, and we
hoped to get a straight reply. but what did we get? I am
sorry to have to say that we have got nothing but
contemptuous personal insult and contempt for his colleagues and contempt for the majority and contempt for
the democratic process.

92. I would ask him to believe that there are many of us
who believe that there is nothing so contemptible as
political persecution. I would ask him to believe, too, if he
will, that there is no trick in this; there is no plot in this;
there is no diversionary tactic, as he suggests; there is no
ill-will; there is no animosity.

96. But it is not too late, knowing the personality of the
representative of the Soviet Union-it is not too late for
him to consider the matter again in a new light. He can
desist from fighting shadows. I would again appeal to him:
we wish to have an answer to the questions; we shall not be
content unti1 we get an answer. The purpose of the draft
resolution is to get an answer to the questions I put
yesterday morning. Would it not be possible that the
representative of the Soviet Union, instead of searching the
vocabulary for new adjectives of insult, would be prepared
to consult with us-a serious consultation; a genuine
consultation-in order to give us some satisfaction, if he will
pay us the compliment of believing that we are concerned,
as he is concerned, as we both are concerned in the matter
that we raise? I can only speak for myself, but if there
were a readiness to consult together to achieve an honourable answer to the question we have put, I should be the
first to recommend it to my co-sponsors. And I would also
say that if he would respond to such an appeal, then I
believe he would be not only serving the best interests of
the people of Czechoslovakia, and indeed of his OWII
Government, but also the best interests of the United
Nations.

93.. I would wish to remind him that during the time since
his return to the United Nations, and before that, in the
time of his predecessor, in this Council, and in particular in
the relationships between my country and his, representatives of my country have worked tirelessly and persistentIy in order that there should be a better understanding and
a better co-operation between East and West. I paid tribute
to the personal qualities which he has brought to that task.
I remember that it was not so very long ago that he and I,

97. If it could be seen that the representative of the Soviet
Union; in a spirit of mutual respect and co-operation, was
willing to consult with his fellow members of this Counc&all of us have the right to speak, and we are not going
to be intimidated by the classifications which he applies-if
it could be seen in the world that he was ready to consult
on the dimple and direct and genuine questions which have
been put to him in the determination to find an answer
which satisfies the opinion and conscience of the world,

9 1. We have had no reply. Had there been a reply, even a
very short reply, to the questions which I asked yesterday
morning, there would have been no need for this draft
resolution, and no need for this debate. The shortest speech
that the representative of the Soviet Union has ever made
would have been sufficient. If he could have said “Yes” to
the questions I put to him yesterday, then all of us would
have been content. And ,I would ask him again to believe
that we mean what WC say. We care about political arrest;
we care about political internment; and we care about
political duress.

9

then I believe that he would be making a contribution to
the reputation of his own country and of this Organization
which would be beyond calculation.

and its internal development, nor to undertake measures
contrary to the publicly declared wishes of the people
and constitutional organs of a country.

98. Again I say that we are concerned with the fate of
brave men-brave men who have faced suddenly crisis,
confusion, and danger, with the sudden approach of
circumstances which they were the last people to expect,
and with a natural inclination perhaps to accept the
inevitable. But no: they have spoken for their people. They
were determined to continue as far as they conceivably
could to risk their lives in the service of the people who had
put them in the places they occupied. The whole world, let
me assure the representative of the Soviet Union, is
concerned for their future. It is not something which can be
forgotten; it is not something which can be pushed aside by
raising irrelevant matters in long speeches. The world wishes
to know the fate of the leaders of Czechoslovakia. We need
to know-we
as a Council have a right to demand that we
have an answer from the Soviet Union.

“The military intervention against the Czechoslovak
Socialist Republic and the invasion of its territory can in
no way be justified, even more so since this socialist
country does not threaten anyone nor has it-as unequivocally stated by the legitimate Government and other
constitutional institutions of the Republic-felt threatened.
“The Governments of those countries that are taking
part in the military intervention against the Czechoslovak
Socialist Republic are assuming the full responsibility for
the far-reaching consequences of their actions. Thearmed
intervention agamst the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic
constitutes a diiect encouragement of the policy bf force,
of aggression and of dangerous practice of continuous
interference in the internal affairs and unhampered
development of other countries. The negative conse.
quences will not only affect the Czechoslovak Socialist
Republic, but also the interests and relations of other
countries, their internal security and stability of peace in
Europe and in the world.

99. In putting those questions to him again, and in asking
him to reflect on what I have said and to realize that I say it
not in any spirit of ill will but in a spirit of hope that we
can resume before long, God willing, the effort to agree
between East and West, on which the future of the world
depends, I believe that if we can both approach these
simple questions in that spirit, then we can be of some
genuine service to our countries and to this Organization.

“Expressing its full solidarity-in
these grave moments-with
the people of Czechoslovakia, the Government and other constitutionally
and legally elected
leading forums of the country, the Government of the
Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, extends its full
support to the demands of these legitimate representatives of the Czechoslovak Socialis; Republic, for the
withdrawal of the occupation forces for the respect of
independence and territorial integrity of the CzechoSlovak Socialist Republic, for the respect of the sovereignly expressed will of the people of Czechnslovakia and for
making possible the normal functioning of the constitutional bodies and political forums of the Czechoslovak
Socialist Republic.

100. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of
Yugoslavia.
101. Mr. VRATUSA (Yugoslavia): First of all, I should
like to express the gratitude of my delegation to you,
Mr. President, and to the members of the Council for
enabling me to participate in the deliberations of the
Security Council.
102. The Government of the Socialist Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia issued, on 22 August 1968, a statement concerning the situation in the Czechosltivak Socialist Republic, which reads as follows:

“The Government of the Socialist Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia addresses itself to the Governments of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the Polish People’s
Republic, the German Democratic Republic, the Hun.
garian People’s Republic and the People’s Republic of
Bulgaria, in the expectation that they shall undertake
urgent measures so as to end, without delay, the
occupation of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic.”
[S/8765./ =

“The Federal Executive Council expresses its grave
concern over the illegal entry of the armed forces of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the Polish People’s
Republic, the German Democratic Republic, the Hungar
ian People’s Republic and the People’s Republic of
Bulgaria into the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic and
condemns the occupation of its territory,

103. Mr. President, you were kihd enough to circulate the
statement of the Yugoslav Government to the members 0f
the Security Council. Therefore, its contents are known.

“The armed intervention by the aforementioned countries, which has taken place without invitation and against
the will of the Government and other constitutional
organs of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, constitutes
a gross violation of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of an independent cpuntry, as well as a direct
denial of generally recognized principles of international
law and the Charter of the United Nations.

104. Now, with your permission, I should like to add
some further comments to explain the Yugoslav position
concerning the situation that has been created with the
illegal entry of foreign armed forces into the Czechoslovak
Socialist Republic,

“The Government of the Socialist Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia is of the opinion that no State, or a group of
States, has the right to decide the fate of another country

2 Official
Records of the Security Council, Twenty-third Yeerr
Supplement for July, August and September 1968.

10

105. The principle of non-intervention in the internal
affairs of other States, the respect of which constitutes the
basic pre-condition for the stability of international relations, peace in the world, and unobstructed development of
all peoples, has been infringed. The doctrine which is being
used to justify foreign intervention in the Czechoslovak
Socialist Republic is unacceptable and very dangerous for
the independence of States and peace in the world. Similar
or identical interpretations of the provisions of the Charter
regarding the right to collective or so-called legitimate
self-defence, have in the past also been used as a pretext for
foreign interventions in the internal affairs of other
countries, where not once had the independence of a
country been jeopardized, which in turn gave rise to
justified protest by the world.

111. Yugoslavia, proceeding from the policy of promotion
of international co-operation based upon full respect for
sovereign equality, political and national independence,
territorial integrity, and the right of every nation to decide
its own fate, opposes the intervention and occupation of
the territory of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic and
requests the immediate withdrawal of all occupation troops
from the territory of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic.
The peoples of Yugoslavia-who in the past had to fight
againSt intervention and interference and who are prepared
to defend their independence at all costs-cannot reconcile
themselves with the policy of force which they resolutely
condemn.
112. In this connexion, I should like to express our desire
that the legitimate representatives of the Czechoslovak
Socialist Republic and the Governments of the five countries will be able to find a peaceful solution on the basis of,
the principles I have referred to earlier. Our position on this
question reflects the very essence of the consistent,
independent policy of Yugoslavia, which has been using
equal standards and the same yardstick in judging every
policy applied from the posit,ion of force, and every
recourse to force in relations among States, whether it be in
Viet-Nam, in the Middle East, or in the Czechoslovak
Socialist Republic.

106. With the intention of influencing the course of
development in the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, the
armed forces of the five countries are attempting to deprive
the people, the Government, and other constitutional
bodies of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic of the
inalienable right sovereignly to decide the course of their
development. The armed intervention against Czechoslovakia and the occupation of its territory have once again, in
the most acute form, given rise to the question of security
and safeguarding of national independence of small countries.

113. The policy of the use of force and pressure that we
have witnessed during recent years renders imperative the
need for the international community to examine most
urgently the question of collective security and safeguarding of the national security and territorial integrity, above
all of small States and peoples as well as of other States and
peoples in the world.

107. It suits the protagonists of a policy of spheres of
interest, it encourages the use of force and the right of the
stronger in international relations, and violates the very
foundations of the policy of peaceful coexistence. No
principle of socialism whatsoever can be used as a screen
and justification for a gross violation of the sovereignty’of a
State and occupation of its territory. It has once again been
confirmed that blocs cannot guarantee the security and free
development of their members. On the contrary, blocs
create conditions for subjugation of the interests and
independent policy of a member of an alliance to the
interests of another or others.

114. Full security of small and medium States, first of all,
cannot be provided by any kind of umbrella, nor through
guarantees given to them if they are considered as mere
objects. Hence, the greater the responsibility of the
international community for the defence of the independence, sovereignty and unobstructed development of every
country.

108. The resistance of the people and States to such
relationships must be complete, and it is necessary to
oppose the theory and practice of spheres of interests and
doctrines which essentially embody also implications of the
freedom of action within such spheres.

115. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): In response to a comment of the representative of the Soviet Union I would
simply say this. We are concerned with the fate ,of brave
men, the victims of-the armed intervention in their country
by the Soviet Union and certain of its allies-what the
speaker we have just heard described as foreign intervention
in the internal affairs of Czechoslovakia, which is a
legitimate concern of this Council. This is a humanitarian
question because it concerns the release, the safety, of the
Czechoslovak leaders. The deeply humanitarian issues involved are self-evident.

109. The action of the five countries is inherent with a
serious danger to peace and stability in Europe and
elsewhere. Europe had made significant progress in the
direction towards intensification and consolidation of
political, economic and other forms of co-operation. This
progress has receilred a heavy blow, since peace and
co-operation in Europe and in the world in general are
indivisible.

116. Considering the importance of the issues involved in
the question before us, the co-sponsors of the draft
resolution would not quibble about each and every one of
its words, provided its basic objectives are pursued. I say
this in response to the representative of Ethiopia, whose
instructi-te comments we duly took note of. I would, of
course, be happy to consult with him and any other
representatives interested in reaching a positive and constructive conclusion on this matter, having, of course, due
regard to the urgency.

110. The reactions in Europe and in the world towards the
invasion of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, as well as
the resistance to the armed intervention of the United
States in Viet-Nam, clearly show that the protagonists of
the policy of force must realize that there can be no peace
in the world as long as there are instances of arbitrary
recourse to force in international relations.
11

117. The PRESIDENT: I have no further speakers on my
list. Does any member wish to address the Security
Council?

should reconvene tomorrow, Saturday, at 11.30 am* Ii
there is no objection to that course I propose to adjwm
this meeting.

118. After formal consultations, it is my understanding
that opinion prevails to the effect that the Security Council

The meeting rose at 8.35 p. tn.

12

!
;

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Notions
publications
the world.
Consult
your

NATIONS
may
bookstore

PUBLlCATlONS

be obtained
or write

from bookstores
and dirlributorr
lo: United
Nations,
Sales
Section,

throughout
New
York

or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Notions
Unies
sonf
en vente
dons
les librairier
et ler
ogences
dipositaires
du monde
entier.
Informer-vow
oupr&
de votre
libroirie
ou odrersex-vow
6:
Notions
Unies, Section
des venter,
New York ou GenBve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

Las publicaciones
en todar
partes
Ventor,

Litho

in United

Nations,

Nueva

New York

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

de lar Nociones
Unidas
eslbn
del mundo.
Consulte
e su librero
York

NACIONES

UNIDAS

en vento
en librerias
o dirljase
o: Nocioner

y cosos dirtribuidoros
Unidos,
Seccibn

de

o Ginebra.

Price:

$U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

3521

&-October

19’72~-2,050
