United Nations

S/PV.6060

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

6060th meeting
Wednesday, 31 December 2008, 6.40 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jurica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Croatia)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Detaille
Mr. Kafondo
Mr. Zhang Yesui
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Natalegawa
Mr. Terzi di Sant’Agata
Mr. Ettalhi
Mr. Suescum
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Kumalo
Sir John Sawers
Mr. Khalilzad
Mr. Bui The Giang

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question
Letter dated 31 December 2008 from the Permanent Representative of Egypt
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2008/842)
Letter dated 31 December 2008 from the Permanent Representative of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2008/843)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-67507 (E)

*0867507*

S/PV.6060

The meeting was called to order at 6.40 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
Letter dated 31 December 2008 from the
Permanent Representative of Egypt to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2008/842)
Letter dated 31 December 2008 from the
Permanent Representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council
(S/2008/843)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Egypt and Israel in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Ms. Shalev
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) took the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 31
December 2008 from the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations, which will be issued as
document S/2008/844, and which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Council that will be held on
Wednesday, 31 December 2008, regarding the
situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question.”

2

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting, in accordance with the
provisional rules of procedure and previous practice in
this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mansour
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 31
December 2008 from the Permanent Mission of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to the United Nations, in
which it is requested that the Permanent Observer for
the League of Arab States to the United Nations, His
Excellency Mr. Yahya Mahmassani, be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item, in
accordance with rule 39 of the Council's provisional
rules of procedure.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Yahya Mahmassani.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Mahmassani to take the seat reserved
for him at the side of the Council Chamber.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

The Security Council is meeting in response to
two letters dated 31 December 2008 from, respectively,
the Permanent Representative of the Arab Republic of
Egypt and the Permanent Representative of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, which will be issued as documents
S/2008/842 and S/2008/843.
I should also like to draw the attention of Council
members to a letter dated 31 December 2008 from the
Permanent Representative of France, transmitting a
statement by the European Union on the situation in
the Middle East, which will be issued as document
S/2008/841.
I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and I give him the
floor.
The Secretary-General: A dramatic crisis in
Gaza and southern Israel has now reached its fifth day.

08-67507

S/PV.6060

The civilian population, the fabric of Gaza, the
future of the peace process, stability in the region and
goodwill among people throughout the world: all are
trapped between the irresponsibility displayed in the
indiscriminate rocket attacks by Hamas militants and
the disproportionality of the continuing Israeli military
operation. We will be further threatened if the conflict
continues or escalates to a new phase of deadly
violence.
I am profoundly troubled that the call of this
Council, issued nearly four days ago, for an end to the
violence has gone unheeded. I wish to underline in the
strongest possible terms the world’s call for an
immediate ceasefire that is fully respected by all
parties. This must be achieved now. The parties must
step back from the brink. All this violence must end.
As a result of the crisis and the violence,
conditions for 1.5 million people in Gaza today are
nothing short of terrifying. The people of Gaza are
living under heavy bombardment, which has targeted
Hamas facilities, smuggling tunnels and other Hamas
infrastructure, as well as the former Palestinian
Authority security structure, government buildings,
residential homes, mosques and businesses. More than
300 people lie dead, among them at least 60 women
and children. Over 800 are wounded.
In southern Israel, there has been a continuous
stream of rockets fired from Gaza by Palestinian
militants. Longer-range rockets have been used by
militants, hitting major Israeli cities, with hundreds of
thousands of people now in range. Four Israelis have
died since Saturday and over 30 more have been
injured. Schools have closed and daily life in southern
Israel is extremely difficult, as Israelis live in constant
fear of rockets, which have hit homes and schools.
Let me be clear: I condemn unequivocally and in
the strongest possible terms the ongoing rocket and
mortar attacks by Hamas and other Palestinian
militants. But I also condemn the excessive use of
force by Israel. All parties must fully uphold
international humanitarian law. It is the civilian
populations that are bearing the brunt of this
escalation, and there must be swift and decisive action
by the international community to bring to an end their
suffering.
All parties must address the serious humanitarian
and economic needs in Gaza and take necessary
measures to ensure the continuous provision of

08-67507

humanitarian supplies. Without the violence stopping,
it is extremely difficult to get food to people who need
it. It is too dangerous for civilians to leave their homes
to seek urgent medical treatment, buy supplies and
assist people in distress. Conditions for parents and
children in Gaza are dangerous and frightening.
I wish to pay tribute to United Nations staff in the
area, who are working hard under deeply adverse
conditions to address urgently the humanitarian
situation of Gazans. I am pained at the death, injury
and damage that United Nations personnel and
premises, as well as others associated with our
programmes, have sustained.
I also pay tribute to the efforts of donor countries
which have come forward and pledged their support.
Pursuant to assurances given to me by Prime
Minister Olmert and Foreign Minister Livni of Israel
and the continuing close cooperation between United
Nations agencies and Israeli authorities on the ground,
some humanitarian aid is passing through the Kerem
Shalom crossing. Today, a total of 84 truckloads,
including 34 for humanitarian aid agencies, entered
Gaza. As a result, the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) is opening seven emergency distribution
centres with a skeleton staff to distribute recently
donated wheat flour starting tomorrow.
However, the Karni crossing and the Karni
conveyor belt, which UNRWA urgently requires to
open to bring in wheat grain supplies, remain closed, as
do the Nahal Oz fuel pipelines. There remains a
shortage of wheat grain, which exacerbates a shortage
of bread in a situation in which two thirds of Gaza’s
population were already reliant on some kind of food
aid prior to this escalation. Fuel shortages have led to
the closure of the Gaza power plant and power
shortages for up to 16 hours a day. To address the
shortages of food and fuel, the Nahal Oz and Karni
crossings must be opened. Unless there is an
immediate end to the violence, the humanitarian
situation will deteriorate significantly.
I urge all members of the international
community, in particular those in the region, to exert
what influence they have on the parties to end this
violence now. Yesterday, at the Quartet meeting, I
stressed the need for decisive action. I welcome the
efforts under way, including by Arab and European

3

S/PV.6060

leaders. But I must repeat: not enough has been done,
and more is urgently required.
There must be an immediate ceasefire that is fully
respected by all parties. This must create new
conditions on the ground that ensure at last that
crossings into Gaza will be reopened, that rocket
attacks and weapons smuggling will end, that we will
pursue political dialogue, and only political dialogue,
to reunite Gaza with the West Bank, and that the root
cause of this suffering — the absence of IsraeliPalestinian peace — is ended.
Even as this crisis rages, let us never forget the
underlying issue: there must be an end to occupation,
an end to conflict and the creation of a Palestinian
State. Let us not lose sight of our goal: two States,
Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace and
security, and a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in
the region, based on Security Council resolutions
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
1397 (2002), 1515 (2003) and 1850 (2008), the
principle of land for peace, the Madrid terms of
reference and the Arab Peace Initiative. This conflict
must end, and it must end once and for all.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): I
thank you, Mr. President, and the other members of the
Security Council for responding positively, by
convening this meeting, to the request by the Group of
Arab States and the sisterly country of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
presence and for the important statement he has just
made.
For the fifth consecutive day, Israeli military
aggression continues against the Palestinian people in
the Gaza Strip. As I address the Council, the
Palestinian people — the elderly, children and
women — are facing a criminal military campaign that
has claimed the lives of more than 380 people and
injured more than 1,800 others, not to mention
innocent women and children who have fallen victim
while asleep in their homes.
We are at a very dangerous crossroads in the
Middle East as a direct consequence of this Israeli
aggression, which daily increases in ferocity, which

4

threatens the lives and prosperity of 1.5 million
Palestinian, and which threatens to undermine peace
efforts. It is of the utmost importance that decisions be
taken immediately by all actors, in particular the
Security Council, which bears responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. Such
decisions must restore the reason, calm and stability
that are necessary to make peace. The alternative is a
more deeply entrenched cycle of violence, destruction
and killing, a cycle that has many times brought
tragedy to our peoples and that, if not halted, will
definitely lead to the destruction of our hopes for
peace.
Despite the momentum generated by the Security
Council’s adoption of resolution 1850 (2008), Israel,
the occupying Power — instead of opening a new page
and continuing on the road of peace, and in blatant and
flagrant violation of the norms of international law —
began its brutal aggression on 27 December. Israeli
military aircraft — F-16 fighters and Apache
helicopters — have dropped hundreds of bombs on
numerous sites in Gaza. Israel continues to defy
appeals from every corner of the world — including
the statement issued by the Security Council on
28 December; the repeated appeals of the SecretaryGeneral, including the appeal he made this evening;
and the appeal of the Quartet — that it cease its
aggression, which has been condemned and which
threatens to claim more lives and plunges the region
into a cycle of violence and hatred. And Israel
continues to kill, paying no heed to any appeals and
trampling on every human value and every norm of
international law.
What we are seeing today is the realization of the
repeated threats made by several Israeli officials over
the past few months. They threatened to launch broad
military attacks against the Palestinian people in Gaza,
which is under Israeli occupation. Those threats have
now been fulfilled in the military aggression launched
by the occupying Power, killing innocent civilians.
Those threats and the ongoing attacks must be
taken very seriously. They must be condemned, and
they must be stopped immediately by all available
means. That requires immediate measures by the
international community, including the Security
Council.
Under the guise of withdrawing from the Gaza
Strip, Israel tightened its siege of the Strip and imposed

08-67507

S/PV.6060

a policy of collective punishment of Palestinians in
Gaza. From the beginning of 2008 it continued to use
brute force — excessive force — against the
population, further exacerbating the humanitarian
situation. Weeks before the most recent campaign,
Israel crippled all spheres of activity in Gaza, notably
the medical services, and prevented international and
other humanitarian agencies, including the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), from bringing
aid into Gaza. Israel has made absolutely no response
to reports from the United Nations, from United
Nations agencies on the ground and from Mr. Robert
Serry warning of the disastrous consequences of this
irresponsible policy. Everybody has confirmed those
reports: that the unprecedented closure of the Gaza
crossings is causing an unacceptable disaster for the
civilian population.
UNRWA has had to cease the distribution of aid
to 800,000 people, resulting in dire shortages of food,
fuel, electricity and water throughout Gaza.
Infrastructure construction projects, including those
initiated by the United Nations, have come to a halt for
lack of materials. Those are but a few illustrations of
the hunger and despair that have been imposed on the
Palestinians in Gaza for an entire year. Let me provide
some additional tragic details to illustrate life in Gaza.
Gaza’s tragedy did not begin today; it has been
taking place for a long time. Throughout that time, we
have come to the Security Council time and again to
warn of imminent aggression and of the fact that
Israel’s siege would lead to a disaster. We asked the
Council to adopt practical steps to compel Israel, the
occupying Power, to halt its policy of collective
punishment against the civilian population of Gaza.
But the Council took no serious measures to stop
Israel. Prior to the commencement of the current
aggression, the situation in Gaza was on the verge of
becoming a genuine humanitarian disaster.
As can be seen on television screens, we now
face that disaster. Live broadcasts include images of
children killed in their beds, decimated families and
human organs retrieved from underground. Allow me
to repeat what I have already said: there is absolutely
no justification for such criminal acts or for the
immoral and illegal collective punishment of an entire
people.

The Israeli side has publicly rejected the
Council’s appeals for a halt to the aggression. It has
also rejected every appeal by the leaders of the world
and is continuing its aggression. All of that is in
defiance of the Security Council, international law and
international humanitarian law. The question now is:
What does the Council intend to do? We believe that
the Council must adopt a binding resolution that
condemns Israel’s crimes, ends the military aggression,
provides protection for the Palestinians, lifts the siege
and ensures a lasting ceasefire. We would like the
Council to consider and adopt the draft resolution that
my brother from Libya will introduce shortly.
There must be an immediate ceasefire, and
international protection must be provided for our
people in Gaza, which is the only way genuinely to
ensure respect for a ceasefire and to calm the situation.
The international community, the Quartet and the
Secretary-General have repeatedly expressed their
views on this disaster and have called for an end to the
aggression. They have done so in line with their moral
and political responsibility. We pay tribute to their
appeals and urge the Council to respond to them
positively by adopting the draft resolution.
The Council’s failure to express its view with
regard to this situation and to play its Charter role to
address an issue of such centrality to the maintenance
of international peace and security would result in
enormous damage to its credibility and deprive us of its
contribution, at the expense of innocent victims and the
collective efforts to end the aggression. Once again, the
peace process and developments on the ground are
both linked and mutually reinforcing. Negative
developments only serve to undermine efforts to
achieve peace.
In conclusion, mothers and children in the Gaza
Strip are today looking towards the Council to halt this
barbaric aggression and to protect them from
criminality, deliberate starvation and killing. We hope
that the Council will not let them down. We hope that
their fate will not be that of the five brothers in Jabalia
or the martyred Hamdan children — Lama, five years
old; Haya, 12 years old; and Ismail, also 12 years of
age — or of the other 60 martyred children.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Ms. Shalev (Israel): Last Saturday, Israel
launched a military operation aimed at protecting

08-67507

5

S/PV.6060

Israelis living in southern Israel from the incessant
barrage of rocket and mortar shell fire. Israel was
compelled to resort to a military operation after many
weeks — indeed, months and years — during which its
civilians were subjected to deliberate terrorist attacks
carried out by Hamas and other Palestinian terrorist
organizations operating from the Gaza Strip. Israel
demonstrated the utmost restraint before launching that
operation, but there comes a time when a sovereign and
responsible Government must take decisive action to
protect its citizens and send a clear message to the
Hamas terrorists: enough is enough.
In the past two weeks, prior to Israel’s reaction,
we witnessed a steep escalation in Hamas attacks
against Israel. Israel has been subjected to more than
300 rockets and mortar shells, which were launched
indiscriminately, striking cities and towns, schools and
playgrounds, commercial centres and synagogues. In
its military operation Israel has exercised its inherent
right to self-defence, which is enshrined in Article 51
of the United Nations Charter. Any other State would
have acted in the same manner when faced with similar
terrorist threats.
No sovereign State would allow more than half a
million people to constantly be held hostage by a
terrorist organization. No sovereign State would allow
its citizens to become the target of thousands of rockets
and mortar shells. A mother sending her children to
school must know that they will come back safely. No
person should fear leaving his house because he may
have to scramble for cover. No construction worker
should fear dying while earning his living, as we
witnessed just two days ago. Israel cannot, and will
not, allow its citizens to be sitting ducks for terrorist
attacks. Israel will continue to take all necessary
measures to protect its citizens and stop terrorism.
Members of the Council must ask themselves
what they would do in the same situation if their
citizens were terrorized on a daily basis. Protecting the
lives and well-being of one’s citizens is not only a
right, but also a responsibility of every sovereign State.
With its military operation, the State of Israel is
fulfilling that responsibility.
Let us all remind ourselves what Hamas is all
about. Hamas is a terrorist organization that promotes a
radical agenda of hatred and violence. It is supported
financially and militarily by Iran and other extreme
forces in our region. Ideologically, is tightly connected

6

to Al-Qaida. It does not recognize Israel and calls in its
charter for Israel’s destruction. Hamas rejects peace in
the Middle East. Like other terrorist organizations,
Hamas strives to achieve its political goals by targeting
innocent men, women and children, without hesitating
to use its own population as a human shield. Hamas
controls Gaza not through democratic means, but
through violence and force against its political rivals.
It is regrettable that the Palestinian observer
failed to mention Hamas, an organization that declared
war on its own people and that holds them hostage.
Hamas stands against the very principles and
purposes which the United Nations was founded upon
and seeks to promote. It stands against any peaceful
solution for the conflicts in our region.
Let me be very clear. The targets of this operation
are the terrorists and their infrastructure alone. We are
not at war with the Palestinian people, but with Hamas
and other terrorist groups in Gaza. As such, we are
doing our utmost to minimize civilian casualties.
Hamas, on the other hand, places civilians in the line of
fire, carrying out its activities from densely populated
areas, and directs its attacks towards Israeli civilian
targets. The current operation has exposed once again
the fact that Hamas stores weapons and explosives in
homes, schools, mosques and hospitals. It is Hamas
that bears the sole responsibility for the current
escalation and for any civilian casualties, Israelis and
Palestinians alike.
While determined to protect the lives of its
citizens, Israel continues to ensure passage of
humanitarian goods and supplies to the people of Gaza.
As Prime Minister Olmert emphasized at the outset of
the military operation, we will make every possible
effort to avoid any humanitarian crisis in Gaza. The
people of Gaza do not deserve to suffer because of the
killers and murderers of the terrorist organizations.
Since the operation commenced, more than 350 trucks
loaded with food and medical supplies have entered
Gaza. As we speak, supplies and donations continue to
flow into Gaza from international organizations and
State donors.
At the same time, Hamas continues to target
crossings and to obstruct the provision of humanitarian
relief to the Palestinian people.
Our region is facing crucial times that will shape
its future. The international community must reject the

08-67507

S/PV.6060

agenda of the extremists and support that of the
moderates calling for coexistence and the realization of
two States living side by side in peace and security.
Only two weeks ago, the Security Council
adopted resolution 1850 (2008), reaffirming the
Annapolis process. Israel, for its part, will continue its
efforts to pursue peace with the Palestinian people and
its moderate leadership, while taking all necessary
measures to protect its citizens from terrorism.
The President: I shall now give the floor to
members of the Council.
Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
emergency meeting. My thanks go also to His
Excellency the Secretary-General for his presence and
for his statement.
Once again, we had wished that the people of the
entire world without exception could be enjoying days
of peace and calm at this time commemorating the
birth of Jesus, the prophet of love, tolerance and peace.
But others had a different view.
As everyone knows, the Gaza Strip is under siege
and has been the target of Israeli military aggression
since mid-2007. A truce between the Palestinians in the
Gaza Strip and the Israelis was agreed upon last June,
under the sponsorship of Egypt. In it, both parties
committed themselves to halting violence of all kinds,
and the Israelis pledged to end the siege, open the
crossings and restore the situation to the pre-June 2007
status.
Everyone knows, and neutral observers agree,
that the Palestinians religiously observed the truce, in
spite of the fact that the Israelis violated it at least 190
times and, during this period, killed more than 25
inhabitants of Gaza. They never opened the crossings
or lifted the siege, except partially. Indeed, they
prevented many civilian goods from being delivered to
the Strip. On 4 November 2008, the Israeli army
penetrated well into the eastern part of Gaza, without
provocation. In the course of that incursion, the Israelis
killed six Palestinians in yet another violation of the
truce. What, then, could be expected? Of course, it is
normal that the Palestinians would react.
I can confirm that from that date the Palestinians
never fired a single bullet except in response to an
Israeli violation of the truce. Since 5 November, the
Israelis have imposed a total land, sea and air blockade

08-67507

on Gaza. This has even extended to the humanitarian
assistance provided by the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), in clear defiance of resolution 1674 (2006)
and the Fourth Geneva Convention. The Israeli
authorities prevented UNRWA trucks from entering the
Gaza Strip, forcing the Agency to suspend deliveries of
basic commodities and food. Everybody knows — and
this is nothing new — that half of the Gaza population
live on that aid: more than 750,000 Gazans depend on
it. What, then, does it mean to block that aid? It can
have only one outcome: the imposition of hunger and
starvation on the Palestinians. And what will that lead
to?
These practices, in themselves, constitute a crime
of genocide, a crime against humanity and a war crime
under articles 6 (c), 7 (b) and 8 of the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court. If any Council
member harbours any doubt about that, I will gladly
read out the text of those articles.
At the Council meeting held on 18 December (see
S/PV.6049), my delegation spoke of the outcome of the
blockade: complete paralysis of all activity. Even grain
mills and bakeries cannot operate, and 80 per cent of
Palestinian families are not merely living beneath the
poverty line but are suffering from hunger. There has
been a complete collapse of water and sewage services.
Water is life. Water supply stations are inoperable, and
Gazans have access to clean water only once a week:
that is according to the United Nations. Sewage
processing plants have stopped working, with sewage
inundating entire municipalities. Supplies of medicine
have been nearly exhausted: as members must be
aware, United Nations officials have stated that 150
basic medicines no longer exist in Gaza. And the
Council is well aware that, as a result of the blockade,
more than 400 Palestinians have died because of a lack
of access to medical treatment outside the Strip.
Members also know that an electrical power station
that meets 50 per cent of the needs of the Strip has shut
down almost completely.
The long list of facts is known to everyone; I
need not recite it item by item. This has been carried
out with the full knowledge of the Council, which,
despite the assessments of United Nations officials,
unfortunately never lifted a finger. I ask members:
what do you expect from people living under such
conditions? The fact that the Council made no move
encouraged the occupation authorities to do what they

7

S/PV.6060

have been doing since 27 December: conducting
extensive aerial and naval bombardments with Israel’s
most modern and sophisticated weaponry.
All of that led to this horrible massacre, a heinous
crime that thus far has left 400 dead and 2,000
wounded, most of them civilians, including large
numbers of children. The attacks have utterly destroyed
civilian buildings, homes, schools, mosques,
governmental buildings and an already fragile
infrastructure.
On the night of 27 December, the Security
Council met. The meeting was not public, and the
Council could agree only on a press statement that
called for an immediate halt to all military activities
and for the opening of border crossings. What we
expected to occur happened, and it was nothing new.
The Israelis refused to respond, despite appeals by the
Secretary-General, the Quartet, the European Union
and many countries. Indeed, Israeli officials stated that
this was only the beginning — that they would expand
the attacks. They massed their ground forces on the
borders of Gaza and continued killing and besieging
the citizens of Gaza. And that is what led the Arab
foreign ministers to request the Arab representative in
the Council to call for today’s meeting.
Unfortunately, the Israelis have proved once
again that they are interested not in peace, but in
seizing land and terrorizing Palestinians and expelling
them from their homes by every possible means,
including killing and starvation. As we have said many
times before, Israel’s actions are essentially part of a
very direct approach whose results are known to all.
And I reiterate that what Israel they did on
27 December was precisely the response that they were
expected to make to resolution 1850 (2008) adopted by
the Council earlier this month. How can all Israeli
practices on the ground be ignored? How could the
force used by the Israelis be more excessive? How
could there be greater disregard for international
human rights and humanitarian law than that displayed
by the Israelis through their actions in the besieged,
starved and impoverished Gaza Strip?
We have prepared a draft resolution, and I have
requested the Secretariat to circulate the text. Very
briefly, it includes the following elements. First, it
strongly condemns the Israeli military attacks, which
have resulted in the deaths or injury of thousands of
civilians. Second, it calls upon Israel to immediately

8

cease its military attacks and to scrupulously abide by
its obligations, as the occupying Power, under
international law. Third, it calls for the immediate
provision of protection for the Palestinian civilian
population in the Gaza Strip in accordance with
resolution 1674 (2006). Fourth, it calls also on Israel
for an immediate and sustained opening of the Gaza
Strip’s border crossings to allow for the unrestricted
and unhindered access of humanitarian aid and basic
supplies. Fifth, it calls for immediate measures to be
undertaken by all members of the international
community to address the severe humanitarian crisis
and the economic needs of the civilian population in
the Gaza Strip. Sixth, it stresses the need for
restoration of calm in full, in order to pave the way for
resolving all issues in a peaceful manner. And seventh,
it requests the Secretary-General, in the light of the
urgency of the matter, to follow up on the
implementation of the resolution.
In conclusion, I appeal to the Council to swiftly
adopt a binding measure so that another Srebrenica or
Rwanda is not added to its history.
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): We thank you,
Mr. President, for holding this emergency meeting this
evening. The presence of the Secretary-General at this
meeting is a clear indication of how dire the situation
is in the Gaza Strip. The violence over the past few
days in Gaza and in southern Israel has worsened to
such an extent that many innocent civilians have been
killed or injured. That makes it imperative that the
Security Council, which is entrusted with the
maintenance of international peace and security,
publicly voice its condemnation of the attacks and
demand that they cease immediately.
Four days ago, the Council, in a rare moment of
unity on issues related to the Middle East, issued a
press statement expressing serious concern at the
escalation of the situation in Gaza and calling for an
immediate halt to all military activities and violence.
The Council also called for all parties to address the
serious humanitarian and economic needs in Gaza and
to take necessary measures, including the opening of
border crossings, to ensure the continuous provision of
humanitarian supplies, including supplies of food and
fuel, and the provision of medical treatment. We are
disappointed that this call by the Council has yet to be
heeded.

08-67507

S/PV.6060

The South African Government has expressed its
view that the Israeli air strikes using the most
sophisticated war machinery, such as F-16 planes, are a
violation of international humanitarian law. My
Government has formally called on the Israeli
Government to stop the military onslaught in Gaza and
to immediately and unconditionally withdraw its forces
that are currently massing on the border of Gaza.
The Israeli air strikes represent a disproportionate
use of force by Israel. There have been almost
400 deaths, and hundreds more have already been
injured. We join the Secretary-General in reiterating
Israel’s obligation to uphold international humanitarian
and human rights law, and we condemn the excessive
use of force, which is leading to the killing and
injuring of civilians.
We recognize the legitimate security concerns of
Israel resulting from rocket attacks. However, we do
not believe that Israel’s right to self-defence entitles it
to violate the rights of innocent civilians, particularly
those civilians who have been living under 40 years of
foreign occupation.
We are further disappointed that the Israeli
Government has rejected international calls for a 48hour ceasefire in Gaza that would have allowed
humanitarian aid to go into an area which has been
besieged by an illegal blockade for many, many
months. Israel cannot expect security for its people and
political normalcy as long as it occupies Palestinian
lands and continues its attempt to impose permanent
rule over Palestinians through the use of military force.
The South African President has said in a public
statement on this matter that violence and counterviolence will advance neither the cause of Israelis nor
that of the Palestinians and that thus neither strength
nor effort must be spared by the Palestinians and the
Israelis in an effort to find an amicable solution, which
can only result in two States living side by side and in
peace.
The Security Council should again demand an
end to both the Israeli attacks and the rocket attacks. To
do less would again call into question the credibility of
the Council in addressing the loss of innocent lives in
the Middle East. Avoiding action is no longer an option
for the Council.
It is for this reason that we fully support the draft
resolution that has been presented by the delegation of

08-67507

Libya and hope that the Council will consider it in the
coming days. The draft resolution calls for three basic
things: the ending of the bombardment of Gaza; a
ceasefire; and the protection of innocent Palestinian
civilians. That is the least that this Council can do.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
presence and for his statement.
My delegation reiterates its extreme concern at
the escalation of violence in southern Israel and the
Gaza Strip. As the President of the French Republic
declared three days ago after his meeting with the head
of the Palestinian Authority, France reiterates its strong
condemnation of the provocations that led to this
situation, as well as the disproportionate use of force,
and calls for an immediate halt in the launching of
rockets into Israel as well as the Israeli bombardment
of Gaza.
France deplores the significant civilian losses and
expresses its condolence to the innocent victims and
their families. France reiterates its position that
international humanitarian law must be fully respected
by all parties in all circumstances, as must the
obligations based on that law with respect to the
uninterrupted flow of humanitarian goods to the
population and free access for international and
humanitarian organizations. France recalls the
importance of the opening of border crossings, in
accordance with the Agreement on Movement and
Access.
There can be no military solution to this situation.
Everything must be done to find a political solution.
The commitment of the international community is
essential, in particular through the Security Council. In
this regard, France reiterates the importance of the
unanimous call for an immediate end to the violence
made by the Council on 28 December and of resolution
1850 (2008). We also underline the importance of the
message of the Quartet.
Confronted by the seriousness of ongoing events
and the suffering of civilian populations, the priority is
now to bring an end to the chain of violence, to permit
the provision of assistance to the victims without delay
and to ensure a return to a lasting truce and a political
solution. In this regard, France expresses its full
support for the initiative proposed yesterday in Paris by
the European Union, whose main principles I should
like to recall. First, there must be an immediate and

9

S/PV.6060

permanent ceasefire: the launching of rockets by
Hamas into Israel must cease unconditionally; Israeli
military action must stop. Also, there must be
immediate humanitarian mobilization to meet the needs
of the population of Gaza. The halting of fighting
should also make possible the lasting opening of all
border crossings. The European Union is prepared to
resume its assistance role at Gaza border crossings,
which must remain open. Thirdly, peace negotiations
must be resumed and intensified. Continued
negotiations between the Palestinian Authority and the
Israeli Government, in accordance with Security
Council resolutions, are the only solution to this
conflict.
The French authorities are mobilized and remain
in contact with the Israeli Government and the
Palestinian Authority, as well as with our European
Union partners, the other members of the Security
Council, the League of Arab States and the SecretaryGeneral in order to consider means to bring an end to
the violence as quickly as possible, to effect the best
response to the humanitarian situation and to resume
without delay the search for a lasting political solution.
To that end, the President of the French Republic will
travel to the region in the coming days and the
European Union will send a ministerial mission.
Mr. Suescum (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I should like to acknowledge the presence of
the Secretary-General and the representatives of Israel
and Palestine and to thank them for their respective
statements.
Panama would like once again to express our
profound dismay at the situation to which the
population of Gaza is being subjected. We deplore the
breaking of the ceasefire and we call upon both Israel
and Hamas to immediately and unconditionally cease
violence, to take the necessary measures to avoid
civilian casualties and to allow the unrestricted
provision of medical and humanitarian aid.
Panama acknowledges the efforts made by a
number of regional actors — in particular Egypt, the
League of Arab States and the Palestinian Authority —
in striving to resolve the crisis. We also commend
France, both in its national capacity and as current
President of the European Union, and Brazil for their
initiatives. We endorse the statements made by both:
that only a renewed ceasefire can open the way to
establishing minimally acceptable conditions for the

10

people of Gaza, and that only continued political
negotiations between the Palestinian factions and
between Israel and a Palestinian Authority that is
negotiating on behalf of all Palestinians, can bring a
lasting solution to this conflict.
Finally, we stress the absolute need to speedily
resolve the underlying causes of the situation in the
Middle East. Here, we reaffirm Panama’s great concern
about the fact that the Security Council — which bears
primary responsible for maintenance of international
peace and security — is on the margins of this process.
In this case in particular, some States members of the
Council that support one party or the other do so
unconditionally, without the necessary distance from
the specifics of the actions or decisions taken by the
parties. As a consequence, it seems to us that the
Council possesses neither the will nor the capacity to
promote an understanding that can help reach a
peaceful solution. In the light of that incapacity, peace
initiatives come and go without significant impact.
Panama calls upon the Council and its members
to shoulder our Charter responsibility and make a
serious effort to understand the causes and, especially,
the effects of the conflict at the international level, and
to promote and follow up approaches and solutions
leading to peace.
Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): Thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this emergency meeting
of the Security Council. We also very much appreciate
the presence of the Secretary-General and the
statement he made earlier this evening.
My delegation would like to begin by expressing,
in the clearest manner possible, its outrage at and
strong condemnation of the continued military
onslaught by Israel in the Gaza Strip. For days now, we
have all been witness to the excessive and
disproportionate use of force by Israel and the
collective punishment of innocent civilians in
contravention of international law, including the
Geneva Conventions. One and a half million
Palestinian civilians in the Gaza Strip are living in a
state of constant fear. Innocent civilians, including
women and children, have been killed and injured.
International humanitarian workers risk death and
injury as they carry on their vital mission.
We must not allow this situation to continue. The
violence must end, and it must end now.

08-67507

S/PV.6060

At this critical juncture, there should be no lack
of clarity about what needs to happen. Israel must
immediately end its attacks against innocent civilians
in the Gaza Strip and comply with international
humanitarian and human rights law. There is a need to
cease hostilities and put to an end the cycle of
violence.
The continuing violence in the Gaza Strip can
only worsen the already dire humanitarian situation
there. Civilians in Gaza have been suffering as the
illegal blockade and the closure of the Gaza crossings
by Israeli authorities continue. We are aware that at
some points Israel has allowed humanitarian assistance
to enter Gaza. However, we believe that humanitarian
access should be provided continuously and
permanently order to achieve tangible improvement of
the humanitarian situation in Gaza. We therefore once
again call on Israel to immediately lift the blockade
and the closure.
My delegation also underlines that movement of
persons, including humanitarian workers, and goods
into Gaza should be immediately normalized in order
to facilitate economic activity and to meet
humanitarian needs.
The continued provision of emergency and
humanitarian
assistance
by
the
international
community to the Palestinian people in Gaza remains
critical. In this regard, we commend the United
Nations agencies, including the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, and other humanitarian organizations for their
work in the Gaza Strip.
To help ease the suffering of the Palestinian
people in Gaza, Indonesia will send humanitarian
assistance in the amount of $1 million.
Indonesia commends the Secretary-General for
his personal engagement on the unfolding crisis in the
Gaza Strip. In this regard, we welcome the intensive
efforts that the Secretary-General is making with all
parties concerned in order to end the violence and
restore calm.
Indonesia also recognizes the important role that
countries in the region, individually or collectively
through the League of Arab States, can play in
promoting peace in the region. We welcome, therefore,
the convening of the meeting of Foreign Ministers of
the League of Arab States in Cairo earlier today to

08-67507

contribute constructively to the response to the ongoing
crisis in the Gaza Strip. We believe that the Quartet
also has an important role to play. Not least, the
Security Council is called upon to remain seized of the
unfolding crisis.
The Council’s call in its statement of
28 December 2008 remains unheeded by Israel. Thus,
the Security Council should consider the possibility of
pursuing stronger measures to end all violence and
military activities and to restore the ceasefire. In that
connection, we therefore fully support the draft
resolution which has just been introduced by the
representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, as it
stands.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation is gravely concerned
at the sudden escalation in the Gaza Strip. We believe
that it is necessary to bring an immediate end to
Israel’s wide-scale use of force against the Gaza Strip,
which has already led to great losses and suffering
among the Palestinian civilian population. Clearly, the
current conditions in Gaza make it virtually impossible
to avoid such casualties.
At the same time, we again urge Hamas to
immediately end the firing of rockets into the territory
of Israel.
On 28 December, the members of the Security
Council clearly stated that they favoured an immediate
end to all military action in Gaza. Unfortunately, the
parties have yet to heed their call. We insist that they
must do so without further delay. We are certain that
the key task today is to put an end to armed
confrontation and to restore calm on both sides. That is
an essential condition for saving lives and ensuring the
safety and security of Palestinians and Israelis alike
and for preventing a humanitarian catastrophe and
destabilization throughout the Middle East, which
would
hold
unpredictable
consequences
for
international security.
It is time to put an end at long last to the Israeli
blockade of Gaza. Scattered ad hoc measures will not
bring that about. All parties must fully comply with
international humanitarian law. As a matter of urgency,
humanitarian corridors must be opened and allowed to
operate safely to enable unimpeded passage out of
Gaza by civilians, as well as by foreigners, including
Russian citizens. This would also help in the

11

S/PV.6060

immediate evacuation of the sick and wounded from
the Gaza Strip.
The Israeli and Palestinian parties must
immediately
resume
full
and
unconditional
implementation of their obligations under the Road
Map for a Middle East peace settlement, including
putting an end to settlement activity and effectively
fighting terrorism. Here, it is key to resume efforts
towards a just and comprehensive resolution of the
Palestinian problem, to ensure adequate security for
Israel and, in the broader sense, to bring about a
comprehensive and lasting peace between the Israelis
and Arabs.
There is an ever more urgent need for interPalestinian reconciliation, based on the well-known
principles laid down by the Quartet of key international
mediators. That was the thrust of resolution 1850
(2008), recently adopted by the Security Council. We
hope that, guided by that important decision of the
principal organ bearing responsibility for international
peace and security, the parties will demonstrate
political will and a sense of responsibility for the future
of the region and that they will put an immediate end to
violence and genuinely move forward towards an
Israeli-Palestinian settlement, with a coordinating role
played by the Quartet.
Russia will continue actively to encourage the
attainment of that objective. There is no alternative for
the sake of peace in the Middle East.
We shall study the draft resolution submitted to
the Security Council by the delegation of Libya.
Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I too
welcome the presence of the Secretary-General at
today’s meeting.
The situation in Gaza is of grave concern to my
Government, as it is to the entire international
community. My Prime Minister and Foreign Secretary
have been in regular contact with the Government of
Israel, with the Palestinian Authority and with partners
in the Arab world. And, as my French colleague noted,
European Union foreign ministers met yesterday and
set out the steps that we in the European Union believe
need to be taken to address this crisis.
One thing is clear: it has to be brought quickly to
an end. The cost in terms of civilian lives is simply
unacceptable. To achieve that we need to see four
steps.

12

We need to see an immediate and permanent
ceasefire. Hamas must ensure a complete and
unconditional end to the rocket attacks into Israel that
triggered this crisis. And Israel must cease its military
strikes, which have continued for too long and which
have caused many civilian casualties.
Secondly, we need urgent action to restore
supplies of food, fuel and medicine to the population of
the Gaza Strip. That means opening up the crossings
into Gaza to allow the entry of those supplies, and it
means ensuring that the supplies can be distributed
properly within the Gaza Strip. Israel must meet its
humanitarian obligations, and the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East will, as always, have a vital role to play and
will almost certainly need more support.
Thirdly, we need to see the crossings into Gaza
reopen on a sustainable basis. The European Union
stands ready to help in that effort, as it did after the
2005 Agreement on Movement and Access. Alongside
the reopening of the legitimate crossings, there must
also be action to clamp down on the illegal smuggling
trade across the Egypt-Gaza border, which militants
have exploited to bring more weapons into Gaza. There
must also be a new effort towards Palestinian
reconciliation under the leadership of President Abbas.
We believe that steps along those line will contribute to
a durable ceasefire.
And fourthly, the parties and the entire
international community must reinvigorate the
collective efforts to achieve peace in the Middle East.
Resolution 1850 (2008), which the Council adopted
only a few weeks ago, mapped the way forward. It
highlighted the importance of both the Annapolis
process and the Arab Peace Initiative. We need a
comprehensive approach, aimed at a two-State
solution, which allows a secure Israel and a viable
Palestinian State to live side by side in peace and
security.
The current crisis is yet another reminder that
there can be no military solution to the problems of the
Middle East. The only way forward is through a
political solution based on that common vision.
The Security Council has an important role to
play in setting out the steps that need to be taken by the
parties and in giving authority to a durable ceasefire.
We will study the draft resolution circulated by our
Libyan colleagues on behalf of the Arab Group. For a

08-67507

S/PV.6060

resolution of the Security Council to secure broad
support, it will need to reflect the responsibilities of all
the parties and contribute to a durable ceasefire. The
United Kingdom will work for agreement along those
lines.

deliveries to enter the Strip. But more needs to be
done. We commend the work and dedication of United
Nations humanitarian agencies and personnel,
especially the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.

Mr. Terzi di Sant’Agata (Italy): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting
and to thank the Secretary-General for the important
statement he made.

It is my Government’s belief that the Security
Council should again address this situation, taking into
full account the position expressed by the European
Union foreign ministers yesterday in Paris. The
following elements should, in particular, be considered.

My country is extremely concerned about the
situation in the Gaza Strip and the ongoing military
operations, as well as about the uninterrupted
launching of rockets deep into Israeli territory. In
deploring the heavy loss of life and the destruction of
civilian infrastructure, we have to stress that the sixmonth truce between Israel and Hamas ended with the
firing of Qassam rockets from the Gaza Strip, which
we condemn without reservation. We call for the
immediate cessation of those attacks against unarmed
Israelis.
We also urge the Israeli Government, in the
exercise of its right to self-defence, to guarantee the
utmost restraint and moderation in its military
operations. It is deplorable that, in a heavily populated
area, innocent civilians were involved and that attacks
caused the loss of civilian lives.
It is important that violence end on all sides. We
must urge all parties to agree to a ceasefire.
Consequences at the regional level could be extremely
dangerous. It is essential that unity among the
Palestinians be restored. Mediation between Palestinian
factions is crucial and should not be abandoned,
despite the current difficult situation.
There is an urgent need to relaunch the political
process that was started in Annapolis one year ago;
resolution 1850 (2008) sends a key message in that
regard. There is no going back. The Arab Peace
Initiative continues also to be a main point of reference
for the peace process.
The most urgent objective that the international
community must set out to achieve is an immediate
ceasefire. This should be flanked, just as urgently, by
immediate humanitarian aid to the Palestinian civilians
living in the Gaza Strip. We take positive note of the
efforts mentioned by the Secretary-General, by which
the Israeli authorities, in cooperation with the United
Nations, have today allowed 84 trucks with essential

08-67507

First is the call for an immediate and permanent
ceasefire based on an unconditional halt to rocket
attacks by Hamas on Israel and an end to Israeli
military action.
Secondly, there must be an immediate resumption
of humanitarian aid through the reopening of all
crossing points and their lasting and normal operation,
as provided for by the 2005 Agreement on Movement
and Access. On this, consideration could also be given
to an international observation mechanism to guarantee
the cessation of hostilities and unhindered access for
humanitarian aid.
Thirdly, the Security Council should also urge the
parties to intensify their efforts to advance the peace
process, as demanded by resolution 1850 (2008).
And fourthly, Palestinian reconciliation and
reunification, under the legitimate Palestinian Authority,
will remain a key element.
Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam): We thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this urgent meeting. We
also thank the Secretary-General for his presence and
for his statement.
My delegation is following with grave concern
and great regret the current dire situation in the Gaza
Strip, where unjustifiable violence and attacks against
both the Palestinian and the Israeli civilian populations
have mounted to unacceptable levels over the past few
days. We reiterate our condemnation of the
indiscriminate attacks against civilians.
While recognizing Israel’s need for self-defence
against terrorist attacks, we denounce the excessive
and disproportionate use of force by Israel, in
collective punishment of the population in Gaza, which
has resulted in the death or injury of hundreds of
Palestinians, including women and children, and

13

S/PV.6060

widespread destruction
infrastructure.

of

local

property

and

At the same time, we are profoundly dismayed at
the inevitable prospect of exacerbation of the
humanitarian crisis in Gaza and its redoubled collateral
impact on more than 1.5 Palestinians there if the Israeli
military operations continue in the coming days.
Strongly convinced that there can be no military
solution to the conflict, my delegation urges the parties
concerned to immediately and unconditionally stop all
acts of violence. We demand that Israel open all border
crossings to allow for the urgent delivery of food,
medical aid and fuel to Gazans, the evacuation of the
injured and unhindered access for humanitarian
workers.
We commend the United Nations agencies,
including first of all the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), and other humanitarian organizations for
their work in difficult conditions on the ground, and
call upon them to extend further emergency assistance
to civilian populations in Gaza.
We welcome the joint efforts by the Palestinian
Authority, Egypt and Jordan to strengthen interPalestinian political dialogue and reconciliation. We
reconfirm our support for the important role played by
the Quartet, the League of Arab States and regional
countries in brokering a truce between the parties
concerned and restoring calm to Gaza.
We believe it is imperative for the Security
Council now to adopt an enforceable resolution that
can help stop the killing of innocent people, prevent
the situation from further risky escalation and bring the
peace process back to the direction set out in the Road
Map, the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace
Initiative, the Annapolis joint understanding and the
relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 1850 (2008).
In this context, our appreciation goes to the
Libyan delegation for preparing a draft resolution,
which we commit ourselves to studying carefully and
working actively and constructively on with other
Council members towards its early adoption.
Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): I too
welcome the presence of the Secretary-General.

14

The United States is deeply concerned by the
continuing violence in Gaza and southern Israel. We
support an immediate ceasefire that is sustainable and
implemented by all. Specifically, this means that
Hamas must stop its rocket attacks. There cannot be a
meaningful ceasefire without this step or without the
end of illegal arms smuggling into Gaza.
We have not yet seen any evidence that Hamas is
willing to immediately cease rocket attacks. The
decision by Hamas to break the Egyptian-brokered
period of calm — a decision, by the way, that was
announced immediately following the adoption of
Security Council resolution 1850 (2008) — led to
renewed rocket attacks into southern Israel from Gaza.
Knowing that it was intolerable for Israel to live under
the terror of rocket attacks, Hamas continued its
barrage, which involved dozens of rockets a day. As a
result, we face the crisis we are meeting about today.
The United States deeply regrets the loss of
innocent lives and the growing humanitarian
difficulties in the area. We need to address all
humanitarian suffering on an urgent basis. A ceasefire
will clearly help with this objective. To attain these
crucial results, my Government has been engaged in
intensive efforts with Governments in the region and
around the world to restore calm. These intensive
efforts continue and will not cease until calm is
restored.
We are faced with an extremely complex situation
that cannot be resolved by simple and one-sided
declarations or unbalanced initiatives. We welcome the
concrete efforts made by the legitimate Palestinian
Authority, the Government of Egypt, the European
Union, the Arab League and other groups to contribute
to a viable solution. For our part, we are working
incessantly to achieve the following urgent objectives:
first, an enduring ceasefire that is respected by all
parties; secondly, an end to smuggling of weapons into
Gaza; thirdly, increased transit of humanitarian goods
to aid Palestinian people; and, fourthly, the opening of
the crossings, with appropriate and legitimate
Authority control.
We call on all to join us by working for those
concrete objectives. Beyond that, as the Quartet stated
in the most recent statement, a lasting peace will be
reached through simultaneous and mutually reinforcing
efforts on three tracks: negotiations; building the
institutions of a Palestinian State; and implementation

08-67507

S/PV.6060

of the parties’ obligations under the Road Map, leading
to the two-State solution — Israel and Palestine. We
are committed to resuming efforts towards the
establishment of that lasting peace.
Mr. Zhang Yesui (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation thanks you, Mr. President, for
having convened this emergency meeting of the
Security Council. We would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
China is seriously concerned by the large-scale
Israeli air attacks against Gaza that have taken place
since 27 December, which have caused an escalation of
the tension in Gaza. We strongly condemn all actions
that have caused casualties among civilians. In the
early morning hours of Sunday, 28 December, the
Security Council adopted a statement by the President
to the press. We note with regret that the appeal made
by the Council in its press statement by the President
has not been heeded.
We urge Israel to immediately halt its military
activities. Palestinian armed factions should also cease
their launching of rockets. The parties concerned
should, with the support of the international
community, re-establish the ceasefire as soon as
possible.
The Israeli air attacks have further exacerbated
the already dire humanitarian situation in Gaza. We
urge Israel to immediately open all border crossings
into Gaza to facilitate unhindered access to Gaza for
humanitarian relief materials. The Chinese Government
has decided to provide the Palestinian National
Authority with $1 million in emergency humanitarian
assistance so that they can acquire essential materials.
We call upon the international community to take
effective actions to alleviate the difficult humanitarian
situation in Gaza, and we support urgent action by the
United Nations in that area.
Two weeks ago in this Chamber, the Security
Council adopted resolution 1850 (2008), reaffirming
the determination of the international community to
promote the peace process in the Middle East. In the
current circumstances, the Security Council should
take action to ensure that the objectives of that
resolution are attained.
We have taken note of the fact that Libya has
introduced a draft resolution, and we hope that all
parties concerned can, on the basis of consultations,

08-67507

reach consensus on the draft resolution as soon as
possible.
We hope that the Middle East Quartet will
intensify its efforts and exert its influence. The
international community and other partners should also
play a constructive role. We hope that, with the joint
efforts of the international community, military action
can be halted as soon as possible and that the situation
can be eased, so that all parties concerned can return to
the negotiation table as soon as possible.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, we thank you for having convened this
emergency meeting, which gives the Security Council
an opportunity to consider the tragic events that are
currently taking place in Gaza. The presence of the
Secretary-General, which we welcome, clearly attests
to the importance and urgency of the situation.
We condemn the use of force by anyone on either
side. We regret the great loss of life in the current
crisis, including among civilians, that has resulted from
Israel’s disproportionate military operations in Gaza.
We call upon Israel to comply with international
conventions, in particular the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War. We also cannot condone the
repeated firing of rockets by Hamas, which endangers
the lives of both Israeli and Palestinian civilians. My
delegation calls for an immediate ceasefire in order to
avert an escalation that could engulf the entire region,
as well as to facilitate the provision of humanitarian
assistance, especially in order to evacuate the
wounded.
By adopting resolution 1850 (2008), on
16 December, the Security Council called on the
parties to honour their commitments under the Road
Map, the Arab Peace Initiative and the relative
resolutions of the Council. In line with those very
commitments, we call on the parties to abandon the
military option and to choose the path of dialogue, for
violence will in fact only delay the prospects for peace
in the Middle East.
Despite Israel’s withdrawal from the territory,
Gaza is among the key issues recently focusing
attention on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In that
regard, 2008 will go down as a year of great suffering
for the people of Gaza; but it will also be one of great
tragedy for the people of southern Israel, who have
lived with the anxiety caused by indiscriminate firing

15

S/PV.6060

of rockets. The current crisis therefore entails a number
of security concerns, which above all fall within the
responsibility of the Security Council. How can the
security of Israel, which is under threat from rocket
launches from Gaza, be ensured? How can the
Palestinian population be protected from Israel’s
military incursions and repeated embargos? How can
emergency humanitarian assistance for the people of
Gaza be ensured today? Those are the great current
challenges that the Security Council must address.
At the same time, pending a comprehensive
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, it is
important that the Security Council agree on the
answers to those questions. That is especially so given
that reality on the ground calls for immediate action.
That includes the urgent need for Israel to open border
crossings to humanitarian assistance, and in particular
to allow access for humanitarian workers and the
delivery of assistance by a number of States. The
international community, including the League of Arab
States, has a duty to continue to help the parties to find
a solution to the current crisis and, in general, to work
to bring about a comprehensive, just and lasting
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
We have just received the draft resolution that has
been introduced by Libya. We shall consider it in due
course.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by welcoming the presence among
us of the Secretary-General, whose statement we very
much appreciate. We have also listened very carefully
to the statements made by the Permanent Observer of
Palestine and the Permanent Representative of Israel.
We thank them both for their interventions.
Costa Rica would like to express its appreciation
for the convening of this meeting in the light of the
gravity of the current situation in the Middle East,
especially in Gaza and southern Israel. We believe that
the urgency of the reality on the ground required the
immediate holding of a public meeting of the Council
and calls for a firm response by this organ. We hope
that the Council will take relevant action that will be
respected by the parties.
Costa Rica agrees with the judgement of the
Secretary-General that Israel’s military activities in the
Gaza Strip have been disproportionate. Those activities
have resulted in the death of more than 350 persons,
including a significant number of civilians. As we have

16

said before, legitimate self-defence does not sanction
reprisals such as those carried out by Israel in its
attacks of recent days and its months-long blockade
against the Palestinian civilian population, which has
resulted in shortages, hunger and economic collapse.
We understand Israel’s security concerns. In that
regard, Costa Rica has repeatedly condemned, as it
does today, the terrorist attacks against southern Israel.
However, apart from that tragic situation, we urge
avoiding the temptation to engage in an argument
about who began this new descent into madness. Such
a pointless undertaking leads only to the point of
departure, while the number of dead and wounded
continues to mount. Israel and Palestine should not be
a proving ground for intellectual preferences or
political games. For more than half a century, the lands
of Israel and Palestine have called for a reaffirmation
of the principles upon which the United Nations was
founded, as well as the implementation of policies that
neither ignore nor contravene those principles. Justice
and Israel’s security should not be incompatible goals.
As always, the question today is how to halt the
current escalation of violence that is undermining
every hope to see two States living side by side in
peace, while furthering the well-being of their peoples.
No one is blind to what a solution to the Middle East
conflict requires. No one denies that there will be no
solution and no peace so long as the occupation
continues and international law is not respected,
including international conventions and the resolutions
of the Council. It seems to us important to reiterate
that, given what is currently happening in the Middle
East, the Council cannot remain indifferent and still be
relevant.
It is also necessary to reiterate that there is a need
to respect the Rome Statute and the relevant Additional
Protocol to the Geneva Conventions, so as to ensure
the protection of civilians and civilian goods. The
parties to the conflict must always make a distinction
between civilians and combatants and between civilian
goods and military goals. Along the same lines, we
believe that attacks on both Israeli and Palestinian
territory are equally to be condemned.
As we have said before, we are concerned about
the recourse to collective punishment as a response, for
it violates international law under the Fourth Geneva
Convention.

08-67507

S/PV.6060

Today, Costa Rica calls for a ceasefire that will
lead to a permanent cessation of hostilities. We believe
that the Council must, as a priority, ensure fulfilment
of the parties’ obligations under the Road Map, the
relevant Council resolutions and international law. Our
delegation is committed to working on the basis of the
proposal submitted to us. We would like to see it
improved so that it can receive broad support, and we
will strive to achieve an unequivocal statement by the
Council.
Mrs. Detaille (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this emergency
public meeting of the Security Council, and I thank the
Secretary-General for his presence.
Belgium is extremely concerned at the
unprecedented escalation of violence in Gaza and
southern Israel. It is a serious threat to regional
stability, having already caused hundreds of deaths,
and is accompanied by a grave humanitarian crisis
linked to the specific context caused by the blockade of
Gaza in recent months.
Belgium condemns the breaking of the truce by
Hamas and the resumption of rocket attacks on
southern Israel. Belgium recalls that Israel’s right to
defend itself does not give it the right to respond
disproportionately and without regard for the effects of
its actions on civilian populations.
In any event, neither of the parties has anything
to gain from the current escalation. There is no
possible military solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, either in Gaza or anywhere else. That is why
Belgium, together with the entire European Union,
calls on the two parties to display responsibility
towards the civilian populations concerned by
undertaking a full and immediate ceasefire.
We also call for the normal and permanent
reopening of all crossings into Gaza, as envisaged in
the 2005 Agreement on Movement and Access. Both
parties must allow and facilitate immediate
humanitarian action by permitting the urgent provision
of food and medical aid, fuel and electricity to Gaza as
well as the evacuation of the wounded and unhindered
access for humanitarian workers.
Finally, Belgium calls for an intensification of the
peace process, as requested in Security Council
resolution 1850 (2008), so as to attain, in accordance
with the Annapolis process, the objective recognized

08-67507

by all: the establishment of an independent, democratic
and viable Palestinian State, living side by side with
Israel in peace and security. We must work to find a
comprehensive solution to the Israeli-Arab conflict
based on elements including the Arab Peace Initiative.
We also encourage inter-Palestinian reconciliation and
support mediation efforts to that end.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Croatia.
My Government shares the sense of urgency and
utmost concern regarding the ongoing violence in
southern Israel and Gaza, in particular its heavy toll on
civilians. We deeply regret the loss of civilian life. Our
sympathies go to the families of innocent victims on
both sides.
We join in the appeals made by the Council on
28 December 2008 and by the international community
at large for all violence to be immediately brought to a
halt, as it is only through peaceful means that we can
hope to achieve a just and lasting peace. We urge the
parties to adhere strictly to international humanitarian
law. It is essential to avoid further civilian casualties,
as any life lost is one too many. In that regard, we
should not forget that the tenets of humanitarian law —
notably the duty to protect civilians — apply to all.
Croatia is deeply concerned at the desperate
situation of Gaza’s civilians and hopes to see swift
humanitarian action on the ground, including deliveries
of humanitarian supplies, unhindered humanitarian
access and the facilitation of the evacuation of injured
persons. We appreciate the efforts of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and other United Nations
agencies, as well as the initiative by the Government of
France, in that regard.
However, we cannot address the situation in
Gaza — including the latest military actions of the
Israel Defense Forces — in isolation from its context.
Hamas and the militants in the Gaza Strip, positioned
in and among the civilian infrastructure, have since
been consistently carrying out rocket attacks on Israel.
The terrible daily rocket attacks that Hamas is
launching at the population of south Israel have
increased in frequency as well as in range in recent
days. Israel cannot be denied its inherent and
legitimate right to defend itself or its obligation to
defend and protect its citizens. However, civilian
casualties must be avoided.

17

S/PV.6060

We do not condone violence, and we continue to
believe in peace. Only two weeks ago, the Security
Council sent out a strong message of support for the
Annapolis peace process. It is essential that we stand
firmly behind the messages contained in resolution
1850 (2008), which lay the groundwork for a political
settlement and a continuation of the process. This calls
for responsibility on the part of all actors, notably
those in the region. We will continue to support every
constructive effort aimed at curbing the violence.
We shall study very carefully the draft resolution
circulated by the Libyan delegation.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now call on the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I wish
to thank you, Mr. President, and the other members of
the Security Council for rapidly responding to the
request of the Group of Arab States that this emergency
meeting be convened. We are grateful to the SecretaryGeneral for attending this emergency meeting, which is
being held to consider the recent and ongoing Israeli
military actions against the Palestinian population in
the Gaza Strip. To date, this aggression has killed more
than 400 Palestinians and wounded thousands of
others, including many women and children, and the
horrifying carnage continues. The impact has been
made still more tragic by the crippling blockade
imposed by Israel, in flagrant violation of its
responsibilities
under
international
law
and
international humanitarian law, including its specific
obligations, as the occupying Power, under the Fourth
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War.
The events in Gaza, including Israel’s
premeditated and barbaric aggression and killing of
civilians and its disproportionate and arbitrary use of
force, threaten peace and security not only in the
Middle East region, but throughout the world. That
requires the Security Council to step up its efforts and
take immediate action, in accordance with its Charter
mandate, to ensure a comprehensive and binding
ceasefire that will be respected.
Such action by the Council would implement its
unanimous will, as expressed in the press statement of
28 December 2008, which called for an immediate end
to all military action and violence and for efforts to

18

address the humanitarian situation and the urgent
humanitarian needs in the Gaza Strip through the
permanent reopening of the crossings, in order to bring
about improved political, economic and humanitarian
conditions.
Such conditions are necessary if there is to be an
end to violence and counter-violence and true calm
between the parties, so that international efforts can be
stepped up to bring about the desired settlement and to
establish an independent Palestinian State, with
Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, as quickly as possible.
There can be no doubt that Israel is not heeding
the appeals by the Security Council to address the
explosive situation in Gaza. Israel continues its
military aggression, flagrantly flouting the will of the
international community despite the Council’s repeated
calls to both parties, the calls by Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and contacts with the concerned parties.
Israel’s actions have exacerbated tensions in the
occupied Palestinian territories and, indeed, in all Arab
countries. This will compromise the prospects for
peace in the Middle East.
The Security Council, which, through its
successive resolutions and decisions, has recently
stated its intent to bring about peace, needs to impose
its collective will under international law and
international humanitarian law by adopting a decisive
resolution that would include the elements already set
out in the press statement, along with other elements.
Specifically, it should highlight the need to ensure the
international protection necessary for the Palestinian
people in order to restore the prestige and credibility of
the Security Council by addressing this aggression,
avoiding double standards, politicization and
selectivity.
The Israeli aggression, which has been
denounced by all international and regional parties,
requires that the Security Council adopt a firm decision
and take all measures necessary to end Israeli
aggression against the Gaza Strip and to prevent a land
attack from taking place. Contrary to Israeli assertions,
these attacks are not carried out in self-defence. The
attacks are taking place in the context of a lack of any
real political will to put an end to the occupation and to
enable the Palestinian people to restore their lost rights,
specifically their inalienable right to self-determination
and to the creation of their own independent State.

08-67507

S/PV.6060

Notwithstanding all the efforts undertaken by the
forces of peace in the region, including Egypt, to
maintain the lull, this lull is not an end in itself, but a
way to ensure an environment conducive to true peace
instead of the suspended peace process, in which the
Palestinian people and all Arab peoples have lost their
faith. To truly guarantee that the situation will not be
replicated, there must be an end to the occupation of
the Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese territories, a
return to the borders of 4 June 1967, a settlement of the
refugee question and the establishment of an
independent, viable Palestinian State — which are all
elements of the Arab Peace Initiative. That Initiative
continues to be the only basis for bringing about a
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East.
As a result, the Council of the Arab League,
which met at the foreign minister level today,
31 December 2008, decided to instruct the Arab Group
in New York to call for an emergency meeting of the
Security Council and to call for a binding resolution to
compel Israel to immediately end its aggression, lift
the blockade, open the crossings, put an end to its
collective punishment policy, ensure international
protection for the Palestinian people and calm the
situation.
I endorse the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya as the
sole member of the Arab Group represented in the
Security Council and welcome his introduction of the
draft resolution. We reiterate the fact that the draft
resolution submitted to the Security Council represents
an integrated, complete basis for addressing these
issues in order to bring about an end to military
confrontation and to promote peace efforts. The Arab
Group hopes that all Council members will support the
draft resolution and that it will be adopted as soon as
possible.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Observer for the League of Arab States to
the United Nations, His Excellency Mr. Yahya
Mahmassani.
Mr. Mahmassani (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
first to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting of the Security Council so speedily. Allow me
also to welcome the presence of Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and to thank him for his statement.

to more than 2,000 casualties, many of whom are
women and children. Furthermore, buildings, including
homes, schools and mosques, are being destroyed with
people inside them.
This past Saturday, the Security Council held an
urgent meeting. An understanding was reached by the
Council, expressed in a statement on Sunday morning.
Since then, we have continued to call for a ceasefire,
the opening of crossings to Gaza, the meeting of the
humanitarian needs of the Palestinian people and the
protection of civilians.
Israel, at this very moment, continues to
perpetrate its aggression, an aggression that comes on
the heels of more than 18 months of a suffocating siege
against Gaza, during which Israel prevented any
medical or other essential supplies from reaching Gaza.
This is a flagrant breach of international humanitarian
law. It represents a policy of collective punishment,
and it has been followed up by a policy of collective
killing of the Palestinian people.
The continuing deterioration of the situation in
Gaza serves no one’s interests. It will have serious
consequences and will result in more extremism and
violence in the region. There will be less of an
opportunity to reach a just and comprehensive peace.
The Council of the League of Arab States has
taken up this grave situation at the ministerial level. It
took a decision today strongly condemning Israeli
aggression against the Gaza Strip, demanding that
Israel instantly cease all military activities in the area
and condemning Israel for its blockade against the
Palestinian people in Gaza, which has led to a grave
deterioration of the humanitarian situation. Israel is
directly responsible for this situation and is called upon
to put an end to it.
The Council of the Arab League also stressed the
need to continue to provide urgent humanitarian
assistance to the Gaza Strip and support to
international humanitarian organizations. We appeal to
those organizations to shoulder their responsibilities
vis-à-vis Palestinian civilians in Gaza in the light of
Israeli violations of international humanitarian law. We
call on the high contracting parties to the Fourth
Geneva Convention to convene a meeting of the parties
to ensure the implementation of their decisions of 2001
and of the relevant resolutions of the Security Council.

Since 27 December 2008, Israeli war planes have
been continuously raiding the Gaza Strip. This has led

08-67507

19

S/PV.6060

The Security Council is called upon today to take
the necessary measures to compel Israel to instantly
cease all military activities in the Gaza Strip and allow
the entry of humanitarian assistance to Gaza. The
Council is also called upon to shoulder its
responsibilities for the maintenance of international
peace and security and to ensure the humanitarian
protection of the Palestinian people.
How can the Security Council condone the daily
killing of hundreds of people? How can it remain silent
while Israeli raids are killing human beings and

20

destroying buildings? Where is the international
community? The Security Council has a responsibility.
The credibility of the international community is about
to dissolve as a barrage of ammunition continues to
strike the Gaza Strip.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 8.45 p.m.

08-67507
