S/PV.7019

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7019th meeting

Monday, 19 August 2013, 10.45 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Ruiz Cerutti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Argentina)

Members:

Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Musayev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Maes
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Kim Sook
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Manzi
Mr. Menan
Mr. Parham
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Letter dated 1 August 2013 from the Permanent Representative of Argentina to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2013/447)

13-43092 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1343092*

S/PV.7019

The meeting was called to order at 11.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Letter dated 1 August 2013 from the
Permanent Representative of Argentina
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2013/447)
The President (spoke in Spanish): Under rule
37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I
invite the representatives of Armenia, Belgium, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Croatia, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Denmark, Egypt, Estonia, Georgia, Hungary,
India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel,
Japan, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Malaysia, Namibia,
the Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Qatar,
Slovakia, South Africa, Spain, the Sudan, Switzerland,
the Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Turkey, Uganda
and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to participate
in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Ms. Navanethem Pillay, United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Ms. Pillay,
who is joining today’s meeting via video teleconference
from Geneva.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Ms. Valerie Amos, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I wish to welcome
Ms. Amos, who is participating in today’s meeting via
video teleconference from Rio de Janeiro.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Philip
Spoerri, Director for International Law and Cooperation
at the International Committee of the Red Cross, to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Ioannis Vrailas, Deputy Head of the Delegation of

2

the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to document S/2013/447, which contains the
text of a letter dated 1 August 2013 from the Permanent
Representative of Argentina to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note concerning the item on today’s agenda.
The Security Council takes up this item today as
we commemorate World Humanitarian Day. Argentina
would like to pay tribute to those who have lost their
lives while rendering humanitarian assistance.
The Council last considered the issue of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict at its open debate held
on 12 February under the presidency of the Republic
of Korea (see S/PV.6917). At that meeting, the Council
took up the report of the Secretary-General contained
in document S/2012/376 and the five challenges he
identified therein, namely, enhancing compliance with
international law by parties to a conflict, improving the
same compliance by non-State actors, improving the
protection of civilians by United Nations peacekeeping
and other missions, improving humanitarian access and
improving accountability for violations.
As a result of that debate, the Council adopted
presidential statement S/PRST/2013/2, which reaffirmed
its commitment to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and to the ongoing full implementation of all
its relevant previous resolutions, including resolutions
1265 (1999), 1296 (2000), 1674 (2006), 1738 (2006) and
1894 (2009), as well as all of its resolutions on women
and peace and security, children and armed conflict
and peacekeeping, and all the relevant statements of the
President.
The Council also reiterated its demand that all
parties to a conflict abide strictly by obligations
flowing from international humanitarian, human rights
and refugee law. It also underscored, among other
things, the need for secure and unhindered access for
humanitarian assistance. It also made reference to the
importance of ensuring that peacekeeping missions
develop protection strategies in order to carry out their
protection-of-civilian mandates. It also underscored
the importance of investigating events and reiterated
its commitment to the fight against impunity and

13-43092

S/PV.7019

committed itself to follow up closely on its decisions
pertaining to international tribunals.
On 17 July, the Council held an open debate on the
protection of journalists, organized by the presidency
of the United States of America. The main goal of that
meeting was to continue to consider the protection
of civilians as part of the Council’s commitment
by taking up various specific challenges, that is,
improving compliance with international humanitarian
law, human rights law and refugee law, improving
access to humanitarian assistance and strengthening
accountability for grave violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights.
I am grateful for the presence of His Excellency
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, to whom I now give
the floor.
The Secretary-General: World Humanitarian
Day is our annual opportunity to salute the brave and
committed women and men who endure danger and
adversity so others may survive and thrive, to thank
those who open homes and borders to people fleeing
war and persecution, and to remember those who have
lost their lives helping others who are suffering.
Ten years ago today, explosions ripped through
the Canal Hotel in Baghdad. Twenty-two United
Nations colleagues lost their lives, among them Sergio
Vieira de Mello. His passion for the mission of the
United Nations and his compassion for those we serve
remain inspirational. Every day, humanitarian workers
protect, feed, shelter, educate, heal and assist millions
of people, regardless of who or where they are. It is
an outrage that our colleagues and partners should
be attacked for providing those essential services. On
this tragic anniversary, I call again for greater respect
and protection for humanitarian workers and assets
everywhere. Attacks against humanitarians are a
violation of international law, they are war crimes and
they are direct assaults on those who we serve, those
who need us most.
Every day, we are reminded of the horrific
consequences of conflict, violence and terrorism.
We cannot become numb to that brutalization. I am
particularly concerned about the use of explosive
weapons with wide-area effect in populated areas.
Roadside bombs, heavy weapons and artillery and
air strikes can indiscriminately kill and maim, with
profound humanitarian consequences.

I repeat my call to the Security Council and to
Member States to also work through the General
Assembly to recognize and act on this critical issue.
We need to better understand the types of explosive
weapons that are most problematic. We need to examine
how existing international law can help regulate use.
And we need to consider the concrete steps that can be
taken to reduce the humanitarian impact of explosive
weapons in populated areas.
In Syria, villages and towns are repeatedly subject
to indiscriminate and disproportionate attacks. All
parties to the conflict are systematically failing in
their obligations under international humanitarian and
human rights law to protect civilians. That must end
immediately.
The
violence
has
created
overwhelming
humanitarian needs and widespread suffering.
The number of persons displaced by the fighting
continues to grow. Yet, all parties continue to hinder
direct and efficient access for impartial assistance.
The humanitarian space in opposition-held areas
is shrinking. And the Government continues to
impose numerous and unacceptable bureaucratic and
administrative constraints. I urge the international
community to increase its support for relief efforts.
That includes assisting affected countries in the region.
Their borders need to remain open to people fleeing the
violence.
I am also seriously concerned about the situation in
the Central African Republic. The Council was briefed
on Wednesday about the deteriorating humanitarian
and human rights situation there. Armed attacks against
civilians, illegal detention, torture, widespread sexual
violence, child recruitment and abductions are rife. I
urge the Council and the international community to
give that tragedy the highest priority.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, civilians,
including children, are also caught in the fighting,
subjected to sexual and gender-based violence, killed,
forcibly recruited and arbitrarily detained. Those
violations have continued for far too long.
I call on all parties to respect their obligations
under international law and to work towards the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region. Protecting civilians demands timely
political action and prevention. It means helping
Governments — which have primary responsibility for

13-430923

S/PV.7019

protection — to build the necessary capacity. That may
include a presence or preemptive action by uniformed
peacekeepers.
Where the United Nations acts to support the
strengthening of national security institutions, we
are guided by our human-rights due-diligence policy,
which is firmly rooted in the fundamental principles of
international law.
United Nations peacekeeping operations take
an integrated approach to protecting civilians that
addresses a wide spectrum of possible measures. The
protection of civilians remains at the core of nine
current United Nations peacekeeping operations.
The establishment of the new mandate for the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali and the strengthening of the mandate of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo have offered
opportunities to enhance our ability to protect civilians.
At the same time, the evolving nature of our protection
role also poses significant challenges for the Council to
consider. In particular, we must beware of the risk of
being seen as a party to conflict and diminishing our
ability to provide impartial and timely humanitarian
assistance.
Let me turn to the question of compliance. It is
essential to act on and punish violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law, including the
deliberate obstruction of humanitarian assistance.
Commissions of inquiry and fact-finding missions
with clear mandates have proven crucial in supporting
investigations and informing possible referrals to the
International Criminal Court.
The Security Council has a particularly important
role in such efforts: first, in promoting the cooperation
of Member States with the International Criminal
Court and, secondly, in encouraging and assisting
States to ensure accountability at the national level.
Those responsible for attacks against aid workers must
be arrested and prosecuted. We must never tolerate
impunity.
Addressing the issues I have outlined demands
unity and resolve. It has been 14 years since the
Council acknowledged the protection of civilians as
a fundamental component of its responsibility. In
that time, divisions have too often stood in the way of

4

action to meet urgent needs. The tragedy in Syria is a
particularly stark example.
Let us be inspired by the unselfish commitment
and sacrifice of humanitarian workers everywhere.
Let us commit to work in common cause to meet
our responsibility to the peoples of the United
Nations — wherever and whenever they need us.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
I now give the floor to Ms. Pillay.
Ms. Pillay: On this anniversary, I join the SecretaryGeneral in paying tribute to our fallen colleagues,
including my predecessor, High Commissioner for
Human Rights Sergio Vieira de Mello, and support the
call of the Secretary-General for greater protection of
humanitarian and human rights workers.
As we mark this day, civilians in many conflict
zones face unacceptably high levels of threat to their
lives, security and dignity. This past July was the
deadliest month in years in Iraq, as violence killed
more than 1,000 people. In Afghanistan, in the first
half of 2013, 1,319 deaths as a result of conflict were
reported. In Syria, more than 100,000 people have been
killed since the fighting began. The number of victims
of the ongoing violence in the Central African Republic
is still unknown, but reports give rise to concern.
I draw the attention of the Council to the important
recommendations concerning the protection of
civilians made at the recent Oslo conference, which
gathered 94 States and various organizations, including
my Office. They reiterated that all parties to a conflict
must apply and respect both international human rights
law and international humanitarian law. The protection
of civilians is necessarily norm-based.
In that respect, I welcome the adoption, by the
General Assembly, of the international Arms Trade
Treaty (ATT). I hope that the ATT will become a
powerful tool for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and the prevention of human rights violations. I
strongly encourage States to ratify it as soon as possible.
Throughout the past year, my Office and human
rights components of peace operations and political
missions have continued to work in key country
situations on the Council’s agenda to improve respect
for international human rights and humanitarian law.

13-43092

S/PV.7019

In coordination with the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic,
we are closely monitoring the situation in that
country. Recently, I dispatched a fact-finding mission
to collect information on human rights violations,
and I am working to increase the number of human
rights officers on the ground. I appeal to the Council
to urgently authorize the deployment to the Central
African Republic of a large multinational force with
a strong protection mandate, as stressed by Assistant
Secretary-General Šimonović in his 14 August briefing
to the Council (see S/PV.7017).
In Mali, 25 human rights officers have been deployed
within the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission, to monitor, investigate and
report on compliance with international human rights
and humanitarian law. Human rights mobile teams
have been dispatched to critical areas to document
and analyse patterns of violence and to advise on
action to prevent further violations. The human rights
component is also playing an essential role in devising
the Mission’s strategy for the protection of civilians.
I am deeply concerned about the recent resumption
of violence in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights within the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo reported that the
latest fighting between the Mouvement du 23 mars and
the Forces armées de la République démocratique du
Congo resulted in at least 200 cases of sexual violence,
as well as many other gross human rights violations.
The Office has increased field visits and advised on
mission strategies to protect civilians.
United Nations Deputy High Commissioner for
Human Rights Flavia Pansieri will visit the Democratic
Republic of the Congo next week.
As regularly demonstrated, undertaking monitoring,
causality checking, analysis and reporting of violations
of international human rights and humanitarian law is
critical for informing appropriate responses. In that
regard, I welcome both the increasing use by United
Nations bodies of international commissions of inquiry
and fact-finding missions to investigate violation
in conflict situations and the Council’s developing
practice of referring to their findings.
Currently, my Office is supporting the international
commissions on the Syrian Arab Republic and the

Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. As part of our
active monitoring and documenting of violations in
conflict situations and making information available to
the Security Council and beyond, earlier this year my
Office published the shocking results of a study into the
number of individuals killed in the conflict in Syria.
Providing humanitarian access and ensuring
accountability for violations of international human
rights and humanitarian law are obligations grounded in
international law. They are not only morally imperative
but also legal requirements. That was clearly recalled
in the report of the Secretary-General’s internal review
panel on the United Nations action in Sri Lanka.
States Members and the United Nations should make
conserted efforts to ensure that the protection of
civilians integrates, in a complimentary and mutually
reinforcing manner, humanitarian access and full
respect for the norms of international human rights,
humanitarian and refugee laws.
In a recent joint statement, Under-SecretaryGeneral Valerie Amos and I urged all parties to the
conflict in Syria to allow humanitarian organizations
safe access to all people in need. Today I renew my call
to the Syrian Government to grant representatives from
my Office and the Commission of Inquiry on Syria full
access to the country.
Following the recent upsurge in inter-communal
violence between rival Nuer and Murle tribes in South
Sudan’s Jonglei state, thousands of civilians fled to the
bush, where their access to humanitarian aassistance
has been extremely limited. The authorities need to
redouble efforts to create a secure environment that
would allow civilians to return to their towns and
villages.
I welcome the resumption of direct peace talks
between Israel and Palestine. That process can only
achieve a tangible result if the protection of the human
rights of all Palestinians and Israelis is placed at its
centre. Ensuring accountability for all human rights
and humanitarian law violations is essential in that
regard. The illegal blockade of the Gaza Strip imposing
restrictions on the enjoyment of fundamental rights
must be lifted. The freedom of movement throughout
the occupied Palestinian territory should be ensured.
I am also seriously concerned about the ongoing
prevalance of impunity, which undermines the fabric
of societies and is detrimental to any lasting solution to
instability. States must adopt the necessary measures for

13-430925

S/PV.7019

combating impunity, in compliance with international
standards. In that respect, I welcome consideration
given in Guinea-Bissau for the establishment of an
international commission of inquiry to investigate
crimes of political violence and other serious crimes,
as well as gross violations of human rights committed
since March 2009.
It is also of the utmost importance for perpetrators
to be held fully accountable for violations committed
in the Central African Republic. I welcome the recent
statement by the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court that her office will, if necessary,
investigate and prosecute those most responsible for
committing serious crimes there. That has followed the
mission of Mr. Ivan Šimonović to the country, during
which he discussed with national authorities ways to
tackle the ongoing impunity.
With regard to Syria, I reiterate my call for
the Security Council to refer the situation to the
International Criminal Court. A referral would serve
to make it clear to all actors that they will be held to
account for their failure to abide by international human
rights and humanitarian law. It is my hope that it will
also contribute to preventing further violations.
I also remain seriously concerned about the human
rights implications for the protection of civilians of
armed drone strikes carried out in the context of counterterrorism and military operations, including in Pakistan,
Yemen and Gaza. The current lack of transparency
surrounding their use creates an accountability vacuum
and affects the ability of victims to seek redress. I urge
the relevant States to clarify the legal basis for such
strikes as well as the safeguards in place to ensure
compliance with applicable international law.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that the
protection of civilians is critically linked to the
protection of all human rights. As the tragic events
unfolding over the past few weeks in Egypt have
shown so clearly, a failure to ensure respect for all
human rights, including those aimed at ensuring vital
democratic space, can culminate in bloody violence
and the loss of lives. The response should equally be
based on international law, including human rights.
Otherwise, such failures are likely to have long-lasting
and far-reaching consequences.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Ms. Pillay
for her briefing.

6

I now give the floor to Ms. Amos.
Ms. Amos: I would like to thank you, Madam
President, for this opportunity to brief the Council this
morning. I am delivering these remarks from Brazil
where I am participating in ceremonies marking the
tenth anniversary of the Canal Hotel bombing, which
killed Sergio Vieira de Mello, one of my predecessors,
and 21 other colleagues. I join the Secretary-General
and the High Commissioner for Human Rights in
remembering our colleagues who have given their lives
in support of the global humanitarian effort.
You have proposed, Madam President, that today’s
debate be focused on three of the five core challenges to
ensuring the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
namely, compliance with international law, access
to people in need and accountability for violations.
Since the Secretary-General first indentified those
challenges, in 2009, the Security Council has taken
some important steps to implement its commitment to
protect civilians. Peacekeeping operations have been
given more consistent mandates. Situations have been
referred to the International Criminal Court, which
has secured its first conviction. Sanctions have been
applied for serious violations, including the delberate
obstruction of humanitarian access. However, there
remains a need for the Council to use more consistently
all the tools at its disposal to close the gap between
commitments made in the Chamber and the devastating
impact of conflict on the lives of civilians.
Humanitarian workers operate in very complex and
insecure situations. They do all they can to reach and
bring assistance to people in need. But despite their
dedication and commitment and the unprecedented
array of resources at the national, regional and
international levels, millions of people around the
world are not receiving the life-saving assistance and
protection they need. Active hostilities, violence against
humanitarian workers, restrictions on the movement of
goods and interference in humanitarian activities all
restrict access.
I will give two brief examples. There is a human
tragedy unfolding before our eyes in Syria, where
huge and urgent needs remain unmet. I am extremely
concerned by the failure to protect civilians, which is in
flagrant violation of the most basic rules of international
humanitarian law and human rights law. Insecurity and
bureaucratic constraints and limitations on the number
of non-governmental humanitarian organizations

13-43092

S/PV.7019

allowed to operate in Syria continue to prevent aid from
reaching all those in need. We need more capacity, and
humanitarian access must be granted to people trapped
in areas under the control of Government forces or
opposition groups.
In the Sudan, an estimated 900,000 people remain
out of reach in areas controlled by armed groups in
Jebel Marra, South Kordofan and Blue Nile states. The
safety and living conditions of civilians caught in the
midst of the fighting in those areas is reportedly rapidly
deteriorating. Without access, we cannot do more for
them.
There are other factors that limit access and raise
protection concerns. People in areas controlled by
non-State armed groups designated as terrorists may
have no or only diminished access to humanitarian
assistance and protection because of restrictions
imposed by counter-terrorism laws and policies. An
independent study on the impact of donor countries’
counter-terrorism measures on principled humanitarian
action was launched earlier this year. It contains
recommendations addressed to the humanitarian
community, donors and inter-governmental bodies,
including that all the relevant actors discuss how to better
reconcile counter-terrorism measures and humanitarian
action. It also recommends that counter-terrorism
laws and measures include appropriate exemptions for
humanitarian action and that humanitarian actors be
able to engage with groups designated as terrorists in
order to negotiate safe and sustained access to civilian
populations in need.
We must consider measures to prevent and mitigate
the humanitarian impact of the use in populated
areas of explosive weapons, which are by their
nature indiscriminate within their areas of blast and
fragmentation. We need to strengthen the protection
of civilians from their effects. Discussions on the topic
will take place next month.
Ensuring accountability for violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law
remains a serious challenge. The primary obligation to
investigate and prosecute serious violations lies with
national authorities, with international mechanisms
playing a subsidiary role. However, the relatively small
number of prosecutions at the national level underlines
the need for the United Nations and Member States to
provide increased financial and technical support to
national authorities in conducting investigations and

prosecutions. National accountability mechanisms
can also be complemented by the more regular and
systematic use of commissions of inquiry and factfinding missions by the Security Council.
There is an important list of basic obligations
imposed by international law that must be respected by
all parties to conflict. I shall repeat them here.
First, parties must not conduct attacks against
civilians or civilian objects. Secondly, the relevant
authorities must protect and meet the basic needs
of persons within their control and ensure that the
necessary conditions, security or otherwise, are in
place to allow humanitarian access. Thirdly, when
unable or unwilling to provide adequate assistance,
the authorities must allow and facilitate rapid, safe
and unimpeded access to people in need, including
the immediate free passage of all medical supplies.
Fourthly, consent for relief operations should never be
withheld on arbitrary grounds.
As we have seen in the evolution of situations
requiring humanitarian response around the world, it is
clear that the concept of the arbitrary denial of consent
for humanitarian operations requires greater legal
development and policy attention, including from the
Council.
Parties should avoid the use of explosive weapons
and the establishment of military positions in populated
areas.
On World Humanitarian Day today, as we
remember our colleagues who have lost their lives in
the humanitarian effort, we must do everything in our
power to ensure that those who carry on their work can
do so in safety. That is why there is a need for greater
accountability at the national and international levels
for those who perpetrate attacks against aid workers
and in instances of the deliberate delay or denial of
access for humanitarian purposes.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Ms. Amos
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Spoerri.
Mr. Spoerri: I am honoured once again to have
an opportunity to brief the Security Council on a topic
that is at the heart of the mission and mandate of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and
central to all aspects of our daily work in armed conflict

13-430927

S/PV.7019

zones around the world. On behalf of the ICRC, my
thanks go to the Argentine delegation for the invitation.

on universal jurisdiction, or through international
tribunals.

Without being unduly pessimistic, it is fairly certain
that, in terms of concrete progress on the ground, good
news will be in short supply at today’s debate, as it
was in all the preceding ones in recent years. While
considerable progress continues to be made on the
normative and policy fronts towards the protection
of civilians, including the historic adoption of the
Arms Trade Treaty in April, the reality on the ground
continues, sadly, to reflect a dire lack of protection.

Working to ensure respect for international
humanitarian law, and thereby endeavouring to help
protect civilians, is a fundamental tenet of the ICRC
mandate and work, and it is reflected in our impartial,
neutral and independent approach. On the ground,
that entails continuous engagement with all parties
to a conflict, including non-State armed groups, and
building pragmatic relationships with the relevant
political forces at both the local and the national levels
in a confidential manner, thus building trust. It means
remaining close to the beneficiaries and responding to
actual needs in a particular context, negotiating access
step-by-step and scaling up operations when necessary.
That helps to facilitate the broadest possible acceptance
and respect, and thereby the broadest possible
humanitarian access to civilians in need. It also helps
to ensure the safety of our staff.

In some of the diverse contexts in which the ICRC
works, the situation of large numbers of civilians caught
up in armed conflict is nothing short of catastrophic. Not
only are many of today’s armed conflicts increasingly
protracted and increasingly complex in both their
causes and consequences, they are also characterized
by an alarming contempt for the rules of international
humanitarian law on the part of belligerents.
The result, simply put, is a spiralling escalation
of human suffering. In some cases, men, women and
children are deliberately targeted — killed or wounded,
raped, forced out of their homes, their property
destroyed — abused in every sense. Many others suffer
ill treatment in detention or go missing. Their plight
and the anguish of their families often continues long
after a conflict ends.
The elusiveness of lasting political solutions to many
of today’s armed conflicts has effectively consigned
millions of people to chronic suffering and hardship,
with humanitarian actors left to try to alleviate the
worst of it, despite sometimes formidable constraints.
However, neither the complexity and intractability
of many of today’s armed conflicts nor the burden of
the global economic crisis can be an excuse for States
to ignore their primary responsibility to the people
affected by the conflicts.
The most critical challenge to the protection of
civilians, among the five core challenges first set out by
the Secretary-General in his 2009 report (S/2009/277)
on the issue, is the need to improve respect for
international humanitarian law by States and non-State
armed groups, in international and non-international
armed conflicts, regardless of their causes. That also
entails strengthening accountability for violations
of international humanitarian law, both by parties
to conflict and by individual perpetrators, whether
at the national level, including judicial action based

8

Yet the risks in pursuing such an approach are ever
present, both for the ICRC and for Red Cross and Red
Crescent societies with whom we work closely in many
challenging and volatile contexts. Indeed, it is primarily
a lack of respect for international humanitarian law by
the parties to a conflict that impedes humanitarian
access and endangers humanitarian personnel.
As we mark World Humanitarian Day today, we
acknowledge humanitarian workers everywhere and
pay special tribute to those who have lost their lives
in the line of work. For both the United Nations and
the ICRC, the attacks 10 years ago against our staff
and facilities in Baghdad will bring back particularly
painful memories. Tragically, attacks against
humanitarian personnel have continued unabated in
numerous countries around the world.
If anything, those terrible events have further
strengthened the ICRC’s resolve to achieve broadbased acceptance and understanding of its impartial,
neutral and independent humanitarian approach, and
to continue to build its security strategy based on
that acceptance. Today, as 10 years ago, finding the
right balance between the humanitarian impact of our
programmes and the risks faced by our staff — fully
mindful of the impact that halting operations has on
vulnerable people — is an ever-present challenge in
the ICRC’s daily work. We will continue to rise to
those challenges and persistently negotiate our way
through to those most in need, all the while pressing the

13-43092

S/PV.7019

parties to conflicts, both States and non-State armed
groups, to respect their obligations under international
humanitarian law.
I would like to briefly mention one specific issue of
particular concern to the ICRC, one that I have reiterated
at successive briefings to the Security Council, namely,
the issue of violence against health care. I am talking
about direct attacks on hospitals, ambulances and
health-care personnel; about blocking ambulances from
accessing wounded people, or holding them up for hours
at checkpoints; the harassment of health-care workers,
who sometimes see their colleagues killed or arrested
for having treated opposition fighters or civilians and
fear for their own lives; and about the diversion of
medical supplies.
In order to have a better overview of the magnitude
of the violence affecting healthcare, the ICRC has
collected non-exhaustive data in 23 countries. Between
January 2012 and May 2013, the ICRC noted more than
1,200 incidents affecting the delivery of, and access to,
health care, including the killing of 112 medical staff,
and approximately 250 incidents involving attacks
on, or denial of access to, ambulances that were often
delivering life-saving support. In summary, a blatant
disrespect for the special status of health facilities,
transport and personnel is still all too common.
Working to address the most serious yet
underreported humanitarian problem remains one of the
ICRC’s priorities. Some progress has indeed been made
in terms of mobilizing concerned stakeholders and
raising awareness and understanding of the issue. Yet
a prevailing disrespect still exists among belligerents
for the inviolability of health facilities, transport and
personnel, which is ultimately making safe access to
health care impossible for untold numbers of people in
need. The ICRC therefore once again urges members
of the Council to initiate or actively support efforts to
address this urgent humanitarian concern, and to press
others to do the same.
Respect for the laws of war not only provides
protection for civilians during armed conflict but also
helps facilitate post-conflict recovery. Conversely,
attacks on civilians and key civilian infrastructure,
such as health and educational facilities, can have
harmful repercussions long after a conflict ends.
On a more positive note, I would like to return
to another point I raised during the most recent
protection-of-civilians debate in February (see

S/PV.6917). The ICRC has consistently highlighted the
unacceptable human cost of the widespread availability
of conventional arms, and called for the adoption of a
strong Arms Trade Treaty. We were therefore pleased to
see that happen in April.
We now urge States to swiftly ratify and implement
the Treaty, to translate normative progress into tangible
results on the ground. The historic achievement of
the Arms Trade Treaty lies in its establishment of a
global norm prohibiting the transfer of weapons where
they would be used to commit or to facilitate serious
violations of international humanitarian law, among
other grave crimes. Provided that norm is implemented
in a consistent, objective and non-discriminatory
manner, it will go a long way towards achieving the
Treaty’s explicit humanitarian purpose of reducing
human suffering and saving civilian lives. In practice,
that entails carrying out a rigorous risk assessment
prior to authorizing arms transfers, and refraining from
transferring weapons to parties to armed conflicts that
have a track-record of serious violations of international
humanitarian law. A look at a number of current armed
conflicts, however, reveals an evident gap between the
transfer requirements expressed in the Arms Trade
Treaty and the transfer practice of some States.
Achieving the effective protection of civilians
through improved compliance with international
humanitarian law requires a concerted effort by a
range of stakeholders, the ICRC being just one of them.
As I mentioned in February, the joint Swiss-ICRC
initiative to strengthen compliance with international
humanitarian law — which emerged from the thirtyfirst International Conference of the Red Cross and
Red Crescent — continues to gain momentum. Most
recently, in June, more than 70 States participated
in constructive discussions held at a meeting held in
Geneva to affirm strong general support for a regular
dialogue among States on international humanitarian
law and to look at possible functions of a compliance
system. As requested, Switzerland and the ICRC will
formulate concrete proposals and options, in particular
on the form and content of a periodic reporting system
on national compliance; the form, content and possible
outcome of thematic discussions on issues pertaining to
international humanitarian law; the modalities of factfinding, including possible ways to make use of the
International Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission;
and on the features and tasks of a meeting of States.

13-430929

S/PV.7019

However, the main onus remains on States, and I
end with the ICRC’s plea for them to show the requisite
political will to turn legal provisions into a meaningful
reality and to show good faith in protecting the victims
of armed conflicts — conflicts that, in view of some
of the challenges I have mentioned today, are likely to
become ever-more complex and intractable in the years
to come.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Spoerri for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We thank Argentina for hosting today’s debate, which
is taking place during World Humanitarian Day as we
mark the deaths of those killed 10 years ago in a tragic
attack against United Nations headquarters in Baghdad.
We thank the Secretary-General, the heads of
the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the United Nations Office
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights and the
representative of the International Committee of the
Red Cross for their statements.
Today’s agenda item is extremely relevant given
the difficulties in protecting civilians in a number of
hot spots. We are convinced that, in order to remedy
the situation, selective and unilateral approaches to
violations of international humanitarian law must be set
aside, and strict adherence to human rights standards
and the implementation of the relevant decisions of the
Security Council are necessary.
We firmly condemn targeted attacks on civilians,
as well as casualties as a result of the indiscriminate or
disproportionate use of force. Such actions are flagrant
violations of international humanitarian law. There is
no justification for armed groups to attack peaceful
civilians, carry out terror attacks or take hostages. We
underscore the responsibility of all parties for ensuring
the safety of civilians and strict compliance with
norms of international humanitarian law. We call for a
thorough investigation of all the relevant incidents and
the punishment of perpetrators.
The protection of civilians is the responsibility of
the Governments of the States parties to a conflict. The
activities of the international community should seek
to assist national efforts in that regard. The adoption
of response measures to ensure the protection of

10

civilians by the use of force are only possible with the
approval of the Security Council and with unwavering
compliance with the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations. Attempts to manipulate mandates
approved by the Security Council are unacceptable.
It is not always right to rely on strengthened
mandates to provide peacekeepers the right to use force
or intimidate. Protecting civilians is one aspect of the
activities of peacekeeping missions, and is to be carried
out in connection with specific mandates defined by
the Council for each operation. The fundamental task
of peacekeepers is to provide assistance to the peace
process. To ensure the optimal use of peacekeeping
resources, there is an imperative need to devise clear
protection-of-civilians strategies for peacekeeping
operations with related mandates and to train
peacekeepers in that area. Ensuring the protection
of civilians requires the system-wide coordination of
measures, at the international, regional and national
levels.
Furthermore, it must be borne in mind that one
of the components of that challenge is the issue of
the provision of humanitarian aid. It is clear that the
importance of humanitarian aspects is growing, in
particular with respect to a comprehensive strategy for
crisis prevention as well as in the post-conflict phase.
Work in that area must be based on the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations and basic humanitarian
principles, and its effectiveness will depend to a large
extent on the level of coordination with the efforts of
the international community in the area of political
settlements. In that context, one of the core principles
is that of upholding State sovereignty.
The Russian Federation attaches great importance
to the creation of conditions conducive to the appropriate
and timely provision of humanitarian assistance to
those in need. Governments must play a leading role
in initiating and coordinating international aid, and
ensuring safe and unfettered access for humanitarian
staff to civilians in need, in particular in the context
of armed conflict, is one of the key challenges in
humanitarian response operations. The successful
implementation of such operations requires unstinting
compliance by all participants in humanitarian
activities with the guiding principles of emergency
humanitarian assistance set out in annex to General
Assembly resolution 46/182.

13-43092

S/PV.7019

Ensuring the physical presence of foreign
humanitarian personnel in disaster situations is just
one aspect of the problem of access and not an end in
and of itself. The primary task is, rightly, choosing the
simplest, most practical, achievable and suitable means
and routes for the provision of aid, as these may differ
in each case.
Furthermore, the international community and
all humanitarian partners, including United Nations
system entities and specialized non-governmental
organizations, must uphold the sovereignty of States
receiving assistance. We once again stress that the
general coordination of such operations, including
the allocation of funds, the identification of transport
routes and the selection of partners, is the exclusive
prerogative of host States.
On the issue of ensuring access, we wish to call
attention to the problem of the use of armed forces for the
transport of humanitarian assistance. The international
community has repeatedly underscored that the
allocation of military resources to humanitarian-aidprovision operations should be a method of last resort,
when the use of civilian manpower or resources is not
possible and human lives are at stake.
In our view, the inappropriate use of military
resources runs counter to the principle of the
independence of humanitarian aid from economic,
political and military objectives. We support the
activities of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs as a central coordination
mechanism for international humanitarian assistance.
We note the efforts undertaken, including steps towards
reform to increase the effectiveness and timeliness of
the provision of humanitarian assistance to those in
need. We are convinced that a key role in that process
must be played by Member States themselves. In that
connection, we would emphasize the need to bolster
cooperation among United Nations humanitarian
bodies and Member States, which would increase trust
in the United Nations humanitarian system as the most
effective mechanism for assisting Governments in
tackling the consequences of emergency situations.
Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): On this solemn
day, the tenth anniversary of the bombing of the United
Nations offices in the Canal Hotel in Baghdad, I wish
to pay tribute to all those who have lost their lives while
serving the Organization.

At the outset, I would like to thank you, Madam
President, for your presence here today and for having
convened this significant debate. I would also like
to express my sincere appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral; Ms. Pillay, of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights; Ms. Amos,
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs; and Mr. Spoerri, of the International Committee
of the Red Cross, for their informative and insightful
briefings.
International humanitarian law requires all parties
to conflict to spare civilians from the effects of armed
conflict. The Council, in its presidential statement on
the protection of civilians (S/PRST/2013/2), adopted
last February (see S/PV.6917), reiterated its call for
strict compliance by parties to a conflict with their
obligations under international law. However, civilians
continue to account for the vast majority of casualties
in many conflict situations around the world.
The situation in Syria in particular poses a serious
challenge to the protection-of-civilians agenda of the
Council. According to the findings of the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab
Republic, murder, torture, rape, forcible displacement,
enforced disappearance and other inhumane acts are
widespread in Syria, and civilians are bearing the brunt
of the tragic hostilities.
Against that backdrop, my delegation would like to
underline the following key points.
First, accountability is the key to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. Those who commit war
crimes, crimes against humanity and other violations of
international law must be held accountable. Impunity
should not be an option. While the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and other international tribunals
play a crucial role, the Security Council must also
do its part, including through the referral of relevant
situations to the ICC. In that vein, the Republic of
Korea has declared its support for the referral of the
situation in Syria to the International Criminal Court.
Accountability requires verification, investigation
and documentation of allegations of serious violations
of international human rights law and humanitarian law.
My delegation recognizes the significant contribution
made by the international commissions of inquiry and
fact-finding missions, under the auspices of the Human
Rights Council or the Secretary-General, and reiterates
its full support for them. Timely recourse to the

13-4309211

S/PV.7019

International Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission
established by Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions
should also be encouraged with a view to ensuring
more credible information.

used in the commission of genocide, crimes against
humanity, war crimes and attacks directed against
civilians. The Republic of Korea signed the Treaty in
June and looks forward to its early entry into force.

Secondly, the implementation of protection mandates
by United Nations peacekeeping missions should be
further enhanced. Valuable progress has been made
in that field since the open debate held last February,
including the establishment of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, with a strong protection mandate. In order to
further improve the protection of civilians in conflict,
we need to encourage effective interaction and better
coordination among protection-mandated missions,
host States and humanitarian organizations undertaking
protection efforts in a spirit of cooperation. One step
towards that end will be the increased use of training
modules on the protection of civilians, developed by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, by States
sending personnel to protection-mandated missions.

Before concluding, my delegation would like to
reaffirm the need for continued attention to vulnerable
groups, including women and children. It is deeply
disturbing that sexual violence continues to be a
prominent feature of conflict and remains widespread,
even in many current situations on the Council’s
agenda, including in the Central African Republic,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Afghanistan,
Somalia, the Sudan, South Sudan and Syria. As
resolution 2106 (2013), on women and peace and
security, adopted in June, emphasized, accountability
should be ensured for perpetrators of sexual violence
in conflict, and women’s political and economic
empowerment should be further encouraged for the
long-term prevention of sexual violence. To that end,
the Council needs to strengthen its cooperation with
all the relevant bodies in the United Nations system,
including UN-Women and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.

In that regard, I would like to recall that the
presidential statement adopted in February requested
the Secretary-General to include in his next report, due
in November of this year, an assessment of the concrete
measures taken by peacekeeping missions to implement
their mandates in protecting civilians and the impact of
such measures. I hope that the Council’s next debate will
be a valuable occasion to enhance the implementation
of protection mandates by peacekeeping missions.
Thirdly, the use of explosive weapons with wide-area
impact should be avoided in densely populated areas.
My delegation is deeply concerned about the appalling
civilian suffering that explosive weapons cause. It is
disturbing that, as research has shown, more than 34,000
people were killed or injured by explosive weapons in
2012, and 78 per cent of those affected were civilians.
The study found that 58 countries were affected by the
use of explosive weapons, and the most severely affected
countries include Syria, Iraq and Afghanistan. My
delegation believes that the international community
needs to intensify its consideration of that issue through
more focused discussions. The starting point should be
gathering and analysing data on the use and impact of
explosive weapons in populated areas.
The Arms Trade Treaty, adopted in April, presents
a timely opportunity for the international community
to address the human cost of the poorly regulated arms
trade by prohibiting the transfer of arms that would be

12

Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I congratulate
you, Madam President, on the initiative taken by your
country to hold this debate on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict, an issue of concern to the United
Nations, in particular the Security Council. Serious
violations against civilians in armed conflict persists,
and hence the interest in this morning’s debate, which
is being held on World Humanitarian Day. I thank
the Secretary-General, the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Director for
International Law and Cooperation of the International
Committee of the Red Cross for their statements.
Despite the Council’s efforts to strengthen the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, we find that
the cumbersome bureaucracy, restrictions, segregation
and discrimination imposed by the parties to conflict
continue to prevent humanitarian agencies from
providing assistance to many civilian populations in
need. The Syrian conflict, like many others in Africa
and elsewhere, including the situation in Jonglei state
in South Sudan and the conflict between the Buddhist
and Muslim communities in the states of Rakin and
Kachin in Myanmar, are indicative of that state of
affairs. Similarly, the denial of humanitarian access
to civilian populations in need is a serious violation

13-43092

S/PV.7019

of the human rights and human dignity of the victims,
in particular women and children. The perpetrators of
such behaviour should be prosecuted.
That is why my country welcomes the recent
initiatives taken by the Security Council to enhance the
protection of civilians in conflict zones. An example of
such efforts is the adoption of resolution 2112 (2013),
which allowed the establishment, within the framework
of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire, of a
comprehensive strategy to protect civilians. In addition,
the African Union Commission, in close collaboration
with the African Union Mission in Somalia, has
adopted an approach to the protection of civilians that
should, in our opinion, allow both the Commission and
the Council to provide visible protection that is based
on the realities on the ground.
The effective protection of civilians in armed
conflict requires that the capacity of peacekeeping
operations be strengthened. The introduction of
robust mandates to protect civilians is a decisive
step in a strategy to protect civilians, provided that
peacekeeping missions are provided with adequate
resources to implement those mandates. That is why it
is important that Council members agree on the use of
new technologies, such as drones, in the protection of
civilians.
Moreover, since the circulation of small arms and
light weapons is a threat to the protection of civilians,
we must work towards accession by all States to the
Arms Trade Treaty, which was adopted in April.
Effectively protecting civilians in armed conflict
requires vigorous efforts to combat impunity for
perpetrators of violations against civilians, in
accordance with international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. The transfer of Bosco
Ntaganda to the International Criminal Court and
the arrest warrants issued for Joseph Kony and his
lieutenants from the Lord’s Resistance Army show the
determination of the international community and the
Security Council to put an end to serious violations of
human rights in armed conflict. We must pursue our
efforts to achieve the goal of putting an end to impunity.
Finally, Togo shares the view that the five core
challenges to ensuring more effective protection of
civilians, identified in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2012/376), have not lost any of their relevance
and should therefore be reflected in the report that
the Secretary-General will submit in November. My

delegation also hopes that the views expressed during
today’s debate will bring added value to that report.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Thank you for convening
this debate, Madam President, for your presence here
today and for Argentina’s very strong leadership on
the protection of civilians. I would also thank the
Secretary-General for his consistent leadership on
protection matters and High Commissioner Pillay,
Under-Secretary-General Amos and Mr. Spoerri for
their unwavering efforts.
Today’s debate is an apt way to mark World
Humanitarian Day and pay tribute to those working
tirelessly to address humanitarian challenges — people
to whom we owe so much. We also pause to reflect on the
life and legacy of Sergio Vieira de Mello, a humanitarian
of courage and conviction, and his 21 United Nations
colleagues who were killed in Baghdad.
International humanitarian law obliges all
parties to a conflict to protect civilian populations
against the effects of hostilities and sets out a range
of fundamental protection guarantees. It also extends
specific protections to relief and medical personnel.
Yet, humanitarian actors are still too often — and at
times systematically — subject to indiscriminate and
deliberate attacks.
In June, the Council expressed its outrage over the
attack on the United Nations compound in Mogadishu.
We learned last week that Médecins sans Frontières has
ended its engagement in Somalia following attacks on
its personnel. In Syria, 20 Syrian Arab Red Crescent
staff have been killed during the conflict. Over the
past decade, 47 aid workers have been killed in Darfur.
We know that some of those killings were the result of
deliberate attacks, which is an intolerable situation.
The reality is that humanitarian actors operate in
extraordinarily difficult circumstances. Their work
is hard enough, but constraints on humanitarian
access continue to further undermine the ability of
humanitarian actors to reach people in need. Delayed,
impeded or denied access causes unnecessary deaths,
avoidable disease and needless suffering.
Under international humanitarian law, each party
to a conflict has the responsibility to meet the basic
needs of civilians under its control. For those provisions
to have any meaningful effect, it is imperative that
consent to relief operations not be arbitrarily denied.
We support the call made by Under-Secretary-General
Amos this morning for further attention to that concern.

13-4309213

S/PV.7019

Nowhere are the challenges to humanitarian efforts
more evident than in Syria. The Syrian Government
has systematically used bureaucratic and operational
obstacles to deny, delay and impede access for the
delivery of urgently needed humanitarian assistance,
including, alarmingly, medical supplies. Denying
civilians access to medical personnel and facilities is
a particularly grave failure of the Syrian Government’s
protection obligations to its own citizens.
Tens of millions of civilians continue to
suffer in conflicts, not because of a lack of legal
protection — obligations under international law are
clear — but because international humanitarian law is
routinely flouted by both States and non-State actors.
Further promotion of international humanitarian law
is therefore essential. We commend the International
Committee of the Red Cross for its determined
leadership in strengthening compliance. Increasingly,
situations on the Council’s agenda involve non-State
armed groups. We applaud practical measures such as the
deeds of commitment that encourage armed non-State
actors to comply with humanitarian and human-rights
norms. An outstanding example is Geneva Call’s deed
of commitment banning anti-personnel mines, signed
by 42 non-State armed groups from 10 countries. The
Council should continue to explore creative ways of
promoting compliance by non-State armed groups, as
it has done to prevent grave violations against children.
When laws protecting civilians are violated, we
must ensure that all efforts are made to bring those
responsible to justice. As a first step, we support
the Secretary-General’s recommendation that the
Council establish and support fact-finding missions
to document violations of the law in order to inform
decision-making and pave the way for criminal-justice
proceedings. Investigating and prosecuting violations
of laws protecting civilians is, in the first instance, a
national responsibility. The Council should ensure
that peacekeeping and special political missions are
mandated to assist host States in strengthening the
rule of law and boosting their capacity to investigate
and prosecute serious violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law. There will,
however, be occasions when national authorities
are unwilling or unable to do so. In such cases, the
Council must be proactive in ensuring an appropriate
international response so as to avoid any impunity for
the perpetrators. It is vital that the Council consider
referring situations involving genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes to the International Criminal
14

Court (ICC), and that the Council support action by the
ICC.
In conclusion, protecting civilians is primarily a
national responsibility. But where national authorities
fail and mass atrocities occur, the international
community, including the Council, must be prepared
to act to meet our responsibility to protect. Australia
will continue to be a voice for Council action in
such circumstances. That is, after all, the legitimate
expectation of the many millions of civilians who
desperately need protection, and a defining benchmark
against which the United Nations itself should and will
be judged.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I would like to
welcome you warmly to the Council, Madam President,
and to thank you for scheduling this important debate
today. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General,
High Commissioner for Human Rights Pillay, UnderSecretary-General Amos and the Director from the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC),
Mr. Spoerri, for their compelling — although of course
very worrying — briefings. We should reflect carefully
on their advice, both on tackling specific current
conflicts and on our approach to the broader protection
of civilians.
We applaud the commitment and energy that the
Argentine delegation has brought to the protection of
civilians and related issues since it joined the Council
in January. We are also proud of the contribution that
Argentina, Australia, we and the other co-authors of
the Arms Trade Treaty have made to the issue of the
protection of civilians through that Treaty. Like others,
we look forward to its ratification and implementation.
I will focus on two of the dimensions of the issue of
the protection of civilians highlighted in the President’s
concept note (S/2013/447, annex), that is, strengthening
accountability and ensuring humanitarian access.
History demonstrates all too clearly that the worst
crimes against civilians have been committed by
perpetrators who believed that they did not have to fear
being held responsible. That is why tackling impunity
and strengthening accountability for serious violations
of international humanitarian law and human-rights
law must be a central element of international efforts to
protect civilians. We should acknowledge the important
progress that has been made in the past two decades. The
establishment of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia, in 1993, and, subsequently, the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda signalled
13-43092

S/PV.7019

a marked change in the reach and effectiveness of
international justice that was then consolidated by the
creation of the International Criminal Court. Twenty
years after their establishment, it is sometimes easy to
forget or underestimate their impact. Let us therefore
recall that we now live in a world in which no one can
count on being shielded by State sovereignty. Heads
of State, military leaders and politicians have all had
to account for their actions before mechanisms of
international justice, actions that have inflicted untold
suffering, including often the systematic use of sexual
violence against civilians.
But much remains to be done. We must do more
to support and uphold existing mechanisms of justice.
We must hold States to their obligations to cooperate
fully with those mechanisms, as we did successfully
with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, all of whose indictees were eventually
apprehended. The United Kingdom urges all United
Nations Members that have not yet done so to become
parties to the Rome Statute, and we urge all those that
are already States parties to uphold their responsibilities
in that regard. It is deeply disappointing, for example,
that in recent months we have seen high-profile
indictees who refuse to cooperate with the International
Criminal Court visit or travel unchecked through the
territory of States parties. The Council should be ready
to make use of its authority to make referrals to the
International Criminal Court in order to enhance the
protection of civilians. Our failure to refer the situation
in Syria to the Court is a matter of great regret. We have
seen there no let-up — rather the opposite — in the
disproportionate use of weaponry, including ballistic
missiles and aerial bombardment, against civilian
centres. We have seen murder, torture, sexual violence
and forcible displacement used as tools of conflict.
The Council’s responsibility with regard to the
protection of civilians in Syria is clear. We have to
impress upon all sides in Syria that there is no impunity.
We should delay no further in referring the situation in
Syria to the International Criminal Court. We should
ensure that mechanisms of international justice are
applied and that all those responsible for planning and
perpetrating war crimes in Syria and associated civilian
suffering are made to answer for them.
Let me now turn to another theme highlighted in
the concept note, namely, the importance of ensuring
humanitarian access to those in need. That is a
fundamental aspect of protecting civilians. I would like

to highlight two such situations of particular relevance
in that regard: Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan states
in the Sudan, and Syria.
In Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan, hundreds
of thousands of civilians have been displaced and are
vulnerable to continuing conflict. They remain largely
cut off from humanitarian access. That situation has
persisted for months, indeed for years. In Syria, as
the Emergency Relief Coordinator has repeatedly
stated in briefings to the Council, it has proved
extremely difficult to secure humanitarian access to
those affected by the fighting. Those two situations,
although on different continents, have several features
in common: the tragic impact of unchecked conflict
on civilians; a tendency on the part of the host
authorities to see external humanitarian assistance as
interference in domestic affairs; the arbitrary denial
of the delivery of humanitarian support to those in
need; and the prevention of cross-border humanitarian
access, impeding the speed and reach of humanitarian
assistance to vulnerable civilians.
On Syria, I welcome the efforts of Valerie Amos to
develop a consensus around a set of key humanitarian
requirements that offer practical recommendations on
what can be done to improve humanitarian access. I hope
the Council will work intensively and constructively
in the coming days to find ways to come together in
support of those recommendations. With regard to
Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan, we should apply our
influence as a Council to ensure humanitarian access to
civilians. We urge the warring parties to immediately
reach a negotiated settlement that will end the fighting
and alleviate civilians’ suffering. Again, I hope that
the Council will be able in the near future to renew its
commitment to such an approach.
While on the subject of humanitarian access,
and on this day, World Humanitarian Day, I would
like to pay tribute to the dedication and bravery of
humanitarian aid workers and to acknowledge the
risks they face in helping those in need. They too are
civilians, and we need to focus on their protection and
on the accountability of the criminals who attack them.
The international community has made important
strides forward in respect to the protection of civilians.
We have established effective and far-reaching
mechanisms of international justice. We have extended
international normative commitments through a series
of comprehensive Council documents on the protection
of civilians, most recently the presidential statement

13-4309215

S/PV.7019

of 12 February 2013 (S/PRST/2013/2). But as the
presidency’s concept note highlights, those important
steps have yet to be translated into reversing the
increasing suffering of civilians on the ground. For all
the efforts that have been made, the Secretary-General,
in his most recent report (S/2012/376), still correctly
characterizes the current situation in respect of
protection of civilians as abysmal. We must therefore,
as a Council, continue to focus intensively on that
challenge — to uphold and, where necessary, extend
the authority of international justice mechanisms,
while helping to strengthen domestic justice systems;
exercise our responsibility to refer to the International
Criminal Court those situations that warrant it; support
the need for effective humanitarian access in situations
where that is hindered; and demand that all parties
meet their obligations to protect civilians and apply
maximum pressure to those that fail to do so.
The protection of civilians is central to the
Council’s role. It should be uppermost in our minds,
not just during thematic debates but throughout all of
our work.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): May I
begin by thanking you, Madam President, for convening
this relevant debate, the third that the Council has
organized this year on the topic of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. The frequency of the
debate illustrates the ongoing challenge that protection
represents. We thank you, Madam President, for having
launched the debate, and we would also like to hail the
commitment of the Secretary-General, of Ms. Pillay,
of Ms. Amos and of Mr. Spoerri, all of whom have
worked for the protection of civilians in line with
their institutions’ respective mandates. Allow us to
express our gratitude to them for their most edifying
contributions to today’s debate.
The protection of civilians has always been at
the heart of laws governing war and of international
humanitarian law. That protection has become
increasingly necessary in the light of the trend towards
asymmetrical wars, where regular armies face off
against non-State armed groups. The imperative
need for protection has also come to light given the
devastating consequences of those conflicts and the use
of increasingly deadly weapons. Although protection
applies to all civilians, be they locals, refugees or
international players such as journalists or humanitarian
workers, particular concern must continue to be shown
for women and children, who are innocent primary

16

targets of exactions, violations, atrocities and other
types of abuses.
Protection is an obligation set forth in international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law. It is
clear that, despite the clarity and long-standing nature
of rules governing the protection of civilians and the
commitments of parties to conflict, civilians continue
to pay a high price in clashes. The striking brutality
that we have seen over the past months is yet another
reminder of that.
Challenges to the protection of civilians are
enormous and have become increasingly complicated,
owing to internal conflicts that become military in
nature in a most dangerous way, taking on political,
religious and sectarian dimensions that endanger the
lives of civilians. It is inadmissible that violations of
the fundamental rights to life, physical integrity and
dignity of thousands of innocent people continue to
occur in all impunity before our eyes without leading
to a forceful and decisive response from the Security
Council.
Since the presentation in 1999 of the first report
of the Secretary-General on the topic (S/1999/957), the
Council has adopted several statements and resolutions
particularly or specifically on the protection of
civilians. At the same time, concern for the protection
of civilians is increasingly being realized, thanks
to United Nations action on the ground. My country
is pleased to contribute to the achievement of that
humanitarian goal through its participation in various
peacekeeping operations.
By adopting the presidential statement contained in
document S/PRST/2013/2, the Council rightly sounded
the alarm with regard to
“the acute impact of conflict on refugees and
internally displaced persons [… and] the need for
all actors to work together for a durable solution for
refugees and internally displaced persons including
voluntary safe, dignified and sustainable return,
resettlement, or local integration, as appropriate”.
In that context, the Council correctly underscored the
importance of registration, as it enables protection and
the assessment of needs with regard to the provision
and distribution of aid to refugees. The Council has
requested that all actors take appropriate and necessary
measures in order to guarantee the upholding of
principles applicable to the protection of refugees and

13-43092

S/PV.7019

the rights of refugees, in particular with regard to the
civilian and humanitarian nature of refugee camps.
The protection of civilians is a matter, first and
foremost, of primary responsibility for the States of
which the civilians are nationals. However, it also
touches upon the role of armed non-State actors, who
unquestionably present a real challenge, given their
responsibility for most of the recent armed conflicts
we have seen, their participation in the commission
of atrocities and massacres against civilians and their
efforts to control humanitarian aid.
As emphasized by the Secretary-General in one of
his most recent reports, humanitarian activities continue
to suffer from the meddling of State and non-State actors
that are pursuing non-humanitarian objectives, which
leads to the disruption of humanitarian projects and
the diversion of aid. We think that that is an important
aspect that should indeed be delved into further in
future reports of the Secretary-General in order to
determine responsibility and prevent such interference.
Improving access for humanitarian workers
is strongly tied to the need to protect civilians in
situations of armed conflict. In particular, that involves
facilitating unfettered and safe access on the part of
humanitarian organizations to those who need them.
That access must be granted in a context of upholding
the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
independence in all matters related to humanitarian
affairs.
Finally, the sixty-seventh session of the General
Assembly was marked by the adoption of the Arms
Trade Treaty, to which my country made its own humble
contribution. We express our hope that the adoption of
that instrument and its entry into force can lead to an
improvement of the protection of civilians in times of
conflict.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): Madam President,
we deeply appreciate that you are presiding over
the Council meeting today. We thank Argentina
for organizing this open debate on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. This third debate on
the subject in the Council this year underlines the
overarching importance of the subject. We are also
grateful for the very insightful briefings given today
by the Secretary-General, the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the Director for International Law
and Cooperation of the International Committee of

the Red Cross. The concise concept note circulated by
Ambassador Perceval and her team (S/2013/447, annex)
identifies priority issues of compliance, access and
accountability and guides our discussion today.
As we meet here today, wars and conflicts continue
to unfold before our eyes, and the vast majority of their
victims are civilians, who face random or targeted
deaths, grievous injury and massive displacement. The
Secretary-General has rightly pointed out that, despite
established norms and laws, the abysmal state of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict has changed
little.
It is imperative to translate normative standards
into concrete actions on the ground. The Council has
done its job in urging all parties to armed conflict to
comply with their obligation to protect civilians and
abide by international humanitarian, human rights and
refugee law. Compliance with those laws is sporadic
at best, or entirely lacking. Defiance of international
humanitarian law is rampant. There are obstacles to
legitimate humanitarian access to affected populations.
Accountability is weak and, in most cases, non-existent.
Pakistan strongly condemns all attacks against
civilians in situations of armed conflict, especially the
use of gender-based violence as a tactic of war. The
principles of distinction and proportionality must be
observed in all circumstances.
We endorse the view of the Secretary-General
that those principles also apply to the use of new
technologies, including armed drones. We support High
Commissioner for Human Rights Pillay’s call today
for clarifying the legal basis for armed drone strikes.
We believe that such strikes violate international
humanitarian law, and therefore should be stopped.
Negotiations in that regard must be intensified.
Special measures must be taken to protect
vulnerable groups such as women, children, refugees
and internally displaced persons. Protection must also
be ensured for humanitarian actors, including medical
professionals and associated personnel, journalists,
students and teachers.
The Security Council must continue to address the
issue of the protection of civilians in armed conflict
as a key priority. There should be no impunity and no
exceptions.
The Security Council and international tribunals
have successfully addressed some of those concerns

13-4309217

S/PV.7019

in a number of situations and has taken targeted
measures against violators. Because of its proven value,
the Council should persevere in that approach in an
objective, impartial and non-politicized manner.
The protection of civilians, although part of many
United Nations peacekeeping mandates, is the primary
responsibility of States. Pakistan, as one of the top
troop contributors, has proudly performed the task
of protecting civilians in different parts of the world,
including in existing missions in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Darfur, Côte d’Ivoire and
Liberia.
Based on our first-hand experience, we reiterate
our demand that peacekeeping missions be given
adequate resources and operational tools to implement
their mandates, especially with regard to reporting and
intelligence capabilities and the protection of women
and children.
Before concluding, I would like to make the
following observations. All parties to conflict must
remove obstacles to ensure the swift provision
of legitimate humanitarian assistance to affected
populations. The interaction between humanitarian
actors and parties to armed conflict should conform to
the principles of international humanitarian law, within
the framework of host country agreements. The term
“protection of civilians” should be used with the utmost
precision, to avoid giving recognition or legitimacy to
terrorist groups or criminal gangs.
The clear distinction between the established norms
on the protection of civilians and the evolving concept
of the responsibility to protect should be maintained.
The cause of the protection of civilians is best
served by preventing the outbreak of armed conflicts,
addressing the root causes and by pursuing the peaceful
settlement of disputes and conflict resolution. That
approach leads towards sustainable peace.
Finally, the ceremony held today to remember
those who have laid down their lives in the service of
peace has reminded us that new and more effective
measures should be taken to ensure the safety and
security of United Nations personnel, peacekeepers and
humanitarian actors.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): First of all, I would like
to thank Argentina for convening this open debate on
the very important issue of the protection of civilians in

18

armed conflict and for submitting a concept note on the
topic (S/2013/447, annex).
On this World Humanitarian Day and the
tenth anniversary of the attack on United Nations
headquarters in Iraq, we pay tribute to all of those who
have lost their lives in the humanitarian effort.
My delegation thanks the Secretary-General, the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, the UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator and the representative
of the International Committee of the Red Cross for
their contributions to the discussion.
Over the years, a comprehensive legal framework
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict has
been established. The key obligations are contained in
the relevant instruments of international humanitarian,
human rights and refugee law.
The significant development of international
norms and standards on the protection of civilians and
the Council’s engagement have given rise to increased
attention to the issue. However, efforts to ensure a
peaceful, just and prosperous world have not always
been consistent or successful. Civilians continue to pay
the highest price in the wake of armed conflict and to
suffer from inadequate protection and discriminatory
treatment in many parts of the world.
The challenges to civilian protection are vast. But
the main obstacles relate primarily to the frequent
failure of parties to conflict to comply with their
obligations under existing legal rules. It is imperative
that all parties to armed conflict strictly abide by
their obligations under international humanitarian and
human rights law.
The most challenging problems are inaction and
the neglect of civilian suffering, along with a prevailing
atmosphere of impunity and lack of accountability. The
best deterrent is, undoubtedly, ensuring a speedy end to
impunity and holding to account those responsible for
the most serious crimes of concern to the international
community.
Ending impunity is also essential to ensuring
sustainable peace, justice, truth and reconciliation and
to upholding the rights and interests of victims and the
well-being of society at large.
When national authorities fail to take the steps
necessary to ensure accountability, the international

13-43092

S/PV.7019

community should play a more proactive role in order
to ensure an appropriate response, including through
the establishment of ad hoc tribunals, international
commissions of inquiry and fact-finding missions.
It is also essential to emphasize the role of the
relevant humanitarian mandates in ensuring that all
armed conflict situations receive the due attention of the
international community. Commitments to protection
efforts must be free of selectivity and politically
motivated approaches and preferences.
As stated at the recent Global Conference
on Reclaiming the Protection of Civilians under
International Humanitarian Law, held in Oslo, States
should use their leverage, individually or collectively,
to raise the political costs of non-compliance with
international humanitarian law — for instance, through
exerting diplomatic pressure, by publicly denouncing
non-compliance or by naming and shaming parties
operating in violation of their international obligations.
That approach should equally be applied in situations
involving national authorities that are unwilling
to investigate and prosecute serious violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law.
Furthermore, conflict resolution initiatives considered
by the Security Council and regional arrangements must
ensure that peace and justice work together effectively.
It is important that the Council, Member States
and regional organizations ensure that mediators and
envoys in mediation, peace and preventive diplomacy
processes contribute to ensuring accountability,
including by encouraging the parties concerned to
envisage transnational justice and reparation clauses in
peace agreements. It is essential that peace efforts and
peace agreements under no circumstances encourage the
acceptance of situations achieved by the unlawful use
of force and other egregious violations of international
law, such as war crimes, crimes against humanity,
genocide and ethnic cleansing. Particular consideration
must be given to implications for the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts aggravated by population
displacements and foreign military occupation.
It is important that the right of return, along with
increased attention to its practical implementation
and concrete measures aimed at overcoming obstacles
that prevent return, be applied by the international
community with more consistency and adherence to
principles.

Parties to armed conflicts should take all the
necessary measures to ensure rapid and unimpeded
access by humanitarian actors to all those in need of
protection and assistance. All efforts to that end must
at all times be undertaken in line with the Charter
of the United Nations, international law and basic
humanitarian principles.
It is also important that the Security Council
maintain its focus on the protection of civilians.
Azerbaijan will continue to support systematic
discussions on the topic.
In conclusion, I would like to again commend the
initiative of Argentina to convene this open debate and
to advance this significant theme in the work of the
Security Council.
Mr. Manzi (Rwanda): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, and the Argentine delegation for
convening this important open debate. I would like to
express my thanks to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his informative briefing. His presence here this
morning is an affirmation of the importance of the
topic we are addressing. I also would like to thank the
Director for International Law and Cooperation of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Philip
Spoerri; the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Ms. Navanathem Pillay; and the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Ms. Valerie Amos, for their
respective briefings.
Our holding a debate on the topic of the protection
of civilians in situations of armed conflict for the third
time this year suggests its importance in the minds of
Council members. The Security Council has shown
interest in demonstrating that it takes violence against
civilians seriously. It is indeed true that through a broad
Security Council agenda, including human security,
the Council’s legitimacy and credibility hinges on its
ability to act as a guarantor of civilian protection. We
also note that considerable progress has been made
since the first landmark resolution 1265 (1999) and
resolution 1296 (2000) and through the increasing
number of peacekeeping missions expressly mandated
to protect civilians. In addition, over the past 10 years,
the Secretary-General has put forward more than 100
recommendations in successive reports to the Security
Council on the protection of civilians.
Although it may sometimes seem like we are
repeating ourselves, the cumulative effect is dramatic.

13-4309219

S/PV.7019

We believe that with each repetition, the consensus
on the issue of the protection of civilians grows
stronger, and our language becomes clear and loud
to the perpetrators of violations and abuses against
civilian populations that they will be held accountable.
With such optimism, the disparity between our wellintentioned discussions in the Council and the effects
of armed conflicts on civilian populations calls for
more action by the Security Council. There is certainly
a clear need to translate formative commitments into
concrete improvements in the protection of civilians on
the ground.
In the Great Lakes region, for example, we
unfortunately still have armed conflicts and roaming
predators against the civilian population. The negative
forces and other military groups, such as the Rwanda
Defence Force, a genocidal force that consists of
perpetrators of the 1994 genocide of Tutsi in Rwanda,
continues to spread its genocidal ideological poison,
not just in our neighbourhood but also through a
worldwide network. Other groups, such as the Lord’s
Resistance Army and uncontrolled Séléka Coalition
elements, continue to traumatize the population in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central
African Republic.
Those forces use civilians as human shields, abduct
and maim, forcefully recruit children and continue to
carry out sexual and gender-based violence against
women and girls. Such genocidal ideologies and
inhuman acts should not be accommodated anywhere
in the world. The fighting between the Sudan and
the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North also
continue to cause human terror and catastrophe in
Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile states of the Sudan.
The conflicts have caused displacement of persons with
limited humanitarian access.
The crisis in Syria and the death toll there show
the persistent failure of all sides to protect civilians
and safeguard human life. Violations of international
humanitarian law are causing civilian deaths, injuries
and displacement.
What is evident from those few cases is that the
Council is faced with implementation challenges to
its existing normative framework on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. As Rwanda has stated, the
Security Council’s failure to exercise its responsibility
to protect civilians is a stark reminder of its failure to

20

protect the more than 1 million Tutsi massacred during
the 1994 genocide in Rwanda.
Rwanda is of the view that the prevention of armed
conflict is the surest way to prevent violations and
abuses against civilians. Rwanda is playing its part
through engagement at the international, regional
and subregional levels in finding lasting solutions to
conflicts and their root causes. We are fully engaged
under the Pact on Security, Stability and Development
in the Great Lakes Region. We are also party to the
important instruments that came into force in 2012,
namely, the African Charter on Democracy, Elections
and Governance and the African Union Convention for
the Protection and Assistance of Internally Displaced
Persons in Africa, which are aimed at solving the
root causes of conflict and protecting and assisting
internally displaced persons (IDPs) in Africa.
We believe that the Council should take a more
consistent and comprehensive approach to addressing
the root causes of conflicts, including the establishment
and operation of a comprehensive early-warning system
for conflicts. In situations of armed conflict, while the
primary responsibility of the protection of civilians
rests with the State, we equally remind non-State actors
and the United Nations, including peacekeepers and
other humanitarian actors, to prioritize the protection
of civilians. Rwanda therefore calls upon the parties to
fully observe strict compliance with international law,
to avoid targeting civilian objects, to stop militarizing
camps and to allow access to humanitarian assistance.
As I learned from my experience in the 1994
genocide, Rwandan peacekeepers are contributing to
the civilian protection requirements and are translating
protection of civilian normative frameworks set by the
Security Council to practise in the missions in which
they are deployed. The Rwandan Defence Forces
doctrine in peacekeeping is guided by the protection
of civilian and extends to the determination to uphold
the protection of civilians even in situations that may
result in the loss of the lives of our men and women.
In the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Mission
in Darfur, for example, in some instances, Rwandan
contingents patrolling IDP camps were attacked, which
in some cases resulted in death and injuries. Despite the
losses incurred, the patrols were undeterred. Instead,
the attacks increased the peacekeepers resolve and
determination to protect IDPs, who remained under
threat from armed elements. Together with other
peacekeepers, Rwanda continues to help improve

13-43092

S/PV.7019

stability in areas of operation through creating a
safe and secure environment for the distribution of
humanitarian aid to IDPs. Through proactive patrols
and community outreach, they have created confidence
among the population and contributed to the peace
process. In their efforts to reduce attacks on civilians,
Rwandan peacekeepers have introduced new ways
of protecting them that include limiting the need for
civilians, particularly women and girls, to leave their
communities in search of firewood, which increases the
risk of attack in Darfur. Lastly, the Rwandan formed
police unit deployed to the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti is sharing Rwanda’s home-grown
initiatives in community policing and community
service, all of which contributes to the protection of
civilians.
With regarad to accountability for violations and
abuse against civilians in armed conflicts, I wish to
restate the four important peace proposals emphasized
by our Minister for Foreign Affairs in her statement
during the open debate on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict held in February (see S/PV.6917). First,
justice must be timely. Secondly, rendering justice to
victims should be the only objective of accountability
mechanisms. Political considerations should have no
place. Thirdly, more careful attention should be paid
to the principle of subsidiarity when choosing the most
appropriate venue for judicial proceedings. Fourthly,
the international community should increase the
investment in strengthening national judicial capacities.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that overcoming
the challenges facing the Council with regard to the
protection of civilians requires enhanced cooperation
and better coordination among the Security Council,
other United Nations bodies and agencies, and regional
and subregional organizations involved in peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and humanitarian activities. We urge
parties to armed conflict to exercise restraint in
undertaking disproportionate attacks against civilian
areas and to allow unrestricted humanitarian access,
especially to the most vulnerable. All stakeholders,
including United Nations agencies, peacekeepers and
humanitarian agencies, should protect civilians and
avoid politicizing humanitarian assistance.
Rwanda supports the fight against impunity and
is ready to back Government actions that will lead to
accountability for the perpetrators of violations and
abuses against civilians populations.

Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Let
me thank Argentina for organizing this open debate
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. Three
months before the presentation of the next report of the
Secretary-General on that subject, and six months after
the adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2013/2 in
the framework of February’s debate (see S/PV.69170),
today’s debate gives us an opportunity to undertake an
interim assessment in the light of recent developments.
Luxembourg fully aligns itself with the statement
to be made by the observer of the European Union.
The statements by the Secretary-General, the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, the Emergency Relief
Coordinator and the Director for International Law and
Cooperation of the International Committee of the Red
Cross — whom I thank for their statements — have
shown that, unfortunately, a significant gap still exists
between the commitments and obligations of States,
on the one hand, and the often tragic situation on the
ground, on the other.
Among the five challenges that the international
community must address in order to improve the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, five challenges
that the Secretary-General highlighted in his 2012
report (S/2012/376), there is one that is particular urgent
in our view in the light of recent developments. I am
referring to improving humanitarian access, especially
in the context of the Syrian conflict.
The statistics speak for themselves: since the
beginning of the crisis, more than 100,000 people,
mostly civilians, including many women and children,
have been killed. Millions others find themselves in
a disastrous humanitarian situation. We all know that
an end to the crisis cannot come about until a political
solution is found. But the millions of civilians who
are trapped in the conflict cannot wait for a political
solution. They need assistance, and they need it now.
They don’t just need assistance, they are entitled to
it in the light of the most basic humanitarian criteria
codified in international humanitarian law.
Immediate, free and unimpeded access is essential
to reach the people in need who everyday are more and
more dependent upon humanitarian aid from outside.
The issue of access, which is very sensitive, must not
be compromised in any way.
However, humanitarian actors, including United
Nations agencies, encounter numerous bureaucratic

13-4309221

S/PV.7019

obstacles on a daily basis. The conditions for granting
humanitarian visas are done in an arbitrary manner.
Checkpoints are increasing. Convoys are ordered to
surrender medical supplies. Equipment intended for
humanitarian purposes — armoured vehicles, surgical
equipment and communication tools, to mention but a
few — are systematically held up in customs.
Those are just a few of the unacceptable elements
that tend to limit or prevent humanitarian assistance to
the Syrian populations who are suffering. It is urgent
that Syria respond to the demands of humanitarian
players and facilitate immediate, free and unimpeded
access to the affected populations through the most
effective channels, including through the front lines
and across borders.
When we speak about the protection of civilians, we
are led inexorably to raise the issue of the responsibility
to respect and to ensure respect for international law.
The application of international humanitarian law is the
best guarantee for the protection of civilians. A strong
commitment by States is required in that regard, which
can be shown in particular through the ratification of
existing international instruments. I would encourage
all States that have not yet done so to become parties
to the two main additional protocols to the Geneva
Conventions, but also to other relevant instruments,
such as the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child with regard to children in armed
conflict. With regard to non-State actors that are not
parties to international legal instruments, it is important
that they also be engaged, and in a stronger way. In that
context, I would like to mention the example of two
armed groups in Nepal and in Sri Lanka, respectively,
that have signed and implemented action plans for
children in times of armed conflict. Thanks to that
commitment, an end was put to the recruitment and the
use of children by those armed groups.
We believe in the virtues of persuasion. However,
it has to be said that violations of international
humanitarian law are taking place despite all the
commitments that have been taken. Holding the
perpetrators accountable for their actions is vital in
many ways. First, a strong message would be sent to all
violators to show that no crime will go unpunished. That
dissuasive and preventive aspect of justice is important.
In that context, I would like to note the important role
played by the International Criminal Court, a role that
was recently recognized by the Council, and I welcome

22

that fact. Luxembourg has, since january, called for the
situation in Syria to be referred to the Court.
Secondly, when we are unable to eliminate the
suffering of victims, justice may provide moral
compensation for the harm suffered. Allow me,
however, to insist on a third element to be taken into
account. That is the issue of reparations to allow injured
parties to start new lives. That too be addressed. Many
opportunities exist at the national and international
levels provided that such projects are adequately
funded. It is important that we mobilize more in that
regard.
On the anniversary of the attack against the United
Nations headquarters in Baghdad, which claimed the
lives of 22 people and wounded many others, I would
like to conclude by joining colleagues before me in
paying homage to the men and women of the United
Nations who, day after day, put the protection of
civilians at the centre of their action, sometimes risking
their own lives.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): Today
we mark the tenth anniversary of the attack against
the Canal Hotel. Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, lost his
life there, as did 21 other United Nations staff. Like
preceding speakers have done, I too would like to pay
tribute to all of those who have fallen in the service of
the United Nations and to express my condolences to
their bereaved families and friends.
I thank the Secretary-General and the various
speakers for their presentations today. France aligns
itself with the statements to be made by the observer
of the European Union and the representative of
Switzerland on behalf of the Group of Friends on the
Protection of Civilians.
The protection of civilians requires unwavering
attention on the part of the Security Council and must
be at the core of its activities. The Council has a role
to play in ensuring respect for international law by the
parties to a conflict. While the primary responsibility
for protecting civilians lies with States, the Council and
the international community have a vital role to play to
ensure that States and non-State armed groups do not
shirk their obligations. Civilians are the main victims
of armed violence, totalling roughly half a million
deaths per year.

13-43092

S/PV.7019

The Arms Trade Treaty, which has to date been
signed by 82 States, represents real progress in that
respect. Once it has entered into force, the Treaty will
ensure that States are held accountable and ensure that
arms transfers no longer contribute to the commission
of atrocities. That is more than ever necessary because
we have seen that on the ground indiscriminate
attacks against civilians and targeted attacks against
humanitarian workers have become increasingly
frequent. We note that the humanitarian domain is no
longer a safe haven and that the number of obstacles to
humanitarian access has increased.
That is the case in Syria in particular, where the
regime is systematically denying access to civilian
populations in areas besieged by it as long as combat
is ongoing, in flagrant violation of international
humanitarian law. Here I am thinking in particular
of the civilians trapped in Qusayr and in the old city
of Homs. Across the country, despite the fact that the
number of people in need is increasing day by day,
totalling more than 6.8 million, the Syrian authorities
continue to refuse access by humanitarian actors to all
those in need.
The Government continues to place bureaucratic
obstacles in the way of the work of humanitarian
actors. Visas are not issued, and the number of
non-governmental organizations authorized to act
are too few. The Government’s requirements for
the delivery of aid are increasingly numerous, and
attacks against humanitarian and medical personnel
are a constant threat. Several members of the Syrian
Arab Red Crescent have been killed. Ambulances and
hospitals, along with their staff, have become targets.
That is also the case in the Sudan, where access to the
civilian population remains difficult, if not impossible,
for humanitarian actors. There are a growing number of
obstacles, in spite of the appeals made by the Council
for 10 years now, because blocking humanitarian aid
has become somewhat of a Government strategy.
Such arbitrary denials of access prevent lives from
being saved and compound the numerous violations of
international humanitarian law. We must put an end to
this arbitrary and appalling trend. The Council has the
tools to do so and must not hesitate to use them.
The Security Council must be able to react quickly
to put an end to situations where civilians are threatened.

That is the case in the Democratic Republic of
Congo, where the Council provided the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) with a robust
mandate to support the national authorities in combating
the numerous violations of human rights committed
in the eastern part of the country, in particular sexual
violence.
The protection of civilians is a fundamental
aspect of MONUSCO’s mandate. In the context of
the Framework agreement signed in Addis Ababa,
resolution 2098 (2013) is aimed at providing heads of
mission all means necessary to ensure the protection
of civilian populations threatened by non-State
armed actors. It also authorizes the deployment of
an Intervention Brigade that can carry out offensive
actions against such groups. MONUSCO is also tasked
with supporting and coordinating efforts in the area of
security sector reform, so as to enable the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to ensure, as soon as possible,
the protection of civilians with its own rapid-reaction
forces.
In Mali, the intervention of French forces made
it possible to put an end to the attacks carried out by
terrorist groups that were threatening Bamako. The
Council followed up by authorizing the deployment
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), whose
robust mandate for the protection of civilians allowed
for the stabilization of the country and the holding
of presidential elections under good conditions. We
must now continue our efforts to support national
reconciliation in Mali so that the country can finally
find lasting peace.
In South Sudan, the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) to protect civilians
is more important than ever, as sectarian violence has
led to the displacement of more than 70,000 people
since January. That is a major concern, especially in
Jonglei state, where violence has led to the deaths of
hundreds of people.
Finally, we must also take action in the Central
African Republic. As we heard in the Council some
days ago, the security and humanitarian situation in
that country is dire and violations of human rights
widespread. Civilians are the main victims. We must
stop the crisis from worsening or the Central African
Republic could become a source of instability in the

13-4309223

S/PV.7019

heart of Africa. The Council must therefore support the
efforts of the African Union, which decided in July to
deploy a strengthened stabilization mission. We must
also strengthen the mandate of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African
Republic so as to provide it with the means to shed light
on human rights violations committed throughout the
country. Human rights observers must also be deployed.
Allow me in conclusion to underscore that the
Council’s reaction must also include actions to fight
impunity for those who perpetrate acts of violence
against civilians. Justice is required for lasting peace, the
reweaving of the social fabric and reconciliation among
communities. In Darfur and Libya, the Council did what
it had to do by referring the atrocities committed to the
International Criminal Court. Despite the obstacles in
its path, the Court remains the guarantee of effective
and impartial justice. That should be the case in Syria
as well today.
For more than two years now, turning a deaf ear
to the international community’s appeals, Bashar
Al-Assad has been murdering his people. More than
100,000 people have died, mostly civilians. Given the
seeming impunity reigning in the country today, the
Council must send a clear message to the effect that
those responsible for war crimes and crimes against
humanity will be brought to justice. The Syrian National
Coalition has taken a stance in favour of a referral to the
ICC; we should take it at its word and seriously consider
the possibility of a referral to the ICC that would finally
neutralize the perpetrators of crimes in Syria.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the delegation of Argentina for having convened
this open debate under your presidency, partly to mark
World Humanitarian Day and also to commemorate
the events that took place exactly 10 years in Baghdad,
when 22 members of the Secretariat made the ultimate
sacrifice while pursuing the noble humanitarian
mission of the United Nations.
We would also like to thank you, Madam President,
for the concept note (S/2013/447) circulated by your
delegation, which contains valuable guidance for
today’s debate. We are also grateful to the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, as well as to Navi Pillay,
Valerie Amos and Philip Spoerri for their respective
presentations.
This is the third time this year that we have
addressed the issue of the protection of civilians in

24

armed conflict. We expressed our views during the
debates held on 12 February and 17 July (see S/PV.6917
and S/PV.7003). We do not wish to reiterate the points
made in those statements, and there have been no major
changes in the situation on the ground to date, with the
exception of the signing of the Arms Trade Treaty. We
will therefore limit ourselves on this occasion to make
some observations concerning the questions raised in
the concept note.
The starting point of the note focuses on
shortcomings in the protection of civilians since the
Security Council adopted its pioneering resolution
1265 (1999). That point is reflected in the key phrase
contained in the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2012/376) and quoted in the concept note,
which describes the situation of the protection of
civilians as “abysmal”. We would do well, then, to ask
ourselves collectively, “Why?”
One first, obvious answer lies in the serious
shortcomings of the Governments of the countries in
conflict, which frequently do not have the political
will or the institutional or organizational capacity to
fulfil their primary responsibility to ensure security
and the right to life for their own civilian populations.
Clearly, United Nations contingents cannot replace the
State in the fulfilment of such a basic commitment,
although they can sometimes contribute to mitigating
the situation.
In addition, we have specific cases on the agenda of
the Council where States, far from helping humanitarian
aid reach the victims, prevent it from doing so. By the
same token, those States, instead of respecting the
norms of international humanitarian law and human
rights law, are deliberately violating them. It is for
that reason that, together with the palliative work of
the peacekeeping operations, a greater complementary
effort in capacity-building is needed, both for State and
non-State institutions. In that regard, there is a crucial
role for the United Nations Development Programme
and the multilateral financial institutions. Furthermore,
we believe that the norms of international humanitarian
law must continually be analysed in the light of new
circumstances or difficulties that arise in the field.
A second serious failure can be attributed to
militias and rebel groups revolting against national
Governments, which is a subject of extraordinary
complexity. We know relatively little about how to
encourage such diverse groups — the majority of which

13-43092

S/PV.7019

are anarchical in nature — to comply with international
norms regarding the protection of civilians, especially
the most vulnerable civilians. We have cases on our
agenda in which not only did the States fail to fulfil
their most basic responsibility, but the armed rebel
groups have also committed mass atrocities against
civilian populations.
Although we usually include in our statements and
resolutions language demanding that the perpetrators of
such acts be held accountable before justice, that rarely
occurs. For our part, we have firmly supported not only
the rigorous observance of international humanitarian
law and human rights, but have also insisted on the
particular usefulness of the Rome Statute and the
International Criminal Court in holding individuals and
collective groups accountable in certain cases. In the
same sense, we value the mechanism of the independent
international commissions of inquiry established by the
Human Rights Council.
The third failure in enhancing the protection of
civilians in armed conflict situations can be found
within the Security Council. A joint investigation by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations criticized
the Council for not having offered clearer and more
detailed guidance that would have enhanced the United
Nations capacity to offer effective protection to civilian
populations and develop local capacities to make its
own role transitory. Furthermore, when we have not
achieved consensus on a clear path of action, as is the
case with the Syrian Arab Republic, the humanitarian
consequences have been catastrophic. We believe that
we ourselves carry the burden of responsibility for that
flagrant failure to protect innocent civilians, including
women and children.
Finally, I would like to say that the use of modern
technology, such as drones and remotely operated
weapons, complicates efforts to implement the
fundamental norms of international humanitarian law
concerning the distinction between combatants and
non-combatants or civilians. It also complicates the
issue of proportionality in asymmetric conflicts, in
which forces that are very unequal in terms of military
or technological capacity are deployed. And it hampers
the precautions that must be taken, in choosing the
means and methods of attack, so as to ensure that all
feasible measures are employed to avoid or at least
reduce the number of dead and wounded among the
civilian population.

In conclusion, almost 15 years have passed since
our peacekeeping operations were first charged with
the protection of civilians. Missions have increasingly
been charged with such tasks in situations of armed
conflict that, more often than not, pit Governments
against non-State armed groups from their own
civilian populations, or in States that are experiencing
inter-ethnic or inter-communal conflicts. Apparently,
the rich trove of lessons learned from that diverse
collection of experiences has not been translated into
corresponding improvements in our performance in
the field. In addition, we have doubts as to whether the
most recent innovations aimed at focusing missions
on the imposition of peace will improve or worsen
the situation. In any case, we have a robust arsenal of
instruments and policies at our disposal that, at very
least, has the potential of improving our performance
in the matter of protection of civilians.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): Thank
you, Madam President, for your presence and for
convening this debate on the protections of civilians
in armed conflict, an issue at the heart of the Security
Council’s charge to maintain international peace and
security.
First, I would like to join the Secretary-General,
the briefers and Council colleagues in paying tribute
to fallen United Nations personnel and humanitarian
workers on World Humanitarian Day and the tenth
anniversary of the Canal Hotel bombing in Baghdad.
We owe humanitarian workers our deep gratitude for
the work they do and the risks they take.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General,
United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights Pillay, Under-Secretary-General Amos and
International Committee of the Red Cross Director
Spoerri for focusing our attention today on the many
challenges facing civilians caught or targeted in
conflicts.
We see the horrific consequences when access
to those in need is blocked, as in Syria, when the
Government’s armed forces and armed rebel groups
traumatize civilian populations, as in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and when impunity prevails and
the perpetrators of atrocities are not held accountable,
as in the Central African Republic. Those devastating
situations are particularly acute when community
leaders, journalists, activists, religious figures and
scholars are targeted for the critical work they do to

13-4309225

S/PV.7019

sound the alarm, protect the vulnerable and foster
peace and reconciliation.
Today’s discussion is of great importance to the
United States. We have made the protection of civilians
a priority, and indeed President Obama has made it clear
that, for the United States, the deterrence of genocide
in atrocities is a core national security interest and core
moral responsibility. Too often, warring parties fall
short or blatantly disregard their obligations altogether.
In truly appalling cases, including the ongoing tragedies
in Syria and the Sudan, parties to armed conflict
deliberately target civilians. It is clear that we must
strengthen our commitment in the three key areas that
Argentina has rightly highlighted for this debate, that is,
enhancing compliance with international humanitarian
law, improving humanitarian access to areas in conflict
and ensuring effective accountability mechanisms for
suspected war crimes.
Despite a strong body of international humanitarian
law dedicated to protecting civilian populations in
armed conflict, the Secretary-General notes that most
victims in recent armed conflicts have been civilians.
In Syria, more than 100,000 people have tragically
lost their lives. Among them are innocent civilians,
including women and children, who should have been
safe from violence. We must use the tools at hand to
improve compliance with international humanitarian
law in order to prevent the loss of innocent lives. In the
context of the Council’s work, that means supporting
and advancing the tools we have, including action
plans for children in armed conflict and the naming
and shaming of perpetrators of sexual violence. It also
means supporting the work of organizations such as the
International Committee of the Red Cross, which helps
to promote compliance with international humanitarian
law and respect for legal and moral norms. And for
each of our Governments it means raising awareness,
especially through military training about international
humanitarian law and supporting the work of internal
accountability mechanisms in our own Governments
and in those of other countries to which we offer
assistance. That is why the international community’s
military training work, including in countries such
as Afghanistan, is a critical component in fostering
international peace and security while also ensuring
the protection of civilians.
Humanitarian access is critical to protecting
civilians. Timely, full and unimpeded humanitarian
access to populations in need of assistance must be a top

26

priority for everyone. That is as true in Syria as it is in
the Sudan, where millions of vulnerable civilians lack
access to food, water, shelter and medicine. In addition
to access, personnel engaged in humanitarian activities
should be free from targeting and attack. As we have
heard today, attacks on humanitarian personnel have
continued unabated around the world. Attacks like the
one on the United Nations compound in Mogadishu in
June prevent humanitarian agencies from undertaking
their lifesaving work and should be condemned
wherever and whenever they are committed.
Finally, without accountability, the cycles of
violence continue. The United States strongly rejects
impunity and supports the international community’s
efforts to foster stability and sustainable peace through
justice. In that regard, we have worked with national
authorities to strengthen domestic judicial systems
in conflict and post-conflict situations, including by
funding military justice efforts in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, where rebel groups
and the military have used rape as a weapon of war,
among other atrocities. We have also strongly supported
international justice mechanisms and endorsed efforts
to expose and document human-rights abuses, including
through international tribunals and commissions. In
Syria, the United States is helping Syrians prepare
for accountability by supporting the documentation of
violations committed by all sides in the conflict and
bolstering the capacity of civil society organizations to
build the foundations for lasting peace. In addition, we
cooperate with the International Criminal Court (ICC)
on its current cases, consistent with United States law
and policy, including through the recent expansion of
our rewards-for-justice programme to include foreign
nationals indicted by international criminal tribunals,
including the ICC.
As we have seen from Syria and the Sudan to the
Sahel and the Great Lakes, the failure to protect civilians
threatens regional stability, as conflicts escalate and
populations stream across borders. Protecting civilians
is the primary responsibility of States, but it is clear that
the international community must keep its attention
focused sharply on the practical steps we can take to
improve the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
We must redouble our efforts to ensure that the Council
is not sitting on the sidelines when civilian populations
are in grave danger.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates Argentina’s initiative in holding this open

13-43092

S/PV.7019

debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
We welcome Ambassador Ruiz Cerutti as she presides
over today’s meeting, and we would like to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights Pillay and UnderSecretary-General Valerie Amos for their briefings. We
also listened attentively to the statement by Mr. Spoerri,
the Director from the International Committee of the
Red Cross.
Civilians are the primary victims of wars and
armed conflicts. In the recent past the international
community has made enormous efforts to protect
civilians from the scourge of such wars and conflicts,
and the Council has adopted numerous resolutions
and issued many presidential statements establishing
mechanisms and frameworks aimed at effectively
protecting civilians in conflicts, particularly women
and children. China supports the Council’s efforts to
conduct in-depth and extensive discussions on the topic
of the protection of civilians in armed conflict in order
to respond comprehensively to the major challenges
to that protection. We would like to underscore the
following four points.
First, national Governments should bear the
primary responsibility for protecting their own
civilians. All parties to an armed conflict should abide
by international humanitarian law and other relevant
international laws, as well as by the resolutions of the
Security Council, and should fulfil their obligations to
protect civilians. While the international community
can render constructive assistance, it cannot replace the
responsibility of national Governments and the parties
to conflicts. In prosecuting and punishing actions that
violate human rights and contravene international
humanitarian law, and in upholding justice, it is
essential that the major focus be on making full use of
domestic judicial systems as the primary channel for
such efforts.
Secondly, in discharging the responsibility to
protect civilians, it is essential that the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations be strictly
complied with, particularly those concerning respect
for national sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity.
Operations relating to the protection of civilian should
be established by the Council and focus on working
towards early ceasefires and solving disputes by
peaceful means, such as dialogue and negotiations;
they should not be conducted for any political motives
or purposes. With regard to the protection of civilians,

the Council should give equal attention to all situations
on its agenda and adopt an equitable, fair and consistent
position.
Thirdly, in order to carry out humanitarian relief
operations to protect civilians, it is essential that the
principles of humanitarian neutrality, fairness and
independence be observed, while showing respect for
the sovereignty of host countries. Only by winning
their support and mitigating resistance on the part
of the parties to the conflict can relief operations be
effectively established. At the same time, the parties
to the conflict should go out of their way to ensure
that civilians have timely and effective access to
humanitarian relief by improving the humanitarian
situation in conflict-affected areas.
Fourthly, the key to strengthening the protection of
civilians in armed conflict is preventing and settling
those armed conflicts. The Council should actively
conduct preventive diplomacy by urging the parties to
conflicts to resolve their differences through dialogue,
negotiations and other peaceful means in order to
achieve a political settlement and minimize human
casualties. Deploying peacekeeping operations cannot
be a fundamental solution to the problem of protecting
civilians. The Council’s focus should be on helping
host countries to strengthen their security and justice
sectors and improve their ability to protect civilians.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Argentina.
At the outset, I would like to recognize, as others
have done before me, that today we are commemorating
World Humanitarian Day, and Argentina would like to
pay tribute to those who have given their lives while
helping others. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral; the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, Ms. Navanethem Pillay; Ms. Valerie
Amos, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator; and
Mr. Philip Spoerri, Director for International Law and
Cooperation of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, for their participation in this meeting.
Argentina believes that it is necessary for the
Security Council to remain committed to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict by promoting full respect
for international law, in particular humanitarian
law, human rights law and refugee law, as well as by
combating impunity.

13-4309227

S/PV.7019

In his most recent report (S/2012/376), the
Secretary-General indicated that the situation of the
protection of civilians was abysmal. Although we hope
that the next report will show some positive change, the
Council continues to receive information on situations
where a lack of distinction between combatants and the
civilian population has led to civilian deaths, injuries,
displacement and to situations where there have been
various obstacles to and attacks against access to
humanitarian assistance.
In the light of that, it is imperative to recall the
obligtions flowing from the four Geneva Conventions
of 1949, its Additional Protocols of 1977, The Hague
Conventions of 1899 and 1907, human rights law and
refugee law, as well as those derived from customary
international law. It is also necessary to transform
obligations into tangible improvements on the ground.
In that regard, I would like to highlight the following
points.
The first basic challenge is to promote adherence to
norms. Last May, Norway, in cooperation with Argentina
and other countries, organized a global conference
on the protection of civilians under international
humanitarian law that included 300 participants and
94 States. The conclusions of the Oslo Conference are
in line with those contained in the Secretary-General’s
latest report regarding the need to ensure that States and
parties to an armed conflict comply with international
humanitarian law.
In that regard, it is important that States remain
committed to the dissemination of international
humanitarian law. In Argentina, international
humanitarian law has become a salient part of
international law within the curriculums of several law
schools and in training courses for the armed forces.
In addition, one of the workshops organized in the
framework of the Oslo Conference took place in Buenos
Aires in 2011. It is important to highlight that one of the
objectives of those workshops was to promote, through
practical recommendations, the need to comply with
international humanitarian law.
It is also necessary to ensure that States comply
with international human rights and refugee law since,
regardless of whether an armed conflict exists, States
must respect all legal norms aimed at the protection of
civilians.
In terms of actions by the Security Council,
Argentina would like to highlight the need for

28

peacekeeping operations to abide by international
humanitarian law. In that regard, we recall the SecretaryGeneral’s bulletin (ST/SGB/1999/13)on the observance
of international humanitarian law by United Nations
forces. It is also necessary to continue to include
protection activities in the mandates of United Nations
missions in the field, that those are developed clearly
and that such missions are given all the necessary
resources in a timely and effective manner.
Argentina, in cooperation with the International
Committee of the Red Cross, has developed training
courses for the armed forces with a particular emphasis
on Argentine forces in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. In addition, Argentina’s commission on
the application of international humanitarian law has
compiled a manual on international law in the context
of armed conflict for the conduct on how the armed
forces should conduct themselves in such situations, in
line with the norms of international humanitarian law.
With regard to humanitarian assistance, parties to a
conflict must do everything they can to ensure effective
and timely access to humanitarian assistance, including
cargo and materials. Under international humanitarian
law such assistance enjoys special protection. We are
therefore extremely concerned to hear about cases
of bureaucratic red tape in accessing humanitarian
asisstance or stories of it merely being rejected.
Fact-finding is also crucial. Impartial mechanisms
are essential for investigating facts on violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights laws.
In addition to possible ad hoc fact-finding commissions,
including those established by the Human Rights
Council, we also have the International Humanitarian
Fact-Finding Commission, provided for by Protocol I
to the 1949 Geneva Conventions. Let me highlight that,
in resolution 1894 (2009) and presidential statement
(S/PRST/2013/2), the Council acknowledged the
possibility of resorting to the Commision.
Moreover, Argentina recognizes the fundamental
importance of strengthening mechanisms for
accountability for those responsible of commiting
atrocities. Due to its tragic experiences in the 1970s,
following the restoration of democracy in 1983,
successive Governments in my country have adopted
important measures aimed at ensuring accountability
for the violations of human rights that took place during
the dictatorship. Over the past decade, many judicial
cases have been reopened throughout the country

13-43092

S/PV.7019

and, to date, 1,053 people have been prosectuted, of
whom 475 have already been tried in accordance with
the guarantees of due process set out in our national
Constitution. Of those, 430 people have been sentenced
and 45 were acquitted.
As for the international community, the Council
has established two ad hoc international tribunals.
Today we have an international justice system for the
most serious crimes, with a permanent tribunal at its
centre, the International Criminal Court established by
the Rome Statute of 1998. Argentina firmly supported
its establishment and has been a party to the Statute
since 2001.
Due to the fact that the primary responsibility to
prosecute lies with States, it is important that parties
to the Rome Statute adopt the relevant norms for that
purpose. In 2006, Argentina enacted a law to implement
the Rome Statute. The law characterizes the acts that
the Rome Statute has criminalized and establishes
a regime for judicial cooperation with the Court,
including handing over indictees, judicial assistance
and the carrying out of sentences.
It is crucial for all States to cooperate with the
Court, particularly with regard to arrest warrants. The
Council, which committed to provide close follow-up
to referrals to the International Criminal Court in its
presidental statement S/PRST/2013/2) should put in
place a mechanism to that end as soon as possible.
I would like to conclude by reiterating that, under
international humanitarian law and the resolutions of the
Council, attacks of any kind directed against civilians
or other protected persons, as well as the recuitment of
child soldiers and obstacles to humanitarian assistance,
constitute violations of international law.
Finally, once again, I would like to urge full respect
for obligations arising from The Hague Conventions of
1899 and 1907, the four Geneva Conventions of 1949
and their Additional Protocols of 1977, international
human rights law, refugee law and the decisions of the
Security Council.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
Given the large number of speakers, I should like
to inform participants that I will not suspend this open
debate for a lunch break. For the same reason, I ask that
speakers limit their statements to a maximum of four
to five minutes in order for the Council to carry out its

work expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy texts are
asked to kindly distribute their statements in writing
and to deliver a condensed version in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I
commend Argentina for having convened today’s
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
(spoke in English)
I thank the Secretary-General for his informative
briefing, as well as High Commissioner Navi Pillay,
Under-Secretary-General Valerie Amos and Mr. Philip
Spoerri for their comments.
Brazil associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Switzerland on behalf
of the Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians
in Armed Conflict.
Today, we commemorate the tenth anniversary of
the Baghdad bombing and the tragic death of Sergio
Vieira de Mello and other United Nations officials, a
fitting occasion for the Council to look at the challenges
ahead in its efforts to protect civilians under threat
of violence. Also today, the Brazilian Government is
hosting a seminar entitled “Ten Years Without Sergio
Vieira de Mello” in Rio de Janeiro. The event honours
Sergio and his work and addresses key aspects of the
international humanitarian agenda.
As we have heard in several interventions today,
the effective and timely protection of civilians in armed
conflict remains a critical challenge. A United Nations
firmly committed to, and demonstrably effective
in, protecting civilians in situations of conflict has
become a clear and global demand. It is our collective
responsibility to satisfactorily respond to that demand.
It is also our collective responsibility to do so in a
manner that reinforces the moral authority and political
legitimacy of the Organization, which requires ensuring
that our protection policies, strategies and decisions are
strongly anchored in international law and that they
are truly universal and non-selective in scope and free
from any undue politicization. Any failure on our part
to do so is detrimental to the very civilians we all want
to protect. The Security Council has a pivotal role to
play in our meeting both grave responsibilities.
The Council also has the responsibility to continue
to call for conflict prevention. As humanitarian and
human tragedies of the past 20 years have clearly

13-4309229

S/PV.7019

shown, it is quite difficult to stop violence against
civilians when conflict has broken out. Putting the evil
genie of carnage back in the bottle is often a very tall
order, and if and when it is finally done, the death toll
may be simply terrifying. Therefore, we must repeat
that the most effective strategy for protecting civilians
is prevention.
Protection includes the promotion of sustainable
development, social inclusion and food and nutritional
security, as they contribute to conflict prevention in
many parts of the world. We must translate the political
agreement on the interdependence between security
and development into comprehensive prevention
strategies, in full respect of the different competencies
of the United Nations organs and agencies.
None of that is novel, but it must be repeated, as
there remain voices that continue to establish an almost
automatic link between the protection of civilians
and the use of force. As the Council will recall, the
concept of “responsibility while protecting” underlines
the fact that the use of force, even when its declared
goal is to protect civilians, often results in high human
and material costs, frequently contributing to the
deterioration of the situation of those such force sought
to protect. The use of force must truly be a measure of
last resort.
That is clear in the case of Syria, for instance. The
external supply of weapons will only lead to further
bloodshed — and not to peace, as a deeply flawed
argument being made by some would have us believe.
The supply of arms feeds the mistaken belief that there
is a military solution to the conflict. We continue
to firmly support the holding of a second Geneva
Conference so as to advance peace and therefore put an
end to violence against civilians.
Similar reasoning applies to the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. As Brazilian Foreign
Minister Patriota recently stated in the Council, the
military component of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo must be part of a political strategy. What
will truly protect the Congolese people is dialogue and
peace.
That is true also in the occupied Palestinian
territories, where for far too long civilians have been
affected by violence, including from settlers. Only
peace and the end of occupation will ensure their
protection. We firmly hope that the recent resumption

30

of direct final status negotiations will help the parties
to move forward towards such a goal for the benefit of
civilians.
The escalation of violence against civilians
demonstrating in Egypt is a source of grave concern.
Brazil has condemned the brutality of the repression
and associates itself with the statements made by the
Secretary-General and representatives of the African
Union. We call for dialogue and conciliation so that
the legitimate aspirations of the Egyptian people for
freedom, democracy and prosperity can be achieved
without violence, with respect for human rights and
with the full restoration of democratic order.
Ensuring humanitarian access is a political and
moral imperative. It is essential that the parties to
conflict allow and facilitate the immediate, safe, full
and unimpeded passage of humanitarian relief for all
civilians in need of assistance. Just as important is strict
respect for the principles of humanity, impartiality,
neutrality and independence, as provided for by the
General Assembly, especially because that is the most
effective manner for access to civilians in need to
actually be achieved.
Enhancing accountability for violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law
is also a key part of our efforts to protect civilians,
including as a preventive measure, as impunity often
feeds further violence. At the same time, in each
specific situation, we must continue to seek to reconcile
the imperatives of peace and justice, with a view, first
and foremost, to stopping violence and saving lives
that are threatened by violence. We must avoid both
automatic gestures and impunity.
In conclusion, I am confident that the combination
of idealism and realism that characterized Sergio Vieira
de Mello’s life can serve as a model for us as we address
the challenges involved in protecting civilians. Brazil
remains ready to work with other States Members of
the United Nations as well as the Organization itself in
that regard.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): At the outset, my
delegation would also like to join others in paying tribute
to all those who have lost their lives or suffered injury
while working for the United Nations. In particular, we
would like to pay tribute to Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello.

13-43092

S/PV.7019

We welcome the increased attention given to the
issue of the protection of civilians, as evidenced by the
process leading to the Oslo Conference and the recent
thematic work of the Security Council. The presidential
statement adopted in February (S/PRST/2013/2) sent
a strong message, especially with respect to both the
need to fight impunity and the role of the International
Criminal Court. We were also pleased to see that the
Council recognized the importance of ensuring access
for and protection of peacekeepers, humanitarian and
medical personnel.
As highlighted by the Secretary-General in his
most recent report (S/2012/376), we have come far in
identifying responsibilities, achievements, needs and
shortcomings in the field of protecting civilians in
armed conflict. But in many conflicts around the world,
we need concrete action on the ground to avoid civilian
suffering and casualties. All parties to a conflict,
including State and non-State actors, must ensure that
their forces respect international humanitarian law
and that they are trained to do so. They must strictly
respect the principles of distinction and proportionality
and they must in particular avoid the use of explosive
force in densely populated areas. Swift and unhindered
access for humanitarian actors must be guaranteed,
and not arbitrarily denied. Third States should refrain
from contributing to civilian suffering, inter alia, by
prohibiting arms transfers that pose a significant risk of
international humanitarian law violations.
The safety of humanitarian workers is of particular
concern. We call on all States that have not yet done so
to ratify the 1994 Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel and its 2005 Optional
Protocol.
We also recall that attacks on humanitarian workers
may constitute a war crime under article 8(2)(e)(iii), of
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
(ICC).
Where prevention fails, as is often the case,
accountability becomes all the more important. It is an
essential element of reconciliation and it helps prevent
the recurrence of conflict. Accountability is first and
foremost the responsibility of each State, but armed
conflict frequently — almost automatically — leads
to dysfunctional domestic justice systems. The ICC
was designed to fill that void and to deliver justice and
redress for victims. We therefore strongly encourage

States that have not done so yet to join and to implement
the Rome Statute.
The Security Council also has an important role to
play, in particular by referring appropriate situations to
the ICC and by promoting accountability at the domestic
level. The Council should be ready to swiftly establish
commissions of inquiry and fact-finding missions
to jump-start accountability efforts, and it should be
ready to effectively follow up on their outcomes. Where
appropriate, the results of investigations mandated by
the Human Rights Council should be brought to the
attention of the Security Council for further action.
All of what I have mentioned applies to the current
situation in Syria. There has rarely been a situation
in the recent past where more serious crimes under
international law have been committed at this scale
and for such a long time without any response by the
international community. Given the unwillingness
and inability of the domestic legal system in Syria to
investigate and prosecute the crimes committed, we
have joined a total of 63 States that have called upon
the Security Council to refer the situation in Syria to
the ICC. Should the Council’s failure to act upon that
call continue, it may be incumbent upon the General
Assembly to formally recommend that the Council to
make such a referral.
We note that the Syrian National Coalition
publically called for the referral and we welcome that
commitment to obey the rule of law. We also encourage
any future Government to submit the situation in Syria
to the jurisdiction of the ICC, in accordance with article
12(3) of the Rome Statute.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Umemoto (Japan): At the outset, let me express
my sincere congratulations to Argentina on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council, and thank
Ambassador Susana Ruiz Cerutti for holding this debate
on the very important occasion of World Humanitarian
Day. I would also like to thank His Excellency
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; Ms. Valerie Amos,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator; Ms. Navanethem
Pillay, High Commissioner for Human Rights. and
Mr. Philip Spoerri, Director for International Law and
Cooperation of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, for their respective briefings.

13-4309231

S/PV.7019

Japan concurs and associates itself with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of
Switzerland on behalf of the Group of Friends on the
Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict.
Given that today is World Humanitarian Day, I
would like to focus on the humanitarian aspect of the
issues highlighted in the concept note prepared by
Argentina (S/2013/477, annex).
Ten years ago today, the bombing of the United
Nations headquarters in Baghdad claimed 22 precious
lives. Today, the operational environment for
humanitarian assistance has not improved; rather, on
the contrary, it has become even more difficult. A large
number of humanitarian personnel are working at grave
personal risk. In addition to journalists, who were the
focus of last month’s open debate (see S/PV.6917),
humanitarian and medical personnel are among the
civilians to be protected in armed conflict. It is of grave
concern that those personnel, who contribute to saving
the lives of thousands of affected people, are facing
increasing danger.
In addition to direct attacks against them,
humanitarian personnel also experience difficulties
accessing people in need of assistance. In particular, the
arbitrary denial of humanitarian access, as pointed out in
the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/376),
is a great concern. The denial or obstruction of rapid
and unimpeded humanitarian access puts the lives of
affected people at risk, and parties to conflict must bear
in mind the consequences of such actions.
Those issues are related to the question of how
to ensure accountability among parties to conflict.
The international community has established various
mechanisms, including fact-finding commissions,
international tribunals and the International Criminal
Court in order to ensure accountability. Furthermore,
in paragraph 4 of resolution 1894 (2009), the Council
reiterated
“its willingness to respond to situations of armed
conflict where civilians are being targeted or
humanitarian assistance to civilians is being
deliberately obstructed, including through the
consideration of appropriate measures at the
Security Council’s disposal in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations”.
In reality, however, the protection of civilians in
armed conflict is becoming increasingly difficult

32

in inverse proportion to the development of those
very same norms and mechanisms. We must not only
build tools to enforce accountability, but also analyse
fundamental factors by which humanitarian assistance
in armed conflict becomes perceived as adversarial by
parties to conflict. In order to do so, we need to hear
voices from the field where access is negotiated and
humanitarian operations are launched, and discuss
how norms and principles of civilian protection can be
realistically met.
We hope that the next report of the SecretaryGeneral, which is due in November, will also address
such fundamental issues concerning the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): Let me begin by congratulating
you, Madam President, and the delegation of Argentina
for your leadership of the Security Council this month.
Today marks the tenth anniversary of the bombing
of the Baghdad headquarters of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq, which claimed the lives
of 22 people, including Sergio Vieira de Mello, United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
Instead of defending victims of armed conflict,
humanitarian personnel are themselves becoming
victims. In the light of the recent attacks on United
Nations personnel in Darfur, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and South Sudan, we must show zero
tolerance to those who deliberately target United
Nations and humanitarian workers.
Civilians continue to make up the vast majority
of casualties in armed conflict. Human suffering
anywhere should be the concern of men and women
everywhere, but the responsibility rests with the
international community.
Nobel laureate and humanitarian activist Elie
Wiesel said that
“Wherever men and women are persecuted because
of their race, religion, or political views, that place
must — at that moment — become the centre of the
universe.”
Today, men and women are being persecuted in
every corner of the world. The risk of mass killing
has risen sharply in Libya and Mali, and the threat
to civilians remains critical in the Central African

13-43092

S/PV.7019

Republic, Somalia and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
But nowhere is the situation bleaker than in the
Middle East — where nations gained their independence
long ago, but many people did not. After years of
stifling repression and brutal oppression, the people of
the Middle East said: enough is enough. Millions have
poured into the streets from Benghazi to Beirut and
from Tehran to Tunis. They have raised their voices for
liberty, for democracy and for opportunity.
By far, the worst instance has been Bashar
Al-Assad’s murderous campaign against the Syrian
people. Day after day, there are reports of detentions
and disappearances; of soldiers ordered to fire on
civilians; and of people being kidnapped, beaten and
tortured. From Hama to Houla, from Dar’a to Damascus,
innocent people are being slaughtered.
In its June report, the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry, which is investigating the
hostilities in Syria, stated, “Crimes that shock the
conscience have become a daily reality. Humanity
has been the casualty of this war”. The atrocities in
Syria have been made possible by the backing that
Al-Assad receives from Hizbullah. For months, the
Hizbullah leader, Hassan Nasrallah, denied Hizbullah’s
involvement in the Syrian conflict. Today, the whole
world knows that his guerillas are openly battling their
fellow Arab Muslims in Syria and threatening to tip the
fragile sectarian balance.
Nasrallah has repeatedly vowed to keep the
murderous Al-Assad regime in power. This past Friday,
he personally committed himself to fighting in Syria if
necessary, saying, “If the battle requires me to go, I will
go”. Nasrallah has proven that he has no regard for the
lives that have been lost, for the people who have been
forced to flee, or for the untold suffering of the Syrian
people.
The same disregard for human life is clear in
Lebanon, where Hizbullah’s arsenal has become larger
than that of many NATO countries. And Hizbullah
sees fit to store those weapons in homes, schools and
hospitals. It would seem that the people of Lebanon are
more valuable to Hizbullah as human shields than as
human beings. Hizbullah is a ruthless terrorist group
that is committing double war crimes by operating
within civilian populations and directing attacks
against them.

Before proclaiming his support for the Al-Assad
regime, Nasrallah travelled to Iran to secure financial
and military backing from Ayatollah Khamenei. We
must not forget that the first non-violent protests were
in the streets of Tehran, and the Iranian Government’s
response was to torture, detain and even kill peaceful
protesters. Those Iranian protesters were human
rights activists, former Government officials, clerics,
students, professors, journalists and bloggers. For those
who thought that Rouhani’s election would be the dawn
of a new Iran, take note. After taking office, the new
President wasted no time expressing his support for
Bashar Al-Assad.
Jewish tradition implores us to raise our eyes to
see the needs of all humankind. As one of Judaism’s
greatest contemporary scholars and teachers, Rabbi
Joseph Soloveitchik wrote,
“We have always considered ourselves an
inseparable part of humanity, ever ready to accept
the responsibility implicit in human existence”.
As a family of nations, our responsibility to one
another stems from our common humanity. Our moral
imperatives supersede whatever politics, religion or
geography may divide us. From the deserts of Africa to
the jungles of South America, we must stand together
to ensure that people everywhere have freedom,
opportunity and dignity.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Raja Zaib Shah (Malaysia): At the outset,
I wish to congratulate you, Madam President, and
the Argentine delegation on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
would also like to extend my sincere thanks to SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his views regarding the
situation at hand. I also wish to thank Ms. Navi Pillay,
High Commissioner for Human Rights; Ms. Valerie
Amos, Under-Secretary for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator; and Mr. Philip Spoerri,
Director for International Law and Cooperation of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, for their
statements and insights.
Since our debate in February (see S/PV.6917) the
situation regarding the protection of civilians in armed
conflict has shown no signs of improvement. In fact,
it has worsened. The death toll of civilians in various
armed conflicts around the world continues to rise

13-4309233

S/PV.7019

at a rate that leaves Malaysia deeply concerned. The
Secretary-General’s report (S/2012/376) testifies to
that. At the same time, the report reminds us of the need
for us to work together to improve the status quo. For
that reason, we welcome this debate, which could allow
all of us to have a greater understanding of the various
aspects of protecting civilians in armed conflict and to
take the next steps forward.
Civilians in armed conflict should be accorded
the necessary protection from being targeted
indiscriminately. In that regard, all parties to an
armed conflict should do their level best to distinguish
civilians from combatants. While my delegation realizes
that a distinction is not always easily made, an effort
must be made to stop the unnecessary deaths among
civilians. We understand that States bear the primary
responsibility to protect civilians. Nevertheless, other
parties, such as non-State armed groups, must also be
obligated to ensure the safety of civilians, in accordance
with international humanitarian and human rights laws.
In his report, the Secretary-General also highlights
the need for all parties to ensure that greater access to
humanitarian relief reach the vulnerable people who
are caught in conflict. My delegation certainly shares
that view. We also call on parties in conflict to accord
the necessary protection to humanitarian workers in
areas of armed conflict.
Malaysia acknowledges that accountability is an
integral part of ensuring compliance by the parties
to a conflict. On Impunity in that regard cannot and
must not be tolerated. Those who target civilians and
population centres must be made to realize that they
have violated international law and, as such, must be
held responsible and accountable for their actions. They
must be brought to justice.
While we welcome political developments taking
place in the Middle East peace process, the condition
of civilians in the occupied Palestinian territory leaves
much to be desired. Innocent Palestinians continue to
suffer under the clutches of Israeli occupation. As the
occupying Power, Israel has demonstrated its ignorance
of the various articles of the Geneva Conventions and
international law.
In its recent visit to the Middle East, the United
Nations Special Committee to Investigate Israeli
Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian
People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories
underscored that Israel had continued to abuse detained

34

Palestinian children. Israel has also continued to
demolish Palestinian homes, in blatant violation of
the Fourth Geneva Convention on the protection of
civilians, including the protection of civilian objects.
Needless to say, the condition of the Palestinian people
in the occupied Territory continues to remain in a sorry
state. Worse still is the situation in the Gaza Strip. The
Israeli blockade of Gaza has continued to strangle the
very livelihoods of the people. If we are serious about
protecting civilians, the international community
should act to bring an end to that illegal occupation.
Malaysia is also appalled at the number of civilian
casualties as a result of the Syrian conflict. There
must be an immediate end to the senseless killings
and appalling human rights violations, especially
against civilians. We are deeply concerned about the
deteriorating humanitarian situation, including the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to those in need.
My delegation also calls on other parties to the
conflict to restrict themselves from employing heavy
weapons and explosive munitions that have been
known to inflict untold misery, deaths and injuries to
civilians. As with the authorities, the parties should
also attend to the needs of civilians and allow access to
vital humanitarian aid. My delegation believes that the
opportunity for a political solution led by the Syrian
people still exists, and remains our only option for
putting an end to the conflict.
The issue of protecting civilians in armed conflict
is a multifaceted challenge. While States remain obliged
to protect civilians from harm and the atrocities of
conflict, other stakeholders, too, must do their utmost to
ensure compliance with and adherence to international
humanitarian and human-rights law. Malaysia upholds
the importance of resolutions 1738 (2006), 1894 (2009)
and 1910 (2010) for ensuring that civilians are protected
during armed conflicts. The Council can rest assured
that we will continue to do our part in that regard.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Thailand.
Mr. Bamrungphong (Thailand): I would first like
to thank Argentina for convening today’s open debate
on the important issue of the protection of civilians
in armed conflict, and for the comprehensive concept
note (S/2013/447, annex). I would also like to extend
our special thanks to the Secretary-General, the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and
the Director for International Law and Cooperation of

13-43092

S/PV.7019

the International Committee of the Red Cross for their
informative briefings.
The concept of the protection of civilians has a firm
foundation in international humanitarian law. However,
a shared understanding among all the actors involved is
key to its successful implementation. Thailand hopes
that this debate will provide us with an opportunity
to better understand the concept and discuss how to
translate it into effective action.
Killing, injuring or displacing innocent civilians in
situations of armed conflict is unacceptable, particularly
when they are deliberately targeted or subject to
blatant violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law. Thailand shares that concern and
therefore supports the efforts of the Security Council
and the international community to protect civilians.
There will never be legitimate reasons for targeted
attacks on civilians, but especially not when they are
for strategic military or political purposes. Thailand
calls on all parties to conflicts, including non-State
armed groups, to strictly uphold international humanrights and humanitarian law and to implement all the
relevant Security Council resolutions. The military
code of conduct and the principles of distinction,
proportionality and precaution in attacks must be
respected at all times and in all circumstances. In order
to ensure the safety of innocent populations, all parties
to an armed conflict must refrain from using civilian
premises.
However, we still regularly witness the violation of
international law and universal principles. In order to
combat such violations, the international community
must send a strong message to those who commit violence
against innocent people, especially the most vulnerable
groups, and must hold them accountable. At the national
level, Governments must raise awareness about respect
for human rights and the protection of civilians, put in
place human-rights mechanisms, strengthen judicial
systems and institutions and incorporate international
legal principles and the concept of the protection of
civilians into the curriculums of military academies.
In situations of armed conflict, host Governments
and all parties to a conflict must give particular attention
to humanitarian assistance. Timely and unimpeded
humanitarian access to affected civilian populations,
regardless of their social, ethnic or political affiliations,
is vital. It is essential that the international community
and the United Nations explore every possible means

of delivering aid effectively to affected areas. Host
Governments must shorten lengthy customs procedures
and work shoulder to shoulder with their partners, as
well as make full use of civil society networks, in order
to ensure that humanitarian supplies reach those in
distress. At the same time, humanitarian work must be
done in a transparent and neutral manner.
Thailand is also concerned about increasing
casualties among humanitarian actors and the
destruction of essential social facilities, particularly
hospitals, school and drinking-water resources.
Attacks on humanitarian actors and facilities are clear
violations of international humanitarian law. They are
unacceptable. Thailand calls on all parties to conflict to
ensure that humanitarian personnel and their facilities
are protected and their work facilitated.
Peacekeeping operations with a mandate to protect
represent important tools for protecting civilians
in armed conflicts. Peacekeepers must therefore be
well trained, with a knowledge of international law
and an understanding of other cultures. It is also
important that peacekeepers have clear mandates, clear
responsibilities, a clear chain of command and a clear
code of conduct on the protection of civilians under
specific circumstances, particularly when the use of
force is necessary to ensure the mission’s credibility
and success. Predeployment training must focus on all
such issues. The Council must also assess situations on
the ground and review the scope of mission mandates
on a regular basis.
No one should have to experience an armed conflict
or continue to fall victim to them. The best way to protect
civilians is to prevent conflict. I would therefore like to
reiterate Thailand’s continuing readiness to contribute
and render all necessary support to international
efforts to prevent conflict and promote the protection
of civilians.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Falouh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like to thank you, Madam President,
for organizing this important meeting. The protection
of civilians from the effects of war is at the heart of
international law. Experience shows us, unfortunately,
that the protection of civilians in areas that are theatres of
conflict and in difficulties is now being used selectively
and as a tool to serve interests that run counter to the
principles of international law. My delegation has seen

13-4309235

S/PV.7019

the concept paper that was circulated for today’s meeting
(S/2013/447, annex), and would like to emphasize the
following major points.
First and foremost, the protection of civilians
from the horrors of war should mean ending armed
conflicts by peaceful means. It therefore entails strict
compliance with the principles of international law and
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, which include the principles of sovereignty
and non-interference in the internal affairs of States.
Secondly, the primary responsibility for the
protection of civilians rests with the State in question.
Thirdly, the protection of civilians must not be
politicized or manipulated by making it an instrument
of foreign intervention or of efforts to effect regime
change, or in the interests of certain States alone. In
addition, the attempts of some member States of the
Security Council to impose their selective policies will
achieve nothing except further damage to the role the
Council is supposed to play according to the Charter.
Fourthly, with regard to the provision of
humanitarian assistance, my Government, in spite of
the economic war being waged against us, is doing its
utmost to meet the survival needs of its population. In
that respect, the Government of Syria has cooperated
with the various United Nations bodies, including
humanitarian assistance bodies and the International
Committee of the Red Cross. We have provided all
possible support, including by increasing the number
of non-governmental organizations working in Syria
so as to enable them to work and to assist the Syrian
people, in the framework of respect for the sovereignty
of Syria and under General Assembly resolution
46/182. However, the provision of basic necessities for
the people of Syria such as food, medicine and fuel
is hampered by the unilateral measures imposed on
our State, threatening the survival of our people. We
therefore call on the Council to act.
Fifthly, certain States continue to exploit the
suffering of Syrian refugees out of ignorance of the real
reasons that led them to seek refuge abroad, namely, the
terrorist acts perpetrated by certain armed groups. Also
being ignored is the negative behaviour on the part of
the States receiving Syrian refugees. That is why we
call on those States that are hosting Syrian refugees
to stop trading on their pain and suffering, cease their
inhumane treatment of such refugees and allow them to
return to their country.

36

Sixthly, the Government of Syria is exercising its
constitutional duties with respect to the building of a
State based on the rule of law and the fight against in
impunity. The Syrian judiciary is sparing no effort to
consider all cases brought before it; for example, the
national commission established to investigate the
situation in the country is continuing its efforts to bring
to justice all those who have committed crimes.
Despite all of that, it is regrettable to see that some
States are continuing to take advantage of this meeting
to reiterate their untruths regarding the situation in my
country. Even though we are against this, we would
reaffirm that the State of Syria more than any other
State is committed to the well-being of the Syrian
population. That is why we are carrying out our
constitutional duties in connection with the protection
of our people from the scourge of terrorism.
We are working for a return to peace and security,
even as some Member States continue to ignore the
terrorist acts targeting the people and the Government
of Syria. We ask that the Security Council live up to
its responsibilities; condemn the terrorism that is
victimizing Syria; and demand accountability on the
part of those States that are lending financial and
weapons-related assistance and providing refuge to
transnational terrorist groups, in flagrant violation of
international law, in particular that relating to counterterrorism. We ask that the Council force those States,
especially Qatar, Turkey and Saudi Arabia, to cease
their activities and withdraw their mercenaries from
Syrian territories.
This question has been the object of discussion in the
Council for 15 years now. During that time, the Council
must have heard hundreds of statements calling on
Israel to end its practices against the inhabitants of the
occupied Arab territories and the States of the region.
But the support given to Israel by permanent members
of the Council has demonstrated the fallacy of those
States’ claims and of the policies they are pursuing,
which are based on a double standard. As a result,
Israel believes that it is sheltered from accountability
and can continue its criminal policies and aggression,
which threaten international peace and security, and
undermine the principles and norms of international
law, international humanitarian law and human rights
law.
Israel’s policies, as we have seen in hundreds of
United Nations reports, involve acts of aggression,

13-43092

S/PV.7019

genocide and crimes against humanity, which require
that it resolutely be held accountable. My delegation
reaffirms the need to provide security and protection to
civilians living under Israeli occupation in the occupied
Syrian Golan and in other Arab territories and to put an
end to Israel’s aggressive practices.
In conclusion, consideration and analysis of the
situation prevailing in Syria must take place in a
very responsible, neutral and transparent manner, so
as to shed light on the realities on the ground — the
opposite of a narrow approach that would serve only
the interests of some parties. Therefore we reiterate
the need for the Council to support efforts to promote
a political settlement of the situation in Syria, under
resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012) and the Geneva
communiqué.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Guerber (Switzerland): I am pleased to take
the floor in my capacity as chair of the Group of Friends
on the Protection of Civilians and speak on behalf of
the delegations of Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil,
France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, Norway,
Portugal, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and
Uruguay.
Ensuring the protection of civilians in armed
conflict is a task that requires our constant attention.
Unfortunately, the core challenges identified in the last
three reports of the Secretary-General have not been
sufficiently addressed. Parties to conflict too often fail
to comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law, which requires all parties to conflict
to spare the civilian population from the effects
of hostilities. In particular, increasing numbers of
humanitarian workers, including medical personnel,
have been deliberately harmed or even killed recently;
there is thus a clear need to find ways to enhance their
safety and security. At the same time, humanitarian
access must be maintained and negotiated with all
relevant parties in order to reach those most in need.
Parties to conflict must allow and facilitate the rapid
and unimpeded passage and distribution of humanitarian
relief for civilians in need, in full compliance with
the guiding principles of humanitarian assistance
enshrined in General Assembly resolution 46/182. We
therefore consider progress on the question of access as
highly urgent, as the imposition of constraints is often
done in an arbitrary manner. More must be done, within

the framework of the United Nations Charter, to ensure
accountability but also prevent grave instances of
deliberate delays or denials of access for humanitarian
operations, as well as attacks against humanitarian
workers.
In that regard, we recall that attacks on humanitarian
workers constitute a war crime under article 8 (e) (iii)
of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) and that accountability and legal protection are
therefore stronger with an increasing membership in
the ICC.
There is a lot to discuss, and the fact that this is the
third open debate under this agenda item this year so
far is encouraging. I therefore wish to thank the United
States presidency for having held a debate on the
protection of journalists last month (see S/PV.7003), as
well as the current Argentine presidency for keeping the
protection of civilians high on the Security Council’s
agenda.
To ensure a meaningful discussion on the protection
of civilians, a comprehensive humanitarian and human
rights perspective is essential, and we welcome the
diversity of expertise represented around the table
today. This is of particular importance at a time of
internal review processes that aim at strengthening the
protection architecture of the United Nations. With a
view to maintaining the momentum, we very much look
forward to having a further substantive debate on the
basis of the next report of the Secretary-General, which
is due in November.
(spoke in French)
I will now make a brief statement in my national
capacity. A longer version of my statement has been
distributed in the Chamber.
I would like to thank the Argentine presidency
of the Security Council for holding this debate. This
year we are celebrating the 150th anniversary of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC),
which was founded in 1863 by a group of Genevan
citizens. During the high-level week of the General
Assembly in September, Switzerland will host a highlevel breakfast, aimed at addressing the issues of
protection of civilians and humanitarian aid.
Respect for the law regarding protection varies
considerably from one context to another. Switzerland
notes that its joint initiative with the ICRC to enhance
respect for international humanitarian law is generating

13-4309237

S/PV.7019

positive momentum. Indeed, a growing number of
States are participating in substantive discussions
within the framework of that process in Geneva.
We remain very concerned by reports of serious
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights in Syria. We call on all parties to fully comply
with their obligations, to put an end to the violence
and to resolve the conflict through negotiation and
dialogue, as laid out in the Geneva communiqué of
30 June 2012. Given the extent of the violations and
the number of victims in Syria, a holistic approach will
be required in order to address the victims’ right to
know, right to justice, right to reparation and guarantee
of non-recurrence, within the framework of a political
solution to the conflict.
In many areas, access to victims and affected
populations remains one of the most complex challenges.
Despite the existing legal framework, humanitarian
actors face increasing difficulty in gaining access to
those affected. That is why Switzerland has started
drafting two publications, in conjunction with the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and the ICRC, aimed at supporting humanitarian actors
in their efforts to obtain access to victims of armed
conflict and disseminating widely the existing legal
framework that applies to humanitarian access issues.
Finally, as a member of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group (ACT), a
transregional group of 22 States whose objective is to
improve the working methods of the Security Council,
Switzerland welcomes the fact that open debates are held
regularly, particularly on the protection of civilians.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Deputy Head of the Delegation of the
European Union.
Mr. Vrailas (spoke in French): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union and its member
States. The candidate countries the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia,
the countries of the Stabilization and Association
Process and potential candidates Albania and Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with this
declaration.
Before beginning, I would like to add my voice to
all those who have today paid tribute to the memory
of the victims of the bombing of the Canal Hotel in

38

Baghdad in 2003, which killed 22 United Nations staff
members, including the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Iraq, Sergio Vieira de Mello. My
thoughts are also with all our other United Nations
colleagues who have perished while carrying out their
mission. I would like to thank the Secretary-General
and his team for the very moving ceremony that they
held this morning.
I wish also to thank the Secretary-General, the
Under-Secretary-General, Ms. Amos, the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Ms. Pillay, and the representative of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Spoerri, for their
statements. We note that Argentina has chosen this
important topic for an open debate in view of the
upcoming report by the Secretary-General.
The European Union (EU) is firmly committed
to promoting the implementation of international
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law
worldwide. Respect for those laws is crucial to ensuring
the protection of civilians in armed conflicts and to
providing help to victims in the most efficient manner.
The frequent failure of parties to armed conflicts to
comply with their obligations is of profound concern
to the EU.
The EU has adopted guidelines on promoting
respect for international humanitarian law, setting out
the EU view on the scope of international humanitarian
law and listing the tasks the EU must undertake to
improve its implementation. The EU monitors situations
where international humanitarian law is applicable and
recommends actions to promote compliance. The EU
makes full use of all the tools at its disposal, including
political dialogue and processes and public statements
to that effect.
At the 31st International Conference of the Red
Cross and Red Crescent, held in 2011, member States
undertook substantial commitments concerning
international humanitarian law. We would note that
one such commitment was a promise by all member
States to consider ratifying all the core international
humanitarian law instruments to which they were not
yet party by the next conference, in 2015. Work to
implement those commitments is under way.
Significant steps have been taken to implement the
new guidelines, in terms of all member States ratifying
core international humanitarian law instruments and
their accession to the Rome Statute of the International

13-43092

S/PV.7019

Criminal Court (ICC). The EU encourages those
member States that have not yet ratified Additional
Protocols I, II and III to the Geneva Conventions to do
so. We also call on all States to accept and recognize
the competence of the International Humanitarian FactFinding Commission.
Arms control and the fight against the indiscriminate
and disproportionate use of weapons constitute an
important pillar of international humanitarian law. The
Arms Trade Treaty (resolution 67/234 B), which was
adopted by the General Assembly, will be a significant
contribution to the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts. All EU member States have already signed
the Treaty, and ratifications are under way. We believe
that, by ensuring that conventional arms are traded
in a responsible way, the Arms Trade Treaty can
reduce gender-based violence and improve the lives
of hundreds of thousands of men, women and children
around the world. The EU encourages all States
Members of the United Nations to sign the Treaty
and will actively support its early entry into force and
proper implementation.
The European Union is also satisfied with the
significant progress made in the fight against the
suffering and casualties caused by anti-personnel mines
and cluster munitions. Considering the tremendous
humanitarian and development challenges still posed
by such weapons, it is clear that much more remains to
be done.
We continue to be very preoccupied by the
humanitarian impact of the use of such weapons in
densely populated areas. We take note of the view
expressed by the International Committee of the Red
Cross recalling that the use of explosive weapons with a
wide-impact area must be avoided in densely populated
areas.
Unfortunately, it is often women and children who
suffer the most in armed conflict. In particular, the
use of rape and sexual violence as a method of warfare
is one of the most serious violations of international
humanitarian law. While some positive steps have been
taken at both the national and international levels in
holding perpetrators to account, more efforts to address
this issue must be pursued.
Despite all these initiatives, it is clear that
international humanitarian law is violated all too
frequently. For this reason, the EU is closely following
the initiative by Switzerland and the ICRC on the

possibility of establishing a mechanism to improve
compliance with international humanitarian law and
welcomes the initiative to study the feasibility of such
a mechanism.
Strengthening accountability when violations
occur is a crucial element in encouraging the parties
to armed conflict to comply with their international
obligations. National Governments have the primary
responsibility to provide accountability for violations
of international humanitarian and human rights law.
Where they fail to take the necessary steps in that
regard, the ICC is a court of last resort. The Security
Council has an important role to play, given that it has
a global mandate to make referrals to the Court. The
EU is a firm supporter of the ICC and believes it plays
an essential role in promoting respect for international
humanitarian law and human rights.
We must remember that, when mass atrocities
occur, both the State in question and the international
community are responsible for ensuring that all peoples
are protected against such actions. The principle of the
responsibility to protect makes clear that Governments
have an obligation to protect their own populations,
while the international community has an obligation
to assist Governments in doing so and to react when
Governments fail in their obligation to protect their
civilians.
Humanitarian activities face a number of challenges
today that are contributing to the shrinking of the
humanitarian space and jeopardizing the core principles
of humanity, neutrality, independence and impartiality
that underpin humanitarian work. Swift, safe and
unimpeded humanitarian access is a precondition
for undertaking proper assessments of humanitarian
needs, for the implementation and monitoring of relief
operations and for ensuring appropriate follow-up.
However, humanitarian access remains the most
significant challenge for humanitarian organizations,
often owing to political considerations, administrative
and physical impediments and restrictions or securityrelated concerns. In that context, the EU urges all parties
to conflicts to grant humanitarian organizations rapid,
safe and unimpeded access to the affected population
and notes that any arbitrary denial of access constitutes
a violation of international humanitarian law.
Better implementation of existing laws is needed
to respond to the challenges, in particular the
Geneva Conventions and their Additional Protocols.

13-4309239

S/PV.7019

Furthermore, more information and training on
international humanitarian law needs to be provided.
Finally, innovative ways to induce all parties to armed
conflicts to comply with international humanitarian
laws are needed.
In that regard, the EU has been funding and
supporting the following activities: international
humanitarian law training programmes that reach out to
a broad audience, in particular non-State armed groups,
which usually have little information on any laws;
the ICRC’s international humanitarian law training
and dissemination for military and security forces
and armed non-State actors in key conflict-affected
countries, as well as activities aimed at increasing the
capacities of humanitarian workers in advocating for
international humanitarian law. It is noteworthy that
international humanitarian law, human rights, gender
equality and child protection are at the core of training
programmes that the EU’s crisis management missions
provide, for example, to security forces in Mali and
Somalia.
Let me conclude by refering to the very worrying
situations in many countries with regard to the
protection of civilians and to the special attention
needed by vulnerable groups, such as children and
persons with disabilities. The EU is alarmed by the
rapid deterioration in the humanitarian situation in
Syria and demands that all parties, in particular the
Syrian authorities, ensure immediate, regular, safe and
unfettered access for aid organizations to those in need
on all sides of the conflict. All those responsible for
atrocities and human rights violations and abuses must
be held accountable.
In Mali, the EU welcomes the deployment of
human rights monitors and urges the Government to
firmly commit to the fight against impunity and to hold
all those who violate human rights and international
humanitarian law accountable for their actions.
With regard to Somalia, the EU expresses concern
at the ongoing humanitarian crisis and its impact on the
people of the country, and underlines the importance
of providing life-saving assistance to vulnerable
populations.
In the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the recent fighting underscores the need for
urgent action aimed at providing safe and unhindered
humanitarian access to affected populations and making

40

all parties responsible for human rights violations
accountable.
Such conflicts demonstrate how much more work
is needed to improve compliance with international
humanitarian law, to ensure that affected populations
have access to humanitarian assistance and to strengthen
accountability for serious violations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lithuania.
Mrs. Kazragiené (Lithuania): I thank Argentina
for holding this important debate, and the briefers for
their valuable input.
Lithuania aligns itself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union.
As today we are commemorating the tenth
anniversary of the deadly attack against the United
Nations Mission in Iraq, let me stress the importance
of and our shared responsibility for ensuring the safety
and security of all those — United Nations personnel,
humanitarian aid and medical workers — who serve in
order to safeguard peace and security.
I would like to focus on two issues, namely,
compliance with and strengthening accountability for
violations of international humanitarian, human rights
and refugee law.
As a State party to all international humanitarian
law instruments, including the Geneva Conventions, its
Additional Protocols and treaties limiting or prohibiting
the use of certain types of weapons, Lithuania strongly
believes that international humanitarian law is an
indispensable tool in protecting all persons affected by
armed conflict. The Lithuanian national commission
on the implementation of international humanitarian
law, established in 2001, coordinates the promotion
and dissemination of international humanitarian law
to the military, the police and the general public. As
part of their effort to protect civilians, the Lithuanian
armed forces focus both on limiting military actions
in operational areas and on improving the situation of
civilians by providing medical care and undertaking
demining activities and gender-related training for
local populations. Lithuania regularly supports projects
related to the destruction of small arms, antipersonnel
mines, cluster munitions and unexploded ordnance.
Lithuania believes that the Arms Trade Treaty will
help to reduce human suffering by ensuring a more

13-43092

S/PV.7019

responsible arms trade. We were glad to be part of
successful efforts advocating for strong norms aimed at
preventing arms transfers that could be used to commit
or facilitate violations of international humanitarian
law, in particular attacks directed against civilians,
gender-based violence and violence against women and
children.
Lithuania strongly believes that accountability is
not only about bringing justice when compliance with
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee
law has not been observed, but also about sending a
message of deterrence to all potential perpetrators that
such lapses in compliance will not be tolerated.
Credible information on violations of international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law should be
both a prerequisite and a trigger for efforts to ensure
accountability. Lithuania attaches great importance to
the timely recourse to and firm reliance on fact-finding
mechanisms. Given the independent and permanent
nature of the International Humanitarian Fact-Finding
Commission, we call on all States to consider accepting
its oversight and making use of its good offices,
including in cases of non-international armed conflicts.
The primary obligation to ensure accountability
and compliance lies undoubtedly with national
jurisdictions. Therefore, in the long-term, investment
in strengthening their capacities to investigate
and prosecute individual perpetrators is the key.
International justice and reconciliation mechanisms
were designed to support and complement such national
efforts in bridging the immediate gaps. The Security
Council would also benefit from streamlined practices
in its response to alleged violations of international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law. Lithuania
strongly believes that the Council’s powers to refer
situations to the International Criminal Court provide
a unique opportunity to make accountability applicable
all around.
The role and essential rights of victims must not be
overlooked when considering accountability. Lithuania
welcomes the trends in modern international criminal
justice that empower victims and bring retributive
and restorative justice closer together. Again, we see
the Rome Statute as an example of how the traditional
approach of retributive justice might be supplemented
by two distinct forms of victim redress, namely,
reparations ordered by the Court and support provided
to victims independently by the Trust Fund.

Lithuania welcomes the work of the informal
expert’s group on the protection of civilians as an
important forum for keeping the Council informed of
protection developments on the ground, and encourages
the continuation of that practice and exploring ways to
make greater use of the Group.
Civilians still represent the vast majority of
victims in armed conflicts. Given the changing nature
of the concerns related to the protection, the Security
Council has to play a role in finding adequate solutions.
There will always be some disagreement within the
international community on how to respond to a given
situation, but when tens of thousands of civilian lives
are threatened, the world expects the Security Council
to unite and act.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uganda.
Mr. Nduhuura (Uganda): Uganda appreciates the
initiative of Argentina to hold this high-level open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
We also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, High
Commissioner for Human Rights Navanethem Pillay
and International Committee of the Red Cross Director
Philip Spoerri for their instructive briefings.
We welcome the concerted efforts aimed at
ensuring the protection of civilians, but the fact that so
many civilians continue to lose their lives while others
are subjected to human rights violations in situations of
armed conflict, shows that a lot still remains to be done.
My delegation would like to stress that the primary
responsibility for the protection of civilians lies with
national authorities and actors, who should fulfil their
obligations and responsibilities under international
humanitarian and human rights law.
I wish to emphasize three points that we consider
vital in the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
First, it is essential for the Security Council, as well
as regional and subregional organizations, to ensure
that greater efforts are directed towards preventing and
resolving conflicts, which necessitate the protection of
civilians.
Secondly, the role of national Governments, which
bear the primary responsibility for the protection
of civilians, should be respected and supported in a
way that upholds the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, without undermining the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the countries concerned. We

13-4309241

S/PV.7019

would not like to see situations where the noble goal of
protecting civilians is used as a pretext for interfering
in the internal affairs of Member States or for pursuing
other interests.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict should
be a collective effort to ensure strict observance of the
standards and principles of international humanitarian
law and human rights, especially with regard to
women and children. In that regard, we welcome the
incorporation of the protection of civilians in the
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping missions, and
call for the effective implementation of that mandate,
particularly in situations where armed groups such as
the Lord’s Resistance Army continue to commit grave
atrocities against civilians in the Democratic Republic
of Congo and Central African Republic.
Thirdly, in conclusion, the Security Council
and the international community should continue to
support efforts undertaken by national actors, as well
as regional and subregional organizations such as the
African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, the International Conference of the Great
Lakes Region, the Southern African Development
Community and the Economic Community of West
African States to settle conflicts on the continent
peacefully through negotiation, dialogue and mediation.
While we stress the need to end impunity and bring
perpetrators to justice, it is also important to promote
reconciliation for long-term stability.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Allow me, at the outset,
to thank you, Madam President, for your presence and
for convening this open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict,x) as well as for your wellrounded concept paper on the agenda item before us
(S/20123/447, annex).
The protection of civilians in armed conflict is a
very important topic for Indonesia. While the Security
Council has considered this topic for more than a
decade, in recent years the international community
has witnessed a growing number of civilian deaths,
including of women, children and the elderly. We wish
to thank the Secretary-General, the High Commissioner
for Human Rights, the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator and the Director for International Law
and Cooperation of the International Committee of the

42

Red Cross for their respective useful briefings, which
highlight progress on the protection of civilians and the
persistent challenges during armed conflicts.
This meeting is particularly timely as today we
hold an annual memorial service in memory of United
Nations personnel who lost their lives in the line of duty
in the past year and for fallen United Nations staff as
well as survivors of the horrific bombing in Baghdad
10 years ago.
We must explore how improvements can be brought
about in order to have tangible results in protecting
civilians and how we can galvanize actions across the
spectrum to ensure that basic human rights, especially
the right to life of civilians in armed conflict, are
protected. While noting the progress made in setting
up the international normative framework, and the
international experiences and best practices on this
issue that are increasingly being provided, we concur
with the Secretary-General’s observations on the need
to translate the normative framework and commitments
into concrete improvements for the protection of
civilians on the ground.
It is therefore vital to make progress in effectively
addressing the five core challenges identified in
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2012/376). In that
regard, my delegation would like to share some of its
observations as follows.
First, on the strengthening of compliance with
international humanitarian law, human rights law
and refugee law, Indonesia was pleased to support,
together with your country, Madam President, as well
as Norway, Austria and Uganda, the Conference held
in Oslo earlier this year on reclaiming the protection
of civilians under international humanitarian law.
Prior to the Conference, Indonesia, together with
Norway, hosted a regional workshop on international
humanitarian law and the protection of civilians in
Jakarta in November 2010. Participants at that workshop
included representatives from 12 countries of the
region, the International Committee of the Red Cross,
academics, militaries, non-governmental organizations
and national human rights institutions. The workshop
adopted a co-chair’s summary, among others, stressing
the applicability of international humanitarian law
to all parties to armed conflict, irrespective of the
underlying cause of conflict, and noted that a serious
gap remained between protection that civilians are
entitled to under international law and the reality that

13-43092

S/PV.7019

they face on the ground. International humanitarian
law, particularly common article 3, also establishes a
comprehensive framework for the protection of civilians
in armed conflict obliging all parties, both State and
non-State armed actors, to protect civilians from harm
resulting from hostilities. While compliance with
humanitarian and human rights law as well as refugee
law by armed State actors can in general be monitored
through various existing modalities, there are indeed
challenges when it comes to non-State armed groups. It
is widely understood that there are limits as concerns
State-centric international instruments in addressing
protection vis-à-vis those groups.
In that regard, efforts to enhance compliance with
international humanitarian law principles by non-State
armed groups should be further developed. Efforts
such as the use of unilateral declarations, special
arrangements between Governments and non-State
armed groups and deeds of commitment have been
reported to be effective tools for engagement and to
hold armed groups accountable for their actions.
Secondly, ensuring safe passage and unfettered
access to humanitarian assistance is fundamental
to enhancing access to affected populations. While
it is the primary responsibility of the Government
concerned to provide the necessary guarantees for
access to humanitarian assistance, all warring parties,
including armed non-State actors, must shoulder
that responsibility. All parties to conflict must abide
by the rule of distinction, as the most fundamental
principle of international humanitarian law, which is
essential to ensuring the protection of civilians. We
are concerned by the challenges to the application of
that rule, especially in a situation where attacks take
place in densely populated areas and where the nature
of conflict becomes asymmetric, compounded by the
use of new technologies such as cyberwarfare, drones
and explosive weapons.
The growing involvement of private security
companies in armed conflict also brings about new
challenges, particularly when parties do not always
clearly distinguish themselves from the civilian
population and intermingle with civilians, increasing
the risk of civilian harm. We welcome the discussion
held on this issue at the recent session of the Working
Group on the Use of Mercenaries, which stressed,
among other things, that the use of private security
companies by the United Nations creates potential legal
and reputational risks to the Organization, especially

in the context of peacekeeping operations and other
United Nations missions. As Blue Helmets have been
playing a critical role in assisting host countries
and humanitarian actors, mixing them with private
contractors may pose risks not only to civilians but also
to the safety and security of humanitarian actors and
the peacekeepers themselves.
Thirdly, with regard to strengthening accountability
for serious violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law, it is crucial that there be greater
focus on developing effective tools and supporting and
strengthening national capacities and resources.
The role of Member States in promoting compliance
and accountability, including through domestic
legislation and legal means, is necessary to prevent
violations. In that regard, every State has a responsibility
not only to undertake the requisite national steps but to
support the furthering of a global culture that ascribes
the highest importance to the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts and respect for their human rights.
Finally, Indonesia underlines that nothing is
more dreadful than allowing civilians, particularly
women and children, to be the casualties and collateral
damage in armed conflict. Bolstering adherence to
international humanitarian and human rights law
with enhanced political will and partnership among
countries, backed by a solid United Nations response
to human catastrophes, is essential to strengthening the
protection of civilians. Let us all exercise our respective
responsibilities fully to that end.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Colombia deems it very appropriate that the Council is
continuing to reflect on experiences and good practices
in connection with States’ commitment to protect
civilians in armed conflict. This issue is particularly
relevant to our country in that it has had to deal for
nearly five decades with illegal armed groups that
have engaged in terrorist activities and attacks against
civilian populations.
Colombia restates its commitment to human
rights, international humanitarian law and refugee
law for the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
As a demonstration of its commitment, Colombia is
preparing a major high-level international conference
on assistance to victims, to be held next year. That

13-4309243

S/PV.7019

conference is intended to establish synergies between
the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel
Mines and on Their Destruction, the Convention on
Cluster Munitions, Protocol V on explosive remnants of
war and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities in order to deal with the issue of assistance
to victims adopting a holistic approach.
We emphasize that international assistance in this
field must conform to the conditions and principles of
humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence,
as enshrined in General Assembly resolution 46/182.
Abiding by those principles while appropriately
channelling collective efforts in support of national
authorities takes on particular importance when such
cooperation is taking place with countries that have
democratic institutions and legitimately constituted
Governments. My delegation would also like to
reiterate how important it is for United Nations bodies
to have clear information regarding the efforts of
national Governments in terms of the protection of
civilians, in establishing the priorities of their work,
and in informing the United Nations about their
respective situations. Verified, objective, balanced and
impartial information includes the identification of
shortcomings and challenges but also the identification
and recognition of the progress made in each country.
Moreover, while we understand that compliance with
international humanitarian law by illegal armed groups
is essential for the protection of the civilian population,
nonetheless we feel that contacts with United Nations
organs and agencies does not necessarily guarantee that
their actions will conform with existing legislation on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
For that reason, the international community
must bring the requisite pressure to bear to ensure
that such groups repudiate violence and pursue their
objectives through the institutional channels offered by
a democratic State. Colombia therefore stresses that the
appropriateness of such approaches should be analysed
on a case-by-case basis; it is certainly a matter that
should be decided by the States involved in a sovereign,
autonomous and independent manner.
Following the invitation in the concept note
(S/2013/447) prepared by the presidency, I should like
to reiterate that Colombia deems essential measures
aimed at prevention, protection and the guarantee of
non-repetition for victims in situations of armed conflict.
My Government believes that the rights of victims must

44

be guaranteed and reflected in assistance, attention and
reparation measures. We are therefore establishing a
risk map as a means of identifying organizations and
communities at risk, including women’s organizations.
We are also establishing a network of observatories
for human rights and international humanitarian
law. We are training public officials and members of
the forces of law and order in matters relating to the
rights of victims to truth, justice and full reparation;
women’s rights; the implementation of a differentiated
approach; sexual violence; and the need to coordinate
and publicize the various protection programmes.
We also believe that to promote the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, it is necessary to devise
and implement measures that are aimed, inter alia, at
making the administration of justice more flexible,
ensuring coherence among transitional justice
structures, guaranteeing equitable and full reparation
to victims, and prosecuting perpetrators. Colombia has
initiated a peace process based on Law No. 1 of 2012,
which guarantees that, when an armed conflict ends,
perpetrators of crimes against humanity will be held
accountable and the rights of victims upheld.
We express our thanks for today’s very timely
debate today and wish to conclude by stating that
the measures taken in our country reflect our deep
conviction of the need to devise responses and solutions
that make it possible to protect the civilian population
and to achieve national reconciliation and peace for the
benefit of all.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.
Mr. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): May
I begin by thanking you, Madam President, for
having convened today’s open debate on this very
important issue. We also thank you for the concept
paper (S/2013/447) that you circulated, emphasizing
different aspects of this issue. Our thanks go also to the
Secretary-General, the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator and the
International Committee of the Red Cross for their
important statements.
The continuing consideration of this matter by
the Security Council and the adoption of decisions,
resolutions and presidential statements reflect the
importance that the international community attaches
to protecting civilians in armed conflict. There can

13-43092

S/PV.7019

be no doubt that international instruments on this
subject have contributed to promoting human rights,
preserving the dignity of humankind and protecting
rights against all violations. Thus human rights have
become internationally recognized rights, and their
flouting is a violation of international human rights
law, international humanitarian law and refugee law.
We have made great progress in terms of our
respective international instruments, including
provisions of a deterrent nature, sanctions and
tangible measures, as well as the handing down by the
International Criminal Court and other tribunals of
sentences for crimes against humanity. However, we
are witnessing grave violations that can no longer be
tolerated or accepted by the human conscience or the
international community.
In the light of the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations that lay down the mandate of the
Security Council and the General Assembly, and in
the light of resolutions on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, the Security Council has endeavoured to
ensure respect for international standards guaranteeing
human rights and international humanitarian law. The
Council has also sought to assign responsibilities, and
resolutions have been adopted under Chapter VII of
the Charter with a view to putting an end to human
rights violations by means of buffers, through the
establishment of international tribunals to prosecute
the perpetrators of the gravest crimes, consistent
with international human rights law and international
humanitarian law.
Along the same lines, humanitarian concerns
are based on regulations in this sphere. The four
Geneva Conventions of 1949, and specifically the
Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the Protection
of Civilian Persons in Time of War, emphasize the
protection of civilians in the context of domestic
conflict. The four Geneva Conventions restate not only
respect for international humanitarian law but also
call on the international community to take tangible
measures. Article I of the four Conventions calls not
only for respect of international humanitarian law by
all States parties, but also calls on parties to ensure
respect for that law. In that context, we have elaborated
international instruments, including the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and other international
instruments, aimed at putting an end to human rights
violations. We have also developed refugee law.

The General Assembly and the Human Rights
Council have adopted numerous resolutions pertaining
to the humanitarian situation of civilians in Syria
following the grave violations perpetrated by the Syrian
regime against its people. That regime is determined to
use the security solution to muzzle its people. We have
for weeks heard from Paulo Sérgio Pinheiro, Chair of
the Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on the Syrian Arab Republic, about the situation there.
According to the report of that body, crimes against
humanity and grave violations of human rights continue
to be perpetrated in Syria, and this in conjunction with
a deterioration of the humanitarian situation, because
the regime refuses to grant access to humanitarian aid
for civilians. Moreover, the Commission headed by
Mr. Pinheiro has documented violations by the Syrian
regime of international humanitarian law, refugee law
and international human rights law.
There can be no doubt that the atrocities suffered
by the Syrian people are grave and serious violations
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. Those violations also represent a
serious breach of the obligations under the four Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and various Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 1894 (2009), which
calls on parties to conflict to fully implement all
relevant decisions of the Security Council and to take
all required steps to protect civilians and meet their
basic needs.
In the light of the grave current situation, the people
of Syria, who are unarmed, are looking to the Security
Council to take effective measures to put an end to
the grave violations of human rights and international
human rights law from which they are suffering and
to protect the people of Syria, provide them with
humanitarian assistance, and allow displaced persons
to return home.
The perpetrators of violations of international
humanitarian law and violations of human rights law
are ignoring the grave consequences of their acts.
They are failing to respect existing international
instruments, despite the fact that they are respected by
all other countries. The Council’s paralysis has seriously
damaged the profile of the United Nations and sends the
wrong message to the perpetrators of those violations,
who feel encouraged to continue along this same path.
That paralysis and the fact that measures cannot be
taken to protect civilians means that the Council has
failed to take action and is unable to deal with the

13-4309245

S/PV.7019

current humanitarian fallout. My country therefore
reiterates its support for the presidential statements and
resolutions adopted by the Security Council to protect
civilians, which seek to introduce effective measures
aimed at putting an end to the suffering of those people
pursuant to internationally recognized instruments,
including international humanitarian law, international
human rights law and refugee law. We restate our
respect for the rule of law and the aspirations of all
peoples and their choices.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Estonia.
Mr. Kolga (Estonia): At the outset, I should like to
join others in thanking the presidency for organizing this
open debate. I see it as a sign of the Security Council’s
continued commitment to addressing the impact and
consequences of armed conflict on civilians.
Estonia fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union, but I
should like to make some additional remarks. The full
version of our statement will be distributed.
Unfortunately, despite the Security Council’s focus
and recurring debates on this issue, the reality remains
bleak. Civilians continue to account for the vast majority
of casualties in armed conflict, parties to conflict
frequently fail to comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law to protect civilians, and
accountability for those crimes is, to a large degree,
missing. Estonia reiterates its concern that women and
children are the ones often most severely affected by
conflict and that rape is continuously used as a method
of war.
Humanitarian access is a prerequisite for
humanitarian actors so that they can reach people in
need. Regrettably, access is frequently delayed, impeded
or denied. Estonia joins the Secretary-General in his
call for consistent engagement with non-State armed
groups as well, so as to achieve improved compliance
with international human rights and humanitarian
law and gain safe humanitarian access. For example,
in Syria, access to people in conflict-affected areas
remains severely hindered by the Government as well
as by the armed opposition. Estonia urges all parties to
the conflict in Syria to support humanitarian workers so
as to enable them to reach all people in need, wherever
they are in their country.

46

Not only do States bear the primary responsibility
for ensuring the protection of civilians, it is States
that are principally responsible for investigating and
prosecuting those suspected of having committed
serious crimes of international concern. But national
investigations and prosecutions of atrocity crimes
remain rare. It is therefore of the utmost importance
that States encourage parties to comply with
international humanitarian law, support and assist
those in need and investigate and prosecute crimes
against international humanitarian law. Such support
can be provided by helping States adopt the necessary
national legislation for such prosecutions. Where
States fail to take the necessary steps, the international
community, collectively, is responsible for ensuring
accountability through international criminal justice
mechanisms. Therefore, in addition to strengthening
domestic legislation, States that have not done so yet
should ratify the Rome Statute and cooperate with the
International Criminal Court (ICC).
Estonia encourages the Security Council to play
a more proactive role in ensuring an appropriate
international response, including continued use of its
ability to refer situations to the ICC. The Council has
already — twice — referred situations to the Court
with a view to ensuring accountability for serious
crimes, thus extending the reach of the Court. However,
a referral alone is not enough to ensure accountability.
The Court lacks its own enforcement mechanisms and
in that regard is fully dependent upon State cooperation.
Continued engagement, support and follow-up by the
Security Council in an efficient and vigorous manner
are therefore indispensable.
A prime example of where the Security Council
can put its words into action is Syria, where war
crimes, crimes against humanity and gross violations
of human rights have for too long been a daily reality.
No convincing domestic efforts have been made to
investigate those crimes or bring those responsible
to justice. Therefore, a referral to justice at the
international level is necessary.
International commissions of inquiry and factfinding missions are additional valuable mechanisms for
verifying and investigating allegations. It is important
to link fact-finding bodies with judicial processes in
order to ensure accountability.
Before concluding, allow me to stress that a sharper
focus is needed on supporting the victims of serious

13-43092

S/PV.7019

crimes. The protection of civilians is a measure aimed
at ensuring that innocent people are not subjected to
harm, but, where such protections fail, we must at
the very least ensure that ample support is provided.
The Rome Statute’s expansive victim participation
and reparations framework constitute a milestone
in international criminal justice. The reparations
envisioned in the Statute, including through the Trust
Fund for Victims, seek to provide reparations to as
wide a group of affected people and communities as
possible. Successful investigations and prosecutions
assist in restoring dignity to victims by acknowledging
their suffering and help to create a historical record
that protects against those who will seek to deny that
atrocities occurred.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Mukerji (India): Let me begin by thanking you,
Madam President, and your delegation for organizing
today’s debate on the important issue of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. We also thank all the
briefers in this debate for their very valuable inputs.
It bears recalling that the Security Council has been
considering the protection of civilians as a thematic
subject since 1999. The topic has also become a key focus
in many resolutions, including some that are countryspecific and relate to United Nations peacekeeping
missions. However, the sad fact remains that civilians
continue to suffer disproportionately during armed
conflicts. We therefore hope that today’s debate and
the comprehensive concept note (S/2013/447, annex)
prepared by your delegation, Madam President, will
contribute to the evolving discourse on strengthening
the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
India has consistently supported full compliance
with the applicable international humanitarian laws by
all parties to an armed conflict. We believe that a critical
requirement in that context relates to the capacities of
national institutions in situations of armed conflict
and the need to strengthen them. Obviously, capacitybuilding of key national institutions, including in the
security and justice sectors, needs to be adequately
resourced. It is important that the international
community, including the United Nations, step up to
the plate and partner with national authorities so as to
build and strengthen the capacity of State organs.
Today, as we mark World Humanitarian Day, we
must emphasize that adequate resourcing is also an

imperative for United Nations peacekeeping missions,
which are now also being charged with mandates for the
protection of civilians. We must also hold accountable
those who target United Nations peacekeepers, who are
responsible for protecting civilians in their theatre of
operations.
Moreover, efforts at peacebuilding should be
initiated right at the beginning, and the cause of the armed
conflict addressed through national reconciliation and
inclusive political processes, while giving all sections
of society a stake in peaceful coexistence.
The need to ensure humanitarian access to
populations affected by armed conflict cannot be
overstated, and States must endeavour to facilitate
such access. However, humanitarian actors must also
ensure that their activities do not provide legitimacy
or operational space for terrorist or armed groups.
Terrorists and illegal armed groups, which often bear
the primary responsibility for attacks against civilians,
should be held accountable for such attacks.
Security Council action must be based on full
respect for the Charter of the United Nations, including
the sovereignty and integrity of Member States. Insofar
as issues of impunity are concerned, we believe
that a lasting solution is not in the creation of more
international or regional institutions but in building
national institutions through capacity-building efforts
so that they can function consistently with the rule of
law.
In conclusion, I should like to reiterate our
consistent view that the protection of civilians is
primarily a national responsibility that becomes even
more important in an armed conflict. It is our belief
that contributions to national capacity building rather
than intervention mechanisms should be the priority of
the Security Council.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.
Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Belgium associates itself fully with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union and the
statement delivered by the representative of Switzerland
on behalf of the Group of Friends on the Protection of
Civilians.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General and
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, Ms. Pillay, and the Under-Secretary-General

13-4309247

S/PV.7019

for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Ms. Amos, as well as Mr. Spoerri of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, for their
statements.
Just recently, the indiscriminate bombing of
Syria’s most densely populated city was confirmed,
without a shadow of a doubt. The destruction of Aleppo
has, unfortunately, been one of the many tragedies
of the Syrian conflict. In that particular context, the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts is at the heart
of my country’s concerns. I would like to thank the
Argentine President of the Council for making it the
topic of today’s debate.
In his report of 2009 (S/2009/277), the SecretaryGeneral specifically pinpointed five challenges that
have to do with the topic of today’s meeting, three of
which are linked more specifically to today’s debate. In
my national capacity, I would like to say a few things
about them, specifically with regard to the situation in
Syria,
First of all, with regard to respect for the rules of
international humanitarian law, the then President of
the Security Council, in his statement at the end of the
debate in February (see S/PV.6917), reminded each one
of the parties of their duty to comply with the provisions
of international humanitarian law, human rights and
the rights of refugees. During hostilities, parties to
a conflict cannot, under any circumstances, attack
non-combatants. They must display proportionality,
taking all the measures necessary to protect the civilian
population. Indiscriminate bombings of densely
populated urban areas and many other actions have
shown that up until now, mainly in Syria, the Council’s
measures have remained a dead letter and that they
must be strongly reaffirmed.
Secondly, on the subject of humanitarian access, any
victim of a conflict has an inalienable right to receive
help. When an attack is carried out againt humanitarian
workers, when the delivery of humanitarian assistance
is being prevented for any reason, when medical
infrastructure is destroyed, or when people — I am
thinking in particular of women and children, the most
vulnerable group — are being deprived of the care and
assistance necessary for their survival, the principal
of access is being denied and flouted. In Syria, almost
40 per cent of the public hospitals have been destroyed
and another 20 per cent have been damaged. As the
representative of the International Committee of the

48

Red Cross said this morning, patients, medical staff,
other infrastructure and ambulances are being targeted
and attacked. Hospitals are being used by combatants
for military purposes, even as torture and detention
centres. In addition, humanitarian organizations
are faced with many bureaucratic or even security
challenges, which impede their access to millions of
people who have been affected by armed conflict.
In its resolution 1894 (2009), the Security Council
stated that it was ready to intervene by taking
appropriate measures, as authorized by the Charter
of the United Nations, in the event of armed conflicts
where civilians were being targeted or when the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to civilians was
being prevented deliberately. On that basis, Belgium
calls on the Council to consider measures proposed by
the Emergency Response Coordinator, Ms. Amos, in
her Syria briefing on 16 July, namely, the designation
of special navigators whom agencies and organizations
could consult for assistance in overcoming problems
with access.
Removing red tape would allow medical care to
pass through freely, as would the demilitarization of
medical facilities. Notifying civilians and aid convoys of
military offenses in advance, introducing humanitarian
breaks to allow access to people and implementing
cross-border humanitarian operations would also assist
such efforts.
Thirdly, criminal responsibility must be reaffirmed.
In order to ensure a return to sustainable peace in Syria,
the perpetrators of serious violations of international
humanitarian law must be brought to justice. Today, the
International Criminal Court is in the best position to
carry out that role. Belgium reaffirms its support for
the appeal made to the Council last January, in a letter
that we co-signed along with 57 States Members, to
refer the situation in Syria to the International Criminal
Court.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): Thank you, Madam
President, for convening this debate, which is so
significant. Today’s briefings by the Secretary-General,
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, and the
reprentative of the International Committee of the Red
Cross remind us that this agenda item is constantly

13-43092

S/PV.7019

relevant to the Security Council. They also remind us of
mini-conflicts where the Council continues to struggle
for leverage and where the United Nations as a whole
is not delivering what is expected of it in its Charter.
Therefore, no one should be overly concerned that the
Council has already focused on this thematic issue, as
recently as earlier in 2013. Indeed, we look forward to
the Secretary-General’s report later on in the year and to
an additional debate focused on his recommendations.
Nonetheless, it is important to recall that, since
February, when the Council adopted a presidential
statement under the leadership of the Republic of Korea
(S/PRST/2013/2), we have seen a number of important
and positive developments relating to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. The first was the adoption
of the Arms Trade Treaty on 2 April 2013. That was
a landmark step, with really significant implications
for the protection of civilians, who can always be
threatened by those possessing conventional weapons,
including small arms and light weapons. New Zealand
was proud to work closely with partners in Africa, the
Caribbean, Latin America and the Pacific to help to
achieve that result.
Secondly, we welcome the Council’s decision last
week to emphasize the role of regional and subregional
organizations, bodies with huge potential for improving
practical outcomes in the protection of civilians. The
Council must support their efforts.
Thirdly, we note an approach of using force robustly
for the protection of civilians within the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo as another marker of the growing
commitment to the protection agenda.
Fourthly, the African Union’s decision in July to
establish a new peacekeeping mission in the Central
African Republic, with a robust protection of civilians
mandate, is particularly welcome. We are acutely
aware of the ever-deteriorating, increasingly perilous
situation of civilians in that country. We echo calls
from the Secretary-General, Ms.Pillay and earlier by
the United Nations Assistant-Secretary-General for
Human Rights, Ivan Šimonović, that the Council pay
more attention to that issue. As we heard last week in
the Chamber from Valerie Amos (see S/PV.7017), it
is now critical that the Council deal with the African
Union’s request for support with real urgency.
The Council must do more than just address the
protection of civilians as a thematic issue. It must

be more fully engaged in the implementation of this
agenda item in practice, in the field and within the
country-specific situations on its agenda. It must also
do more to lend practical support to the protection
efforts by regional organizations. As Emergency
Relief Coordinator Amos made clear, the situation in
Syria remains a glaring example of where the Council
is quite simply failing both to support the approaches
advocated by relevant regional organizations and to
live up to the standards that it set for itself in its own
thematic statements on the protection of civilians. In
those circumstances, it is important for each of the 15
members of the Council to be seen to be working to
address practical protection needs.
Under this agenda item, we must also emphasize
the ongoing importance of ensuring the safety of
humanitarian actors and their essential access to zones
where they can alleviate suffering. We have heard
Under-Secretary-General Amos’s repeated calls for
access to civilians trapped in Aleppo, Homs and other
parts of Syria. We join Belgium in saying that access
must not be denied. Civilians trapped in those conflict
areas cannot wait for the successful conclusion of a
political process before they get assistance. We join
Estonia in saying that preventing access by deliberately
attacking humanitarian workers is a war crime, and
ensuring accountability for such violations, as has been
emphasized by many in today’s debate, is an important
role of the Security Council. There can be no impunity.
Finally, on this World Humanitarian Day and its
very sad anniversary, it is important that we all pay
respect to the many humanitarian workers who have
risked — and far too often lost — their lives in trying
to alleviate the suffering of civilians. They command
our utmost respect, and all of us — the States Members
of the United Nations, the members of the Security
Council and the United Nations Secretariat — all of
us — must heed their example and be active and equally
courageous if we are to make a reality of the protection
of civilians.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Spain.
Mr. Fernández-Arias Minuesa (Spain) (spoke
in Spanish): I would like to express thanks for the
statements made by the Secretary-General, the UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, the High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the Director for International

13-4309249

S/PV.7019

Law and Cooperation at the International Committee
of the Red Cross. But I would especially like to thank
the Argentine presidency for organizing today’s debate,
particularly as it falls on World Humanitarian Day. I
congratulate you, Madam President, for contributing to
the consolidation of this issue on the Security Council’s
agenda following the success of the February and July
debates (see S/PV.6917 and S/PV.7003), and ahead of
the Secretary-General’s report, which I expect we will
have another opportunity to discuss again in this forum.
Spain aligns itself with the statement made by
the Deputy Head of the Delegation of the European
Union and wishes to make the following remarks in its
national capacity.
The protection of civilians is a primary responsibility
of States, which, to be fulfilled, requires the adoption
of measures that will prevent violations, protect victims
and ensure that those who have infringed the rules are
punished. Prevention, protection and punishment — or,
in other words, complying with the relevant international
regulations, guaranteeing humanitarian access and
ensuring accountability — those are the three elements
on which, in accordance with the guidelines provided
for today’s debate, I will be focusing in my statement.
The necessary starting point for compliance with
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee
law is a commitment at the national level — the signing
and ratification of the Geneva Conventions and their
Additional Protocols, the proper incorporation of their
rules into national legislation, the appropriate training
of its armed forces and members of the judiciary on the
issue, and the promotion of its basic rules within civil
society. With that in mind, my country participated at
the Oslo Conference and fully supports the initiative
of Switzerland and the International Committee of the
Red Cross aimed at devising mechanisms to strengthen
compliance with international humanitarian law.
Furthermore, Spain attaches the utmost importance to
the inclusion of international humanitarian law within
training programmes for armed forces, and has done so
itself, including incorporating fundamental principles
of proportionality, precaution and distinction between
combatants and civilians, as well as rules on the
protection of civilians and specially protected people
and the responsibilities and obligations that arise
therefrom.
The General Assembly has recently approved the
Arms Trade Treaty (resolution 67/234 B), which my
country has signed and is in the process of ratifying.
50

My delegation is convinced that that legal instrument
will have a direct impact on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict.
Access to humanitarian assistance is one of the
key pillars not only of humanitarian action but also of
compliance with international humanitarian law, since,
pursuant to the latter, States — and all parties to a
conflict — have the obligation to guarantee rapid and
unimpeded access to affected populations. As the report
of the Secretary-General entitled “Strengthening of the
coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance
of the United Nations” (A/68/84) acknowledges, it is
unacceptable that, still today, in certain emergencies,
some States and non-State armed groups obstruct
humanitarian access through bureaucratic hindrances
or violence against humanitarian actors, including
medical personnel. Those responsible for that, be
they States or non-State groups, must know that the
arbitrary refusal of humanitarian access can amount
to a violation of international humanitarian law, and,
as such, be punishable by the competent national and
international institutions.
Spain believes that humanitarian access should be
negotiated with all those who have the responsibility for
and the ability to grant it. Criminalizing humanitarian
engagement with non-State groups might result in
impeding humanitarian access and therefore represents
an indirect attack on the civilian population.
For the aforementioned reasons, my country
considers that the international community must use
all available means to fight those situations. Both
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council have engaged in an intense and fruitful
debate on those issues that will certainly strengthen
the doctrine. I call on the Security Council which has
the legitimacy, responsibility and means to guarantee
an adequate humanitarian response to take note of
those debates and act on that basis. The presidential
statement issued following the debate that took place
last February (S/PRST/2013/2) reflects that concern
and constitutes progress that we trust will be embodied
in a future resolution.
As we already had the occasion to highlight last
February (see S/PV.6917), my delegation considers
that the fight against impunity is a fundamental tool in
the protection of civilians. The Security Council has a
clear responsibility in that regard, given its impact on
international peace and security.

13-43092

S/PV.7019

Spain believes that the work of the International
Criminal Court should be strengthened and used by
the Security Council as the basis of an international
criminal system, especially in those cases where States
are unable or unwilling to fulfil their responsibility
to prosecute serious violations of international
humanitarian law. Spain also supports the development
of International Criminal Court’s principle of positive
complementarity and its work to build capacity and
help States to accomplish their primary responsibility
of fighting against impunity.
Over the last few years, the Security Council has
taken significant steps to fight impunity. It is essential
that it provide a follow-up of its referrals to the Court,
continue taking steps towards the detailed oversight
of the results of fact-finding missions, and explore the
possibility of setting up mechanisms such as earlywarning systems.
Allow me to conclude by saying that my delegation
agrees with the reference made by the SecretaryGeneral to the need to devote attention to the issue
of reparations for victims. We believe, therefore, that
the Security Council should endorse the findings of
the commissions of inquiry, ensure their effective
implementation and include that aspect in the relevant
resolutions.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): It is a great honour for me
to address you here today, Madam President. First and
foremost, I would like to thank the Argentine presidency
for having convened this timely meeting, which, in
our view, strikes at the core of the Security Council’s
primary mandate regarding threats to international
peace and security. I would also like to thank the
opening speakers for their important contributions to
the debate.
The Deputy Head of the Delegation of the European
Union (EU) has already spoken on this matter, and,
as an EU member, Croatia stands by that statement.
Nevertheless, I would like to add a few points, keeping
in mind Croatia’s extensive and unfortunate experience
in the field and our particular interest in all of us
drawing valuable lessons from that troubled history
and implement them for the sake of improved lifesaving
assistance and greatly improved protection of those
who are in dire need of it.

At this point, I would also like to commend the
Governments of Argentina, Austria, Indonesia and
Uganda for the excellent work they have done in hosting
a series of regional workshops. The results of those
workshops were discussed at the outstanding Global
Conference on Reclaiming the Protection of Civilians
under International Humanitarian Law, hosted in
Oslo by the Government of Norway. Having been an
active participant at the Vienna and Oslo meetings,
Croatia strongly supports all measures that can lead to
improving the situation of civilians in armed conflict,
and we would like to firmly support the Oslo Conference
recommendations in that regard.
Although international humanitarian law has
established a comprehensive legal framework to protect
civilians from the effects of military operations, that
framework stands in stark contrast to the situation faced
by civilians on the ground in conflict-affected areas.
Nowadays, in the conduct of armed conflict, it is civilians
who often become the main target of armed attacks and
atrocities — murder, deportation and ethnic cleansing,
as well as rape and sexual violence and violence against
health care facilities. That often happens not only as
a consequence of war operations, but as a result of
the methods and means used in conducting war. In
that respect, resolution 1894 (2009) — with its strong
condemnation of attacks directed against civilians
as flagrant violations of international humanitarian
law — stands out as an indispensable instrument to be
used as much as possible.
In current times, which are still plagued by many
armed conflicts, a strong need exists for an appropriate
understanding of international humanitarian law.
For its part, Croatia has invested serious efforts in
strengthening the role of international humanitarian
law and paving the way for the application of criminal
justice against violators. The 1949 Geneva Conventions
and their 1977 Additional Protocols occupy a special
place in Croatia’s international commitments, as they
were the first international treaties to which Croatia
became party. Today, Croatia is party to almost all
international humanitarian law treaties and is widely
recognized as a country with national legislation that is
complementary to international humanitarian law.
Furthermore, Croatia continues to implement
modern international standards through domestic
legislation and to familiarize the general public with
international humanitarian law. It goes without saying
that civilians are the most vulnerable and unprotected

13-4309251

S/PV.7019

group in any armed conflict — women and children
in particular. But women can also play a specific and
unique role in the prevention and resolution of armed
conflicts, as well as in post-conflict reconstruction and
peace consolidation.
With that in mind, Croatia has been actively
engaged in the Friends of Women, Peace and Security
group of countries in promoting the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security. In cooperation with civil society, a national
action plan on the topic was created and adopted by the
Croatian Government two years ago.
Furthermore,
Croatia
adopted
the
Paris
Commitments and Principles — documents that
strengthen global efforts against impunity for crimes
against children. It is our view that continued attention
to the specific needs of women and children, as well as
to their vulnerabilities during and after armed conflict,
must form part of any effective policy for the protection
of civilians and of every significant peacemaking or
peacekeeping effort, including relief operations. Failure
in that field involves much more than a lack of political
success: such failure is measured in human lives and
misery.
Individual States bear the responsibility to protect
their populations from such appalling atrocities. At
the same time, the international community has a
responsibility to help protect populations and to take
collective action through the Security Council — if
and when national authorities manifestly fail to protect
their population.
Furthermore, the fight against impunity and
the establishment of the rule of law are of crucial
significance in ensuring that the most severe crimes do
not go unpunished. Croatia firmly believes that those
who violate human rights in armed conflicts today
should know that they will face justice tomorrow.
Finally, I would also like to take this opportunity to
call attention to the fact that Croatia, in its capacity as
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, will organize,
together with UN-Women, a special meeting, on the
margins of the sixty-eighth session of the General
Assembly, dedicated to the economic empowerment
of women for peacebuilding. It will take place on
26 September.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovakia.

52

Mr. Ružička (Slovakia): First, I would like to
commend Argentina for choosing this important topic
for today’s open debate. Of course, my country’s
words of thanks also go to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, to the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Ms. Navanethem Pillay, and to Mr. Philip Spoerri,
Director for International Law and Cooperation of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, not only for
today’s briefings, but for all of their active dedication to
this important topic.
The history of humankind is, unfortunately, a
history of war and conflict. The loss of any life is a sad
story. When a soldier dies, it is a tragedy. But when a
civilian, woman, or child is killed it is a tragedy and a
crime. As it was said in the 1960s, “war is not healthy
for children and other living things”.
At the outset, I would like to align myself with the
statement made earlier by the observer of the European
Union.
The implementation of and compliance with
international humanitarian and human rights law,
together with respect for the rule of law, are core
requirements for the protection of civilians from
atrocities committed during armed conflict. But there
is a paradox. On the one hand, never before has the
so-called right to the integrity of life been universally
recognized. In the final decades of the twentieth
century, human rights documents of sweeping scope
and rigorous specificity were produced. On the other
hand, despite that fact, during the conflicts recognized
between 1934 and 1994, at least 80 per cent of the
approximately 20 million killed and 60 million wounded
in declared wars, civil wars and other major conflicts
have been civilians. Of those, three of every five have
been children.
Since the 1990s, we have witnessed many new
conflicts, most recently in Syria and Egypt, and
earlier, in Rwanda and Chechnya, where civilians
have been — or are being — killed on a massive
scale, or internally or externally displaced. More often
than ever, situations occur in which the international
community fails to protect civilians — mainly women
and children — and fails to provide basic humanitarian
assistance, not to speak of protection.
Violations of the medical neutrality granted by the
1949 Geneva Conventions, customary international law
and medical ethics are routine in almost every current
conflict. The recent attacks against doctors in Somalia

13-43092

S/PV.7019

represent only one example to add to the mosaic of
massive abuses carried out in the past in many countries
on every continent, without exception.
Instead of stepping up efforts and effective
cooperation at the local and global levels, we have
entered the twenty-first century bearing the heritage
and reappearance of one of the ugliest human rights
abuses, namely, conflicts in which the central purpose
of military action has been the forced removal of
civilian populations from their homes and land on the
basis of religion, nationality or ethnic identity.
Our task in this Organization is — or should be — to
make every effort, using all legal and diplomatic tools,
in order to prevent conflict. If we are unable to prevent
a conflict, we should join together to end it as soon as
possible. If we fail again, we should protect those who
may be in the wrong place at the wrong time and are
unable to protect themselves — they are mostly women
and children.
The most heinous crimes committed during armed
conflict cannot stay unpunished. We therefore consider
the International Criminal Court to be a key judicial
body with a leading role in the fight against impunity.
We call on the full United Nations membership to ratify
the Rome Statute and thus achieve its universality.
Slovakia is a small country, but it is ready to
support any activity leading to an improved system
at both the international and the national levels. The
implementation of the pledges made by Slovakia at
the thirty-first International Conference of the Red
Cross and Red Crescent in 2011 is in progress. We
have also joined the initiative of the Governments of
Norway, Argentina, Austria, Indonesia and Uganda on
reclaiming the protection of civilians under international
humanitarian law. In addition, in November 2012, the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs organized a special seminar
on the protection of children in armed conflict.
Many words have been spoken here by many
countries. But what we lack is a genuine common,
determined and effective effort to reach those goals.
Slovakia is concerned about the deterioration of the
situation in Syria, where humanitarian law has been
gravely violated and many innocent civilians are dying
every day. We encourage the members of the Security
Council to act by referring the situation in Syria to the
International Criminal Court so that the perpetrators,
no matter what side they are on, will face independent
and unbiased justice.

One of the best possible ways to decrease the number
of victims is the elimination, reduction and control of
all kinds of arms. Therefore, we strongly encourage the
early ratification of the Arms Trade Treaty, and we call
upon all other instruments in this area to be strongly
adhered to by the international community.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Armenia.
Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): Madam President, I
join previous speakers in thanking you for presiding
over this important debate. It is commendable that
the Council has continued its practice of holding
open debates on the protection of civilians, featuring
briefings by the Secretary-General, Under-SecretaryGeneral Amos, High Commissioner for Human
Rights Pillay, and Director for International Law and
Cooperation Spoerri of the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC).
Today’s debate offers the Council an opportunity
to evaluate progress on key issues, such as on the
implementation of previously adopted resolutions on
this matter, and to indicate areas where additional
focus is necessary, including enhanced compliance
with international humanitarian law and strengthened
accountability
for
violations.
Ensuring
such
accountability and enhancing compliance with
international legal obligations by parties in conflict
should be viewed as key elements in the Council’s
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security.
We acknowledge the usefulness of discussing in
the Council, on a regular basis, issues relevant to the
protection of civilians and note with appreciation the
continuing efforts of the ICRC. We commend the latter’s
role in the promotion of international humanitarian law
and monitoring compliance with it. In recent years,
Member States and civil society groups have increased
their efforts to address the protection of civilians in
conflict and post-conflict situations. In its previous
resolutions and presidential statements, the Council has
recognized that respect for international humanitarian
law is an essential component of protection. We affirm
that the protection of civilian populations should be
an important aspect of any comprehensive strategy to
resolve conflicts.
The Secretary-General’s reports have also
contributed to the consideration of this critical issue
and have highlighted the need to translate normative

13-4309253

S/PV.7019

commitments into concrete improvements in order to
enhance compliance with international humanitarian
law. Therefore, we share the views expressed by some
participants in this debate, who have called for more
systematic attention to be paid to the protection of
civilians.
We remain alarmed by the worsening of the
humanitarian situation of the civilian population in
Syria and condemn all attacks, kidnappings and terrorist
acts that indiscriminately target civilians, including
minority groups. For Armenia, the situation in Syria is
not just another news headline. We continue to receive
refugees that are deeply worried about the escalation
of violence. Over 100,000 Armenians remain in that
multiconfessional and multi-ethnic country, among
growing violence and an escalating humanitarian crisis.
We have seen their homes and churches destroyed or
damaged, their safety and security taken away from
them. As the conflict continues, the humanitarian
situation worsens. A great number of Armenians in
Aleppo and Damascus are struggling to survive amid
unbearable conditions together with many Syrian
citizens.
We are convinced that to address that kind of
situation, we must abandon selective approaches to
violations of international humanitarian law. There
must also be strict adherence to human rights standards.
Armenia believes that the international community
must effectively seek thorough compliance by
all parties to armed conflict with the norms of
international humanitarian law and recommend that
the parties take all necessary measures to ensure rapid
and unimpeded access by humanitarian actors. We also
believe that increased efforts are essential to strengthen
accountability for mass atrocities. It is commendable
that for the last two decades the Council has continued
to focus on the responsibility of States to end impunity
and to thoroughly investigate and prosecute persons
responsible for grave violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law to avoid the
recurrence of such violations and to seek justice.
As the Secretary-General notes in his latest report
(S/2012/376), the issue of reparations also should be
addressed, as victims often require assistance and
justice.
This March, the Human Rights Council adopted a
resolution on the prevention of genocide that, inter alia,
stresses the importance of the promotion of truth, justice

54

and reparations and that perpetrators should be held
criminally accountable at the national and international
levels. The resolution also affirms the primary
responsibility of States to protect their populations
from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity, which is part of our common
responsibility to protect. Strengthening accountability
based on truth and justice therefore requires a deeper
commitment and a broader vision of the future.
In the presidential statement adopted two weeks
ago (S/PRST/2013/12), the Council emphasized that
ending impunity is essential in a conflict and postconflict society’s efforts to come to terms with past
serious crimes, and in preventing future crimes,
under international law. Armenia strongly shares
that approach in working to address the peaceful and
political resolution of disputes in different parts of the
world.
In conclusion, let me mention that Armenia
supports the implementation of resolutions previously
adopted by the Council, in particular resolution
1894 (2009), which provides important guidance
to ensure the effective protection of populations in
armed conflicts. We therefore welcome Argentina’s
initiative to hold this open debate. It offers a valuable
opportunity to translate advancement at the normative
level into tangible progress on the ground and renew
our commitment to the protection of civilians.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Hungary.
Mr. Hetesy (Hungary): Hungary aligns itself with
the statement delivered on behalf of the European Union.
As a member of the Anti-Corruption and Transparency
Working Group, seeking improvements in the working
methods of the Security Council, Hungary warmly
welcomes today’s open debate, organized by Argentina.
Hungary, which is committed to the full
implementation of international humanitarian law, is
party to all relevant major treaties as well as to the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court. Hungary
sees the Kampala amendments to the Rome Statute and
the Arms Trade Treaty as important building blocks,
solidifying and supplementing the international legal
regime on the protection of civilians.
For the last two decades, the protection of civilians
in armed conflict has become a priority issue for the
Security Council. Yet civilians not only account for the
vast majority of casualties in conflict situations, but the
13-43092

S/PV.7019

numbers are reaching appalling record highs even as
we speak.
As has been repeatedly emphasized today, States
bear the primary responsibility to protect civilians in
times of armed conflict and to bring to justice those
who violate related international norms, including
international humanitarian law. Besides States, all
parties to a conflict have an obligation to comply with
the relevant norms of international law. Yet we see
States failing to provide protection and other actors
behaving as if they were under no obligations at all.
While there is a clear-cut role for the international
community in situations where States are unwilling or
unable to live up to their responsibilities, it has not been
able to do enough. As the Secretary-General himself
mentioned, commitments still have to be translated into
concrete improvements.
There are different reasons for the setbacks
encountered. Hungary, together with other speakers
and briefers today, continues to stress that, among
other things, lack of accountability, and therefore the
possibility of impunity, is an overall source of blame.
Lack of accountability means no justice. Human history
tells us that there is no lasting peace without justice.
Lack of accountability not only kills in the present but
becomes an incentive and a breeding ground for future
atrocities.
Where civilians are targeted, the Security Council
should take all measures at its disposal to protect
the civilian population. Such measures must include
ensuring that the perpetrators of serious crimes
are held accountable, even in cases where national
authorities fail to prosecute them. In order to do so, the
Council should develop its own general and coherent
accountability strategy and apply it in a consistent
manner. Hungary welcomes the Council’s presidential
statement contained in document S/PRST/2013/2, on
the protection of civilians, and the commitments made
towards strengthening accountability. Hungary looks
forward to hearing about further practical steps to be
taken by the Council, as proposed today by several
Council members, including Australia, the United
Kingdom and France.

Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan, Mali, Norway, Panama,
Slovenia, Switzerland, Thailand, my own country,
Chile, and on behalf of South Africa, as an observer.
First, I would like to thank the Argentine
presidency for having convened this meeting on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, with a focus
on humanitarian issues. The Human Security Network
was created in the context of the Ottawa Convention
prohibiting landmines, and the protection of civilians
in conflict has always been central to our concerns. We
cannot overemphasize the importance of discussions
such as today’s, on how best to ensure the security and
dignity of civilians affected by armed conflict.
In that respect, I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his presentation, as well as the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Pillay,
for her contribution to the debate on this challenging
issue. We also believe that the statement made by the
representative of the International Committee of the
Red Cross is of particular relevance, as it highlighted,
inter alia, one of the key elements of the issue, namely,
the implementation of international humanitarian law.
Despite the unrelenting efforts of the international
community, civilians continue to account for the
majority of casualties in armed conflicts. Their
situation becomes even more precarious when they are
deliberately targeted or indiscriminately attacked or
when they are viewed as a strategic asset in a conflict.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chile.

The Human Security Network remains concerned
by the difficulties faced in taking action to ensure the
protection of civilians in Syria. The current debate
provides an opportunity to consider the most pressing
aspects of the issue. These include, first, compliance
by the parties to the conflict with international
humanitarian and human rights law, in order to
guarantee the protection of civilians and, among them,
the most vulnerable groups, including women and
children; secondly, to ensure the full implementation
of protection mandates by peacekeeping and other
relevant missions; and, thirdly, to explore ways to
bolster accountability for violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law. In that regard, the
Human Security Network welcomes the briefing by the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry to
the General Assembly given last July.

Mr. Gálvez (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the members of the
Human Security Network, namely, Austria, Costa

It is true that a lack of accountability and justice
incites perpetrators to continue their heinous acts.
As the most recent report of the Secretary-General

13-4309255

S/PV.7019

(S/2012/376) underscored, the role of the Security
Council is crucial in encouraging and assisting States
in their efforts to combat impunity and reinforce
accountability; however, it is States themselves that
bear the primary responsibility to ensure and respect
the human rights of individuals within their territory
and to protect their populations from mass atrocities.

that cause severe harm to individuals and communities.
Such weapons are indiscriminate within their zones
of detonation and therefore pose unacceptable risks to
civilians. We call on all relevant actors to refrain from
using such weapons in densely populated areas. We
believe that more systematic data collection would be
important in that respect.

Against that backdrop, we stress the importance
of commissions of inquiry and fact-finding missions,
which can substantiate alleged violations, thus opening
the way for a possible referral to the International
Criminal Court.

Last but not least, we would like to reiterate our
concern about the safety of journalists in conflict
situations. Unfortunately, and despite a clear
normative framework and repeated calls on the part
of the international community to put an end to such
attacks, media professionals, too, continue to become
civilian casualties while attempting to report and
brief us on the realities on the ground. According to
the International News Safety Institute, no less than
43 journalists and news workers have died this year
trying to cover situations of armed conflict and civil
unrest. We welcome the open debate on the protection
of civilians and the protection of journalists held under
the American presidency of the Council on 17 July
(see S/PV.7003), and we urge the Security Council to
consider the situation of journalists in armed conflict in
a more proactive and systematic way in the context of
country-specific discussions and to further promote the
implementation of resolution 1738 (2006).

Although instances of failure to protect civilians
rightfully receive widespread publicity, it is important
to recognize that tens of thousands of United Nations
peacekeepers risk their lives every day in order to
protect civilians. In that respect, the mandates of
peacekeeping and other relevant missions are an
element that is pivotal to the issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict and therefore need to be
strengthened and effectively implemented.
The addition of broader objectives to missions’
mandates must be accompanied by a proportionate
increase in resources. The strengthening of mandates
will improve monitoring and prevention as well as
the capacity for a targeted and coordinated response
when incidents do occur. We also recognize the
protection role of other humanitarian actors, including
the International Committee of the Red Cross and
non-governmental organizations.
The full and unimpeded access of humanitarian
assistance continues to be a sine qua non for the relief
of affected populations, including in particular the most
vulnerable groups, such as women and children. In that
regard, we unequivocally condemn sexual and genderbased violence, including the use of sexual violence as
a military tactic. Moreover, the effective protection of
civilians requires that health-care facilities, schools,
teaching staff, transport, humanitarian personnel and
people seeking medical treatment be unconditionally
spared from attacks and acts of displacement. We should
always keep in mind that one of the most disastrous
impacts of conflict is on refugees and internally
displaced persons; we therefore need to tackle that
challenge by taking measures that facilitate voluntary
return, repatriation and reintegration.
Let me also stress Network members’ strong concern
over the use, in populated areas, of explosive weapons

56

We support the continued consideration of the issue
of the protection of civilians on a biannual basis, with
the appropriate inputs, including from the SecretaryGeneral, the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the Emergency Relief Coordinator.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Denmark.
Mr. Petersen (Denmark): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Nordic countries, namely,
Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and my own country,
Denmark.
On this World Humanitarian Day, we welcome
Argentina’s initiative to hold an open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, ahead of the
upcoming report of the Secretary-General.
Let me, at the outset, reconfirm our unwavering
commitment to respecting and promoting international
law. The laws and obligations that apply during armed
conflict must be respected everywhere, regardless
of who is fighting and where the fighting goes on.
We call on parties to armed conflicts around the
world — States as well as non-State actors — to fully
13-43092

S/PV.7019

respect international humanitarian law, human rights
and international refugee law. In particular, the need to
protect vulnerable groups in conflict, such as women,
children, elderly people and persons with disabilities,
must be respected at all times.
Civilians affected by armed conflict need
immediate humanitarian relief. Under international
humanitarian law, the parties to an armed conflict have
a legal obligation to allow and facilitate the rapid and
unimpeded passage of humanitarian assistance, and to
ensure safety from attacks for humanitarian aid workers
and accountability for attacks against such workers.
We call on all parties to armed conflicts around the
world to respect that humanitarian obligation without
exception or precondition. In particular, we recall the
obligation to respect the wounded and sick, health-care
personnel and facilities and medical vehicles and to
take all reasonable measures to ensure safe, prompt and
unhindered access for the wounded and sick to health
care.
When addressing the global legal framework for
the protection of civilians, it is important to mention
the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT) . We view the ATT as a
means to reduce illicit trafficking and alleviate human
suffering in armed conflicts, and we call for rapid
ratification and implementation of the ATT by all States
Members of the United Nations.
During armed conflicts, the risks faced by civilians
will always differ depending on the context and on
whether they affect boys or girls, men or women. Sexual
assaults during warfare have horrendous implications
for victims and entire communities and must simply
stop. We re-emphasize the commitment by all Member
States to end sexual violence in armed conflicts, and
we welcome recent steps taken at the international level
to that end. The inclusion of gender-based violence in
the Arms Trade Treaty serves as an example. Women
and girls who become pregnant after being raped as
part of warfare in an armed conflict must have access
to adequate sexual and reproductive health services,
including access to emergency contraception and safe
abortion. We need to eliminate the widespread impunity
of the perpetrators of sexual violence in conflict, and we
strongly support the work of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Bangura and other international
initiatives to that effect.
We must insist that those who commit war crimes,
crimes against humanity and other violations of
international law must be held accountable before the

law. Impunity must not be an option. We recall that in
every situation the State has the primary responsibility
to maintain the rule of law and ensure accountability.
If the State is unwilling or unable to investigate and
prosecute these international crimes, the international
community should offer its support. The International
Criminal Court (ICC) and other international tribunals
play a crucial role. In that context, we especially want to
remind those in Syria who are responsible for atrocities
and human rights violations and abuses that they will
be held accountable.
The Security Council must do its part to ensure
accountability when violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law have occurred,
as they have in Syria. On that note, we welcome the
first open debate in the Security Council, held on
17 October 2012, on peace and justice and the role of
the ICC (see S/PV.6849). We look forward to seeing
regular follow-up on this topic, in particular on how the
Council can lend stronger support to the Court in cases
of non-cooperation with the ICC.
Accountability requires facts and investigations.
We welcome the international commissions of
inquiry and fact-finding missions carried out under
the auspices of the Human Rights Council and those
initiated by the Secretary-General. They are important
mechanisms to verify and investigate allegations of
serious violations of international human rights law
and international humanitarian law. Attention should
also be drawn to the International Humanitarian FactFinding Commission, which regrettably has remained
virtually unused by parties to armed conflict. In that
connection, we welcome the initiative by Switzerland
and the International Committee of the Red Cross
concerning the possibility of establishing a mechanism
to improve compliance with international humanitarian
and human rights law.
In order to protect civilians and promote
accountability in post-conflict situations, securing
documentation during and after an armed conflict is
essential. Parties to a conflict should ensure proper
documentation of the conduct of military operations,
for example by mapping areas that may be contaminated
by unexploded ordnance and by conducting systematic
casualty recording. States and other parties to an armed
conflict must also ensure, as our Chilean colleague just
stated, that journalists’ right to protection as civilians
be respected at all times. They should find ways to
improve the protection of journalists and other media

13-4309257

S/PV.7019

actors reporting from conflict areas and respect their
right to carry out their important work.

for Human Rights and International Committee of the
Red Cross for their valuable briefings.

The requisite preventive measures and full respect of
international law are essential for ensuring that civilians
are protected in armed conflict. The responsibility to
protect populations from genocide, war crimes, crimes
against humanity and ethnic cleansing has emerged as
an important global principle since the adoption of the
2005 World Summit Outcome. The principle makes
clear that sovereignty can never be used as a shelter
for committing mass atrocities, that all Governments
have an obligation to protect their own population, and
that the international community has an obligation to
assist Governments in doing so and to react if a State is
manifestly failing to protect its population.

Yesterday I spent some time on Roosevelt Island,
across the water from the United Nations Building. In
Roosevelt Park, which is visible from the delegates’
lounge down the hall, I saw the famous “four
freedoms” speech of President Roosevelt’s memorial.
President Roosevelt at the time looked forward to
a world based on four crucial freedoms, including
the freedom of speech, of worship and freedom from
want. Importantly for today, the fourth freedom was
freedom from fear, anywhere in the world. That vision
should inspire our deliberations today. The essence of
the protection of civilians in armed conflicts is that
it should lead to freedom from fear for the civilians
involved. My Government sees three key elements in
realizing that ambition, namely, prevention, protection
and prosecution.

In that regard, preventive actions and support
to Governments in need from the international
community will increase the protection of civilians.
Capacity development in host countries is an important
preventive tool. Comprehensive rule of law strategies
for peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions should
include assistance in the areas of access to legal
institutions and legislative reform, alongside with
support in the areas of policing and the justice chain.
To make this effective, the peacekeeping operation in
question must also receive the relevant resources and
adequate training.
In conclusion, the Nordic countries look forward
to the upcoming report by the Secretary-General on
this topic, and we would like repeat our previous call
for the Secretary-General to regularly report on the
state of play, improvements and implementation of the
recommendations made in relation to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Allow me to
express my Government’s appreciation to the Argentine
presidency for putting the protection of civilians in
armed conflict on the agenda for this open debate.
Those caught up in conflicts need our attention. They
need the attention of our Governments, and they need
the attention of the United Nations.
I align myself with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union and thank His Excellency
the Secretary-General and the representatives of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
58

Let me begin with prevention. For my Government,
the international rule of law is the basis for international
relations. As my Minister recently said, the promotion
of the international legal order is enshrined in the
Dutch Constitution. Therefore, Article 33 of the
Charter of the United Nations. on the pacific settlement
of disputes, is paramount for us. Next week, we will
celebrate the one hundredth anniversary of the Peace
Palace in The Hague, the legal capital of the world.
We will then commemorate the significant ways in
which the International Court of Justice contributes to
international peace and stability through the peaceful
settlement of conflicts.
In our view, the implementation of international
human rights instruments, both legal and other, must
be strengthened. We welcome the New Deal for
Engagement in Fragile States.
To make prevention truly effective, national
judicial institutions should be strong enough to have
a preventive effect. More States must support the
international mechanisms and institutions that offer
protection to civilians. With the knowledge that their
acts will not go unpunished, hopefully those capable
of the worst crimes will be deterred from committing
atrocities.
If prevention fails, we must put the protection of
civilians in armed conflict into practice. That is the
duty of all parties involved, primarily the State and
the warring factions, but also of the peacekeeping
forces. Peacekeeping operations should focus more

13-43092

S/PV.7019

on the situation of civilians in armed conflicts, and
Security Council resolutions that establish mandates
for peacekeeping operations should reflect that moral
imperative.
We must increase our efforts to implement
resolution 1325 (2000), in order to protect vulnerable
women in armed conflict. In building peace, we must
take women seriously. We must include their views
and interests in political agreements and peacekeeping
operations. We welcome the progress that the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations has made in
that regard, and encourage further cooperation with
UN-Women. All such actions should help to protect
women and contribute to combating sexual and genderbased violence in areas of conflict.
The Netherlands continues to champion the global
principle of the responsibility to protect, and we call
on all Member States to support that worthy cause. We
welcome the report of the Secretary-General on the
subject for 2013 (S/2013/399).
If prevention and protection fail, accountability and
prosecution should come into play. Information-gathering
during conflicts is therefore an essential element of
prevention, since it creates a basis for prosecution.
Statistics and data on lives lost, women raped, children
killed and schools burned make for horrible reading,
but they also create a basis for accountability and for
bringing perpetrators to justice, either at the national
or international level. For that reason, the Netherlands
is co-funding a centre for civilians in armed conflict,
aimed at developing guidelines for peacekeepers in the
field on preventing harm to civilians and setting up
civilian-harm tracking mechanisms in Mali.
I would also like to reiterate the concern voiced by
the observer of the European Union about the situation
in Syria. Those responsible for the crimes committed
in that country should be held accountable and brought
before a court. We renew our call on the Syrian
authorities to allow full and unfettered access to the
High Commissioner for Human Rights. The Netherlands
is honoured to host the Syria Justice and Accountability
Centre in The Hague. That important institution is
funded by more than 40 States and organizations. It
takes a non-partisan approach, reaches out to many
Syrian individuals, communities and organizations
and works closely with many international actors. Such
data-gathering creates a basis for accountability and is
therefore crucial long-term work for the protection of
civilians. Finally, in specific cases, the International

Criminal Court can bring justice to civilians harmed
by armed conflict.
To sum up, the protection of civilians is closely
related to prevention and prosecution. Let us work
closely together in applying those three aspects in a
comprehensive approach. Together we can achieve
freedom from fear for civilians in areas of conflict, and
let our common endeavours be inspired by the view
across the East River of the Roosevelt Four Freedoms
Park.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): I would like to express our
appreciation to Argentina for organizing this open
debate on a very relevant issue, thereby giving us
another opportunity to provide input for the SecretaryGeneral’s upcoming report on the subject. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General and the
representatives of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and
the International Committee of the Red Cross for their
remarks.
On this tenth anniversary of the heinous terrorist
attack on the United Nations headquarters in Baghdad,
our thoughts are with the survivors and families of the
victims. We take this opportunity to pay tribute to the
brave men and women serving under the United Nations
flag across the world.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict is a
shared concern and a top priority for the international
community. Unfortunately, the vast majority of
casualties in armed conflicts continue to be civilians.
We condemn all attacks on civilians and are deeply
concerned about their destructive effects, particularly
on women and children. More effort must be made to
enhance compliance with international humanitarian,
human-rights and refugee law so as to protect civilians
more effectively. Furthermore, the principles of
distinction and proportionality must be upheld. At
the same time, we should always strive to provide
humanitarian aid to affected populations, and the
parties involved in conflicts should take all necessary
measures to ensure unimpeded and safe humanitarian
access. Accountability for serious violations of
international humanitarian and human-rights law must
be strengthened in order to bring the perpetrators to
justice and prevent future crimes.

13-4309259

S/PV.7019

There is no doubt that the primary obligation
for protecting civilians lies with States. However,
the international community also has a shared
responsibility to help protect civilians in situations
where States clearly fail to do so. The Security Council
has a particular and inevitable obligation in that regard,
which has direct consequences on the ground.
Syria is a case in point for all the issues I have
just raised. The humanitarian situation in Syria is
grimmer every day. The regime, which has tried to
suppress the legitimate demands of its people through
the indiscriminate use of force, has failed to fulfil its
responsibility to protect its civilians. The bloodshed
there must be ended with a political solution and a
meaningful transition.
Unfortunately, the work of the humanitarian
institutions trying to provide assistance to Syrian
internally displaced persons is being severely hampered
by the bureaucratic hurdles created by the Syrian regime
and confirms the relevance of the calls for unhindered
access to all areas by the most convenient and effective
routes. New and creative methods are needed to ensure
safe and sustainable humanitarian access, including for
cross-border operations. Turkey is doing its utmost to
respond to the consequences of the Syrian crisis. We
are currently hosting more than 200,000 Syrians in
20 camps, maintaining decent living conditions and
providing for their health, education and social needs.
The total number of Syrians who have sought shelter
in various parts of Turkey now exceeds half a million,
and the resources allocated to Syrians in need have
surpassed $1.5 billion. Turkey will continue to stand by
the Syrian people.
However, as we have said on numerous occasions,
the principle of burden-sharing should not be
disregarded and the international community, and
the Security Council in particular, should shoulder
its responsibility to act urgently, resolutely and
collectively. That being said, I would like to emphasize
that this platform has been abused once again by one
delegation making baseless allegations that Turkey has
already categorically rejected. That cannot dissuade
us from standing firmly by the Syrian people, whose
voice, unfortunately, cannot be heard here.
With reference to some of the issues highlighted in
the concept note for today’s debate (S/2013/447, annex),
and in view of the Secretary-General’s upcoming report
on the subject, I would like to underline three additional
important issues.
60

First, with regard to the application of the concept of
the protection of civilians, let me reiterate our position
that counter-terrorism efforts do not constitute armed
conflict and cannot be considered as such. We should
make a clear distinction between counter-terrorism
efforts by law enforcement agencies and armed conflict.
But we must also be cautious about deliberate attempts
to portray legitimate popular movements as terrorism.
Turkey strongly condemns all acts of terrorism and
acknowledges the legitimate right of Governments to
combat them.
The second point we would like to raise relates to
the issue of dialogue with non-State armed groups. We
uphold the principle of humanitarian access to civilians.
However, we also believe that in doing so we should be
extremely careful not to give terrorist organizations any
sense of legitimacy. Terrorist organizations in various
parts of the world attempt to exploit humanitarian
approaches in order to gain international acceptance
and recognition.
Thirdly, we believe that United Nations documents
should not refer positively to non-governmental
organizations that are known to have been exploited by
terrorist organizations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada): As Canada’s
Ambassador and Permanent Representative to the
United Nations, I am both honoured and humbled to come
before the Security Council on World Humanitarian
Day and the tenth anniversary of the attacks on the
United Nations Canal Hotel headquarters in Baghdad
on 19 August 2003. That event has particular resonance
for Canadians, as two Canadian citizens perished in the
attack. We were moved this morning by the words of
Jason Pronyk, a Canadian staff member of UNICEF,
who spoke on behalf of the survivors. Those who
perished in Baghdad and who have perished United
Nations missions around the world were there working
on behalf of the protection of civilians, which stands at
the very heart of both the values and the actions of the
Organization.
(spoke in French)
Canada is pleased to participate in today’s open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
The Secretary General’s 2012 report on the subject
(S/2012/376) highlights the many protection challenges

13-43092

S/PV.7019

faced by civilians in today’s conflict situations. In many
cases, civilians continue to be denied the protection
they are entitled to under international and domestic
law.
All civilians deserve protection from deliberate
violence and abuse. We must take action to defend the
rights of vulnerable religious communities that are
persecuted in situations of armed conflict for their
beliefs. In that regard, we strongly encourage United
Nations agencies to better take into account the needs of
persecuted religious communities, including members
of the Christian community, which have been targets
of persecution and forced to flee from conflicts in the
Middle East.
(spoke in English)
Women and girls around the world continue
disproportionately to be victims of sexual violence in
armed conflict situations. We must therefore persevere
in our efforts to prevent sexual violence, including
rape as a weapon of war, sexual slavery, enforced
prostitution, forced pregnancy, forced abortion and
forced sterilization. Canada remains deeply committed
to denouncing violence against women and improving
the lives of women and girls. Through our humanitarian
assistance, we support humanitarian actors who assist in
the protection of women and girls in conflict situations.
Those efforts are complemented by other initiatives,
such as training African women security personnel,
helping women participate more fully in peace
processes and assisting victims of sexual violence by
improving access to the courts and truth commissions.
We urge the Council to ensure that provisions for
the prevention of and response to sexual violence be
included in its mandates and resolutions and to ensure
that such provisions are fully implemented.
(spoke in French)
Canada is deeply concerned by the deadly violence
occurring in Egypt. We are disquieted by recent attacks
on religious institutions in that country, in particular
the unconscionable attacks on Coptic Orthodox and
Anglican churches and on Baptist and Franciscan
institutions. Attacks on places of worship are totally
unacceptable. Canada calls on the Egyptian authorities
to protect worshippers and religious sites from any type
of violence or intimidation. We call for an end to the
violence and for the launching of meaningful political
dialogue for the good of all Egyptians. Our thoughts

go out to the families and friends of those killed in the
violence, and we wish a speedy recovery to the injured.
(spoke in English)
The brutal conflict in Syria is also a stark example
of how much work remains to be done to better protect
civilians who have routinely suffered as victims of
deliberate and targeted attacks, as have hospitals,
medical facilities and health-care workers. The result
is that people in desperate need are denied lifesaving
humanitarian assistance. The worsening situation is
taking a heavy toll on the civilian population, which
accounts for the vast majority of the more than 100,000
casualties to date. Canada calls on all parties to the
conflict in Syria to refrain from attacking civilians and
other protected persons and facilities, in accordance
with their obligations under international law. We
call on the Security Council to implement effective
economic sanctions against the Al-Assad regime and
to adopt a resolution allowing for the cross-border
delivery of humanitarian assistance.
While the crisis in Syria is perhaps the most
prominent example of current challenges to the
protection of civilians, it is far from unique. One need
only look at the situations in Afghanistan, the Sudan
and South Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, inter alia, to see that threats to people’s basic
human rights, physical security and lives in general
continue unabated. Such emergencies should serve as
stark reminder of the work that remains to be done.
(spoke in French)
In too many instances, humanitarian access is
politicized and deliberately obstructed. Civilians are in
need of assistance and are held hostage to the whims
of Governments and non-State armed groups trying to
achieve their own political goals. Those who commit
violence and deadly attacks against civilians, including
aid workers, must be held to account. The protection
of civilians is one of the most important functions of
United Nations peacekeeping operations. Success or
failure in the protection of civilians is perhaps the most
visible and tangible indicator of a mission’s success and
of the effectiveness of multilateral action. Therefore,
it is essential that the Council undertake all efforts,
through close coordination with the Secretariat and
troop-contributing countries, to provide United Nations
missions with well-defined and achievable mandates
for the protection of civilians, as well as adequate
resources for carrying out such tasks.

13-4309261

S/PV.7019

(spoke in English)
We underline that the Council must exercise the
full range of options at its disposal to prevent and halt
the perpetration of violence against civilians in armed
conflict. We must all step up our efforts to protect
the world’s most vulnerable people and ensure that
those responsible for violations are brought to justice.
I can assure you, Madam President, that Canada will
not remain silent when it comes to identifying and
condemning those who commit deliberate and barbaric
attacks on civilian populations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): On behalf of my delegation,
I would like to thank you, Madam President, for the
initiative you have taken to organize today’s very
important debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and for the concept note you have circulated to
facilitate our discussions (S/2013/447, annex).
The efforts to build consensus on the subject and
the progressive development of normative frameworks
to address civilian protection challenges, including
those in resolutions 1738 (2006) and 1894 (2009), are
very encouraging developments.
We recognize the importance of the collective
efforts of the various entities of the United Nations to
ensure apposite protection for civilians from the terrors
of conflict. We are all witnesses to the impact the
United Nations and its partners have had in mitigating
human suffering in conflict zones around the globe.
The United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations have also continued to play a vital
preventive and mediation role in countries on the brink
of conflict.
Despite those notable developments, the grim
reality of today is that civilians still bear the brunt
of conflict and are direct targets of abduction, sexual
violence and the denial of humanitarian access. Recent
developments have underscored the failure to comply
with the law. We continue to encounter obstacles as we
endeavour to address the five core challenges articulated
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2012/376).
The assault on civilians, especially women and
children, and the denial of humanitarian assistance
in places such as the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Central African Republic and other conflict
zones, illustrate the magnitude of the task of civilian

62

protection. Difficult protection challenges also remain
in Syria and Somalia, and the situation in Mali may
present serious protection challenges, for which the
international community must be prepared.
As stakeholders in international peace and security,
our efforts should be directed at addressing constraints
that militate against the effective protection of civilians.
Protection for the civilian population is a basic element
of humanitarian law. Civilians and all those not party
to conflict must on no account be targeted deliberately
and must be spared and protected. The 1949 Geneva
Conventions and their 1977 Additional Protocols
contain specific rules to that effect.
In order to rededicate ourselves to the moral
undertaking to protect defenceless civilians in
conflict situations, it is imperative that we deepen our
commitment to bolster accountability for violations
of international humanitarian and human rights
law. It is time to put our words into action and adopt
standardized measures to bring persistent perpetrators
of violence against women and children to justice. In
that connection, the Council should take the lead by
adopting targeted measures against such perpetrators.
On their part, States must not hesitate to take appropriate
legal action against perpetrators of such heinous acts,
following extensive investigations.
We must ensure that the export of arms and related
weapons vis-à-vis by those perpetrators are henceforth
regulated for probity, transparency and justice to
innocent victims. The United Nations system has
done a lot in that regard. The Firearms Protocol, the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects, as well as the recently adopted Arms
Trade Treaty, are veritable tools fashioned towards the
achievement of that objective. States must strengthen
their resolve to ensure the appropriate implementation
of those instruments.
As a major troop-contributing country, Nigeria
is conscious of the efficacy of peacekeeping missions
in the protection of civilians in situations of armed
conflict. To further enhance their effectiveness, it
would be necessary to facilitate the implementation of
their protection mandates.
I must stress that our growing understanding of
the needs and vulnerabilities of civilians in armed
conflict must be marked by the ability and capacity to
protect. Parties to conflict, as well as non-State actors,

13-43092

S/PV.7019

have a legal obligation to ensure compliance with
international humanitarian and human rights law where
the protection of civilians, including and in particular
health providers, women and children, is the main focus.
Parallel and equally important is the moral obligation
we also have to prevent attacks against health-care
facilities and providers; violence against women and
children, especially sexual violence, which women
and girls are subjected to; and other various forms of
debasement that innocent civilians are subjected to in
times of armed conflict.
Finally, it is important that we consolidate and
ensure implementation of the existing normative
framework on the protection of civilians, bearing
in mind the challenges that I have enumerated. The
international community should remain vigilant and
bear its fair share of our collective responsibility to
protect all civilians in situations of conflict. If we act
purposefully and in concert we can certainly better
shield civilians from the ravages of armed conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Namibia.
Mr. Shaanika (Namibia): I thank you, Madam
President, and your country, Argentina, for organizing
this open debate on the important issue of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General for his informative briefing, as
well as Ms. Navanethem Pillay, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights; Ms. Valerie Amos,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator; and Mr. Philip Spoerri,
Director for International Law and Cooperation of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, for their
invaluable contributions and briefings. They all made
persuasive presentations on the numerous challenges
and risks that civilians face in conflicts and in which
they are victims.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict can
be strengthened by strict adherence to the elements
highlighted by the reports of the Secretary General, which
are, enhancing compliance by parties to conflict with
international law, enhancing compliance by non-State
armed groups, enhancing protection by United Nations
peacekeeping and other relevant missions, improving
humanitarian access and enhancing accountability for
violations of international humanitarian law.
The Namibian delegation appreciates the fact that,
since adopting resolution 1265 (1999), the Security

Council has been addressing the issue of the protection
of civilians in conflict and has adopted numerous
resolutions on that issue. The international community
has long had in place instruments of international law
that provide the legal framework for the protection of
civilian populations in armed conflicts. They notably
include the following: international humanitarian law,
in particular the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and
the two Additional Protocols of 1977, which established
basic rules of conduct during hostilities and the need for
making a fundamental distinction between the civilian
population and combatants. Those instruments include
the prohibition of torture. The protection of particularly
vulnerable groups, notably women, the elderly, children
and internally displaced persons, are essential elements
in protecting civilians in armed conflict. It is more often
women and girls who are disproportionately affected
in conflict because, in many cases, they have been
subjected to rape and other forms of sexual violence.
The preamble to the Charter of the United Nations
opens with a firm determination by Member States to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
Therefore, it is our shared responsibility to protect
civilians and vulnerable groups in conflict situations.
However, the protection of civilians in conflict situations
should not be motivated by factors other than purely
humanitarian considerations. Also, double standards
and selectivity send the wrong signals to perpetrators
of crimes against civilians in armed conflict and make
a mockery of justice.
While the primary responsibility to protect
the civilian population lies with the Governments
concerned, in some conflict situations, it may happen
that Governments are unable to act on that responsibility.
If their inability is due to a lack of capacity, then the
international community should offer its assistance. It
is for that reason that, at the World Summit in 2005,
Heads of State and Government adopted the global
norm known as the responsibility to protect.
However, those assuming the responsibility to
protect, in particular under the third pillar of that
responsibility, should take extra precautions so
that civilians do not become statistics of so-called
collateral damage due to the negligence of those
assuming responsibility to protect them. Hence, my
delegation rejects the usage or deployment of drones
as inappropriate for the purpose of protecting civilians
in conflict. In most cases, the use of unarmed drones
results in the death of innocent civilians. Therefore,

13-4309263

S/PV.7019

enhancing compliance with international humanitarian
law, human rights law and refugee law is an obligation
that requires strict adherence by all warring parties,
including those assuming the responsibility to protect
civilians. Those who have been identified and proven to
have committed or tolerated war crimes should be held
accountable for their crimes.

last past month (see S/PV.7011)by Mr. Raymond
Tshibanda N’tungamulongo, Minister for Foreign
Affairs, International Cooperation and Francophone
Affairs of my country, owing to repeated conflicts, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has lost more than
six million people, a tragedy that is, in terms of scale,
without equal in the history of humankind.

With the goal of meeting the challenges I have
mentioned here, international humanitarian law has
been integrated into the training programmes of the
Namibian defence force, as well as the Namibian
police force, so that when deployed in peacekeeping
missions or in any other operations, they will abide by
international humanitarian law and effectively assume
the responsibility of protecting civilians in conflict.

The war situation prevailing in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, particularly in North Kivu and
its surroundings, has led to a resurgence in violence
and new forms of crime. The massive violations of
human rights there include extrajudicial and summary
executions, the forcible recruitment of child soldiers,
abductions, rape and sexual violence, looting of public
and private property and the illegal exploitation of
natural resources.

In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm Namibia’s strong
commitment to meeting its international obligations,
particularly under international humanitarian and
human rights law. In doing so, we strive to contribute
to the attainment of the noble ideals of reaffirming faith
in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth
of the human person and in the equal rights of men and
women to live in peace and freedom.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic
Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): I would like
first of all to thank your country, Madam President, the
Argentine Republic, for holding this open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. I also take this
opportunity to thank His Excellency Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon; Ms. Valerie Amos, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs; Ms. Navi Pillay,
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights;
and Mr. Philip Spoerri, Director for International Law
and Cooperation of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, for their statements.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict
remains for my country, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, a subject of great concern. That is why
my delegation welcomes the interest that the Security
Council attaches to this issue, which is central to its
peacekeeping missions.
As the Council knows, in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, as in other conflict situations around
the world, thousands of people continue to suffer
every day of the war. As stated here in the Chamber
64

To give the Council an idea of the
​​ magnitude of the
tragedy, Ms. Kang Kyung-wha, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs, who visited the
region two months ago, noted in her report an increase
in the number of displaced persons, which has increased
from 1.8 million in early 2012 to 2.6 million today. She
also highlighted the 300 cases of rape recorded by the
Panzi Hospital every month.
A Government press release of 22 July reported
that serious abuses had been committed in the city
of Kiwandja, in North Kivu, by terrorists from the
Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23). The toll of the violence
included 10 houses and 15 shops looted, 13 young
people killed, 7 women raped and 13 people injured.
Moreover, those of us who have seen the most recent
report by Human Rights Watch, published on 22 July,
also on the situation in North Kivu, are no doubt aware
of the many unspeakable crimes committed by the
M-23 forces.
Besides the M-23 terrorists, 30 armed groups are
active in North Kivu province. I will not list all those
armed groups, but will just mention the single case of
the Allied Democratic Forces — National Army for the
Liberation of Uganda. That group, which is associated
with Al-Shabaab fighters, recently committed a number
of abuses against the civilian population in the area
of Beni. During the month of July, they temporarily
occupied the town of Kamango and looted several public
buildings, the town hospital, pharmacies, the offices of
international non-governmental organizations and all
motorcycle taxis. Several people were also kidnapped,
including the town chief, and nine of them were
executed. The thugs even attacked a contingent of the
13-43092

S/PV.7019

United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo on patrol.

suffering endured by the people in the east of my
country.

The situation I just briefly outlined shows the
magnitude of the tragedy inflicted on the people of North
Kivu. That is why my country is determined to shoulder
its responsibilities by investing in the implementation
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
As we have stated before, my country has made a great
effort in the conflict areas, and significant progress
has been made in terms of mitigating the threats to the
population’s security and improving the Government’s
management of the security situation.

My country also welcomes the most recent
declaration of Goma as a weapons-free area for
armed groups. We believe that to be in line with the
Intervention Brigade’s assigned tasks, one of which
is to keep all harmful forces, without exception, from
being able to cause any damage.

However, because of the M-23 terrorists, North
Kivu continues to experience violence and instability.
Despite calls for order by the international community,
M-23, which is bolstered by the well-known outside
support it receives, continues to cut down human lives
and forcibly displace the people of the province.
My delegation would like to highlight that, in
legal terms, progress has been made in the field
of international law, in particular international
humanitarian law, international criminal law and
international human rights law. It is dismaying to note
that, despite that progress, civilians are still the primary
victims of armed conflict. My delegation believes that,
in order to more effectively protect populations, those
laws must be respected by all parties to a conflict.
In that context, the responsibility of the perpetrators
of atrocities, whether domestic or foreign, must be
clearly laid out, in accordance with the basic rules of
international humanitarian law, and sanctions against
them must be considered.
My delegation therefore endorses the conclusions
and recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2012/376) on ways to translate
the Council’s commitment to protection into tangible
results for people in danger. In the same vein, my
delegation appreciates the relevance of the findings of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and Human Rights Watch.
My country welcomes the exemplary efforts
undertaken on our behalf by the United Nations through
the Framework Agreement and resolution 2098 (2013),
which authorized the deployment of the Intervention
Brigade. We believe that, through those actions, peace,
which is the main condition on which all security is
based, will quickly return and thus put an end to the

In conclusion, let me emphasize that the substantial
flow of arms throughout the Great Lakes region,
particularly in North Kivu, deserves our attention.
We believe that the protection of civilians in times
of conflict can be effectively ensured only by also
fighting against the proliferation of weapons. My
delegation therefore calls for sanctions to be imposed
on States that, in violating arms embargoes, promote
human rights violations by providing weapons to armed
groups.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Plurinational State of
Bolivia.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, on behalf of the Plurinational State of
Bolivia, I would like to thank the Argentine Republic
for holding this open debate, as well as to congratulate
you, Madam President, on the manner in which you
have led the presidency of the Security Council during
this month as a whole and during this important open
debate in particular. If I am not mistaken, you are one
of the few Presidents who has remained in the Chamber
throughout the meeting, listening to each and every
representative. We are very pleased about that.
The Plurinational State of Bolivia has followed
closely the open debates convened by the Council,
especially those related to the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts. Today we are remembering those who
10 years ago sacrificed their lives for the principles and
values of the United Nations and its Charter.
We also acknowledge the reports of the SecretaryGeneral; of Ms. Pillay, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights; of Ms. Amos; and of
Mr. Philip Spoerri.
We agree with the five main points set out in
the respective reports of the Secretary-General as a
response to the various challenges facing us: respect
for international law; compliance by non-State armed
groups; enhancing protection by United Nations

13-4309265

S/PV.7019

peacekeeping and other relevant missions; improving
humanitarian access; and enhancing accountability
for violations of international humanitarian law,
international human rights law and international
refugee law.
Bolivia nevertheless wishes to draw the Council’s
attention to several issues that should be part of the
discussion if we truly wish to consider the structural
causes of armed conflicts and, ultimately, international
responsibility for the protection of civilians in the
framework of international law.
Ms. Pillay’s report is both clarifying and alarming.
It shows that in recent weeks more than 1,000 people
have lost their lives in Iraq; 1,319 in Afghanistan; and
more than 100,000 in Syria, since the conflict began.
So many others have died, too, elsewhere on the planet.
In sum, one of the fundamental pillars for ensuring
the protection of civilians has to do, naturally, with
the fight against impunity and full respect for the
norms of international law, which are clearly expressed
in instruments such as the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court (ICC). That ideal cannot
be translated into reality as long as the possibility of
the ICC’s having universal jurisdiction is undermined.
There cannot be first-class and second-class countries:
those that subject themselves to the jurisdiction of the
ICC, and those that not only fail to recognize it, but also
use it as an instrument for their specific ends.
History is demonstrating to us that, unfortunately,
humanitarian law, human rights and democracy, or at
least the speeches that mention them, are but a coverup
for the geopolitical control and appropriation of natural
resources. We wonder, how many times was the defence
of those rights brought up as a pretext for invasion and
pillage? How many times, when they speak to us about
democracy and human rights, should we understand
oil, gold or diamonds? How many times are innocent
civilians the main victims of the conflict, killed for no
reason?
We wish also to draw attention to the privatization
of war and to the use by certain States of private
contractors, whose responsibility for violations of
humanitarian law and human rights is even more
difficult to ascertain than that of the regular forces of
a State.
We must put an end to the logic of the rule of
the strongest and substitute the universal rule of
international law. The High Commissioner for Human
66

Rights clearly mentioned drone attacks, which result
in civilian victims, where neither responsibility nor
the legal basis for such attacks can be determined. If
international law is truly for all, and if the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations truly apply to all
Member States, then there should be no Guantánamo.
The fact that one State is spying on all others should not
go unpunished. There should be no acts of aggression
against Heads of State such as the one suffered by the
Head of State of Bolivia, Evo Morales Ayma, when he
was travelling through several countries in Europe.
Nor should there be impunity for acts such as case of
the partner of Guardian reporter Greenwald, who was
recently detained for more than nine hours at an airport.
In sum, Bolivia believes that it is necessary to deal
with all of these issues in order to defend civilians
and prevent them from becoming victims of armed
conflicts.
The so-called war on terrorism, as it is designed
and applied, uses instruments of terror, and thus its
results are comparable to terrorism itself. For that
reason, the Plurinational State of Bolivia calls once
again on the international community to live up to the
speeches made in this Chamber and subject ourselves
to the same norms, from the International Criminal
Court to international human rights standards.
We also deem it important to note that under that
perverse logic, the main beneficiary of today’s armed
conflicts has been the armaments industry. Hopefully,
these days when we all appear to be suspect and all
appear almost guilty will soon be over, and international
law will triumph over the rule of the strongest.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran.
Mr. Mottaghi Nejad (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Madam President, I would like to thank you for having
convened this open debate on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. Today marks the commemoration of
the tenth anniversary of the attack on the United Nations
compound in Baghdad. My delegation joins others
in paying tribute to United Nations staff, including
Sergio Vieira de Mello, who perished in that brutal and
merciless terrorist attack.
The present conflict and violent situations around
the world, particularly in the Middle East and North
Africa, indicate that civilians are still suffering in
massive numbers. Despite the progress made on the
13-43092

S/PV.7019

issue of civilian protection, there have been some
failures as well. A large part of the shortcomings in this
field is due to the double standards used and injustices
in dealing with different situation of armed conflict,
including the situation of territories under foreign
occupation, as well as the fundamental failure of parties
to respect the principles of international human rights
and humanitarian law.
That double standard becomes more visible in
the context of the fight against impunity and for
accountability for the most serious crimes. I would
like here to refer to the crimes committed by the
Israeli regime against civilians in Palestine. It seems
that that regime, while stoking the crisis in the Middle
East, is continuing to base its policies on blaming
others, while itself enjoying impunity. There is hardly
any need to mention that that regime, with its brutal
killing apparatus, is notorious for targeting the civilian
population. The mass killing of civilians in Gaza
and other occupied territories with the most dreadful
and sophisticated arms, including poisonous white
phosphorus and cluster bombs, is just one type of crime
committed by the regime. The Israeli regime has thus
excluded a large number of innocent people from the
jurisdiction of international law, as if those people did
not deserve the protection required under the Geneva
Conventions and international instruments.
In Gaza, 1.5 million Palestinians are deprived of
humanitarian assistance and all the basic needs of life.
Gaza continues to be the largest prison maintained by
the Israeli occupying authorities. We add our voice
to the call raised this morning by Ms. Pillay, High
Commissioner for Human Rights that
“[t]he illegal blockade of the Gaza Strip imposing
restrictions on the enjoyment of fundamental
rights must be lifted. The freedom of movement
throughout the occupied Palestinian territory
should be ensured.”
It is expected that, by ensuring accountability for
serious violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights, and ensuring justice for victims,
our efforts for the protection of civilians would be
translated into meaningful and practical actions.
In his written reports and in his statement today,
the Secretary-General has emphasized the need for
enhancing compliance with international human rights
and humanitarian law and enhancing accountability for
the protection of civilians. To a large degree, in many

conflicts accountability — in particular with regard to
extremist and terrorist groups — is the absent factor
that paves the way for further violations.
In some instances, terrorist attacks target religious
and sacred places and pilgrimage sites, with large
numbers of fatalities among pilgrims and innocent
people. The Security Council should take measures in
preventing such crimes against civilians. Furthermore,
due attention should be paid to the root causes of
conflicts in order to ensure durable peace and stability.
The root causes behind some conflicts include
poverty, exclusion and marginalization, foreign
intervention and military excursions and occupation.
We are sure that the members of the Security Council
consider those elements to be extremely important
for the credibility of the Council. In addressing the
suffering of civilians in the armed conflicts, the
Council should take stock of those causes and seek
a balanced solution in resolving conflicts. Justice
demands that the perpetrators of crimes be prosecuted
and brought to justice. Let us hope that this open debate
will be an opportunity to assess the ways and means
of providing better protection to civilians in armed
conflict situations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
Mr. Escalona Ojeda (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I thank you, Madam
President, for organizing this important debate as an
opportunity for dialogue. We welcome the efforts that
have been made by the Argentine Republic at the helm
of the Security Council.
We, too, would like to join in the homage paid to
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello.
Similarly, we associate ourselves with the
denunciations made by the Permanent Representative
of the Plurinational State of Bolivia, especifically with
regard to the act of aggression experienced by President
Evo Morales Ayma.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reaffirms its
commitment to protecting civilians in armed conflict,
for we are convinced that it is up to States, in fully
exercising their sovereignty, to ensure the fulfillment
of their responsibilities in the promotion and respect
for human rights and international humanitarian law,

13-4309267

S/PV.7019

in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter and the United Nations.
My delegation believes that dialogue and
cooperation in the peaceful settlement of conflicts
are appropriate ways to contribute effectively to
the protection of civilians and thereby contribute to
the achievement of peace. We value the role that the
United Nations has been playing, with the support of
Member States, in promoting peaceful solutions to
conflicts in various regions of the world, in particular
the contribution of peacekeeping operations in dealing
with such situations.
The emphasis of peacekeeping operations should
be on the use of political influence and its integral
support functions to the parties in finding a peaceful
solution to a given conflict. Peacekeeping operations
should be part of the political settlement of a conflict,
not an alternative to it.
There are today no conflicts in the Latin American
and Caribbean region between countries that could
endanger regional or global peace. To the contrary, there
has been increasing efforts at regional and subregional
integration that have served to promote dialogue and
trust among countries, as well as to prevent and avert
conflicts between States. Through novel mechanisms,
such efforsts are intended to strengthen our democratic
systems, thereby creating the conditions, both within
countries and collectively, to strengthen a culture of
peace.
In that context, Venezuela reaffirms its support for
the peace negotiations between the Government of the
Republic of Colombia and the Revolutionary Armed
Forces of Colombia. Those talks have been taking in
Havana, and Venezuela and Chile are participating as
observers at the request of the parties. The goal is to
bring an end to a conflict that has affected the political
and social life of that sister nation for several decades.
As for the current situation in the Syrian Arab
Republic, Venezuela reaffirms its support for the search
for a negotiated political solution to the internal conflict
in that country, which continues to be the victim of
the interventionist policies of foreign Powers seeking
to overthrow the legitimate Government of President
Bashar Al-Assad. In that connection, we deplore the
fact that those countries continue to fuel the clashes
among various sectors of Syrian society by providing
weapons to mercenary groups operating outside the
law and perpetrating terrorist acts that cause the loss of

68

innocent human lives. We reiterate our full support for
the integrity, unity and political independence of Syria,
in accordance with the right to self-determination.
Moreover, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
reaffirms its call for an end to violations of international
humanitarian law committed by the Israeli military and
political elite in the occupied territories and Gaza. We
demand that Israel fully abide by the provisions of the
Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the protection of
civilian persons in armed conflicts.
In that connection, we demand an immediate end
to the policy of building settlements in the occupied
territories and Jerusalem East, as well as an end to the
blockade against Gaza. In addition, it must comply with
United Nations resolutions with regard to its withdrawal
from the occupied Palestinian territories.
To conclude, I would like to reiterate my country’s
commitment to the common cause of peace and
international security, guided by our shared values
in the building of a multipolar system that is free of
hegemony and aimed at strengthening a multicentric
and inclusive world that fully adheres to international
law.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mbalati (South Africa): My delegation
would like to express its appreciation to you, Madam
President, and your delegation for having convened
this important debate on the theme of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. We also wish to express
our appreciation to the Secretary-General, the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
the Director for International Law and Cooperation of
the International Committee of the Red Cross for their
respective briefings today.
For far too long, many civilians have suffered
owing to a lack of protection during armed conflict.
Despite a range of efforts by the Council to address the
issue of the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
we concur with the Secretary-General’s conclusion that
our record in that regard is very poor.
Protection for the civilian population is a
fundamental principle of humanitarian law. Sadly,
despite the provisions embodied in the 1949 Geneva
Conventions, which have been ratified by almost all
nations, their 1977 Additional Protocols, other bodies

13-43092

S/PV.7019

of international human rights law and our respective
national laws, civilians are increasingly becoming
the victims of armed conflict and other situations of
violence.
The continued deliberate targeting of civilians
through such acts as extrajudicial killings, enforced
disappearance, arbitrary arrest and detention, torture,
sexual and gender-based violence and the recruitment
of child soldiers have all become widespread in areas of
conflict, creating an atmosphere of fear aimed at further
destabilizing and displacing civilian populations.
The International Committee of the Red Cross has
reported that in 2012 alone there had been 900 cases in
22 countries of attacks on humanitarian workers, healthcare facilities and health-care workers. In many cases,
those attacks were fatal. Another alarming feature of
armed conflict is the threat posed to the safe delivery of
health care. It is through our collective efforts that such
senseless acts can be put to a halt. We remain steadfast
in our commitment to our international obligations
and, as such, will co-host an international workshop on
the theme “Health care in danger”, intended to draw
attention to the plight of health-care workers in armed
conflict and other situations of violence.
It will be recalled that, in 2000, we co-hosted, along
with the International Committee of the Red Cross, a
regional seminar on international humanitarian law,
with the objective of reviewing the ratification and
implementation of international humanitarian law
and discussing developments in the field. The lack of
awareness of international humanitarian law remains a
critical challenge in many States, including in Africa.
Progress in advancing the protection of civilians
will also depend on the consistency with which the
Council pursues that goal. Selectivity gravely limits the
credibility of the Council in advancing mandates for
the protection of civilians and seeking accountability.
The Council cannot be seen to place the value of some
civilians above others’. While we underline that it is
the primary responsibility of States to protect civilians
within their borders, an important element of protection
is prevention. Armed opposition groups also bear
responsibility for ensuring that unarmed civilians are
protected, and failure by both State and non-State actors
to uphold this responsibility should not go unpunished.
We wish to re-emphasize that accountability
must first and foremost be sought at the national
level. It remains the sovereign responsibility of States

to determine what their judicial mechanisms are in
ensuring accountability. Failing that, the international
community has a collective responsibility to act, with
the utmost adherence to international law, in accordance
with the purpose and principles of the Charter, as
prescribed in the 2005 World Summit Outcome and the
Constitutive Act of the African Union.
It is for that reason that, as peacekeepers, we cannot
continue to watch civilians being killed, maimed, raped
and displaced. In that regard, the Intervention Brigade
of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which was piloted by the Southern African Development
Community and endorsed by the United Nations, is an
unprecedented innovation that could eventually serve
as a model for the United Nations in the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.
In conclusion, South Africa remains unwavering in
its commitment to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. The protection of civilians is an important
objective that will only be made sustainable by enhancing
the capacities of States emerging from conflict in the
long term. The objective of peacekeeping should always
be to assist countries to end conflicts by empowering
them through security sector reform, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes and
the training of effective and professional national
security forces in order for them to assume eventual
responsibility over their territories.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Khalil (Egypt) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to thank Ms. Susana Ruiz Cerutti,
Legal Advisor of the Argentine Ministry for Foreign
Affairs, for being here today with us and presiding
over this meeting. I would also like to congratulate
Ambassador María Cristina Perceval for the excellent
manner in which she has presided over the work of the
Council this month.
(spoke in English)
I would also like to commend the SecretaryGeneral, the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and the representative of the
International Committee of the Red Cross for their
participation and important statements.

13-4309269

S/PV.7019

On the occasion of World Humanitarian Day and
the tenth anniversary of the bombing of the Canal
Hotel in Baghdad, we would like to pay tribute to those
who have lost their lives in service to peace, including
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General to Iraq. Among them also were
two brave Egyptians, Ms. Nadia Younes, Chief of Staff
of the Special Representative, whom I had the honour to
know personally, and Mr. Jean-Sélim Kanaan, member
of the Special Representative’s staff.
I would like to thank Argentina for the excellent
concept note (S/2013/447, annex) it prepared, which
provides a valuable contribution to today’s debate.
It is alarming that increasing numbers of civilians
continue to suffer in armed conflicts around the globe.
Egypt stresses the importance of the contribution of
peacekeeping missions to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. We support providing such missions
with the necessary mandates, personnel and equipment
to enable them to become an effective mechanism for
early warning when violations occur. We stress the
importance that United Nations peacekeeping missions
uphold the principles of respect for the sovereignty and
cultural specificities of host countries.
We reaffirm the importance of compliance with
the provisions of international law and international
humanitarian law by all parties involved in armed
conflicts, regardless of the nature of such parties. All
parties must comply with the principles of distinction
and proportionality in armed conflicts. All parties
must refrain from targeting medical facilities and grant
access to humanitarian assistance. Rapid and effective
accountability for any violations against civilians in
armed conflict must be ensured. Impunity escalates
violations just as much as it increases bitterness and
hostility between the parties to a conflict.
Egypt regrets that today’s important debate has
been undermined by three delegations that addressed
issues that do not fall within the legal scope of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, let alone the
mandate of the Council. We reject the reference to the
recent events in Egypt in today’s debate. The recent
events in Egypt do not constitute an armed conflict.
The addressing of Egyptian affairs in today’s debate
by those delegations demonstrates either a lack of legal
knowledge or the pursuit of narrow political objectives.
We remind those delegations of the following.

70

First, within the meaning of common article 3 to the
Geneva Conventions, a non-international armed conflict
is a situation in which one or more non-governmental
armed groups are involved. In order to distinguish an
armed conflict from less serious forms of violence,
such as internal disturbances and tensions, riots or
acts of banditry, the situation must reach a certain
threshold of confrontation. Non-governmental groups
involved in the conflict must be considered as parties
to the conflict, meaning that they possess organized
armed forces under a clear military command structure
and have the capacity to sustain military operations.
The recent events in Egypt do not meet any of those
qualifications.
Secondly, the situation in Egypt does not threaten
international peace and security. It is an internal matter
that will be resolved only through an Egyptian-led
political process that includes all Egyptian political
factions that reject violence and extremism. As the
Secretary-General said in his press conference a few
hour ago, it is an Egyptian problem, and the Egyptian
people have the right and the responsibility to resolve it
by themselves for their better future.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I should like to thank you, Madam President, for having
organized during your presidency of the Council this
debate on an issue of great importance to all of us, that
is, the protection of civilians in armed conflict. I should
also like to thank you for the concept note (S/2013/447)
you have circulated to inform our debate.
More than 13 years have passed since the SecretaryGeneral submitted his first report (S/1999/957) on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict to the Security
Council, which adopted resolution 1265 (1999).
Our debate today coincides with the observance of
World Humanitarian Day and the tenth anniversary of
the bombing of the United Nations headquarters in Iraq.
This compels us to turn to the topic of those who have
fallen while working for a noble international cause.
We urge the Council to continue regular
deliberations on this issue in order to seek an objective
and broad approach to find a way to protect civilians,
first and foremost to address the root causes of conflict,
as well as to provide regular political support. That is
the best way to protect civilians.

13-43092

S/PV.7019

There is no doubt that many civilians fall victim
to armed conflict in many regions. In that regard, we
must point out a fact that must be taken into account,
namely, that it is rebel movements that are provoking the
greatest number of victims among civilians, including
women and children, so as to turn people against the
Government and cause the international community to
intervene in conflict zones. The best example of that is
what is being done by the armed rebel groups in Darfur
in order to undermine the peace process, the Doha
Document for Peace and other process aimed at peace
and stability in the region.

of the legitimacy and sovereignty of States, including
their full and direct responsibility for protecting their
citizens.

In that connection, I would like to thank Ms. Valerie
Amos, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, who this morning noted in her speech that it
was the armed groups in Darfur that had prevented
humanitarian access to more than 90,000 in the area
under their control.

Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): Let me start by mentioning
that Georgia fully associates itself with the statement
by the observer the European Union. Allow me to add
some comments in my national capacity.

The alliance among revolutionaries attacks villages
in Southern and Northern Kordofan states, which are
heavily populated. They are also attacking the offices
and headquarters of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, UNICEF, the World Health
Organization and other international organizations, as
well as, recently, the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei. That is a flagrant example of targeting
civilians.
The Security Council must play its part in combating
the so-called Sudan Revolutionary Front, which
includes the Sudan People’s Liberation MovementNorth and the other movements in Darfur that reject
peace. Moreover, we expect that the talks with South
Sudan will set the foundation for strong relations
based on good-neighbourliness and non-interference in
domestic affairs. We also hope that they will lead to
the implementation of the agreements that have been
reached and the normalization of relations between our
two States, to the benefit of the interests of our two
brotherly peoples.
Today’s debate also touches on the responsibility
to protect, a noble principle to which we all aspire.
Nevertheless, it is worrying that some are attempting
to use that principle for political ends — for instance,
marketing the responsibility to protect. We would
like here to recall that the responsibility to protect, as
reflected in the 2005 Summit Outcome, continues to
be a concept subject to differing interpretations among
Member States. Defining it should not to the detriment

Moreover, we should recall that civilians’ right
to protection during armed conflict is part of a
comprehensive and independent matrix of rights and
obligations, as the Summit Outcome also underscored,
beginning with achieving development, combating
poverty, preventing conflicts and resolving differences.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Georgia.

First of all, I, too, would like to join in expressing
sympathy to the families of the victims and to
remember those who fell to the terrorist attack against
United Nations headquarters in Baghdad on this sad
anniversary day: Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, Ms. Nadia
Younes, Mr. Jean-Sélim Kanaan and others.
Let me express my gratitude for this timely
opportunity to address the issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict and, more important, to
consider ways to increase the effectiveness of the
United Nations community in that regard.
Today, unfortunately, the urgent nature of this issue
is underscored by the ongoing tragic developments in
the Middle East and other places of the world. While
reflecting on the importance of our endeavours, we
have to confess that millions of people worldwide suffer
from armed conflict and its consequences, are deprived
of their fundamental rights and freedoms, separated
from their families and expelled from their places of
permanent residence. In that context, the role of the
international community is crucial in undertaking
immediate and concrete actions to protect lives of
civilians and ensure their basic rights.
The problem of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and from its consequences is especially painful
for my country, as five years after the Russia-Georgia
war it continues to suffer from the effects of the armed
conflict imprinted on lives of hundreds of thousands of
Georgian citizens. In spite of numerous international
calls, emanating, inter alia, from the relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions on the
subject of internally displaced persons (IDPs) and

13-4309271

S/PV.7019

refugees, and notwithstanding the serious concerns
raised by the relevant United Nations agencies,
hundreds of thousands of IDPs and refugees continue to
be deprived of their internationally recognized right to
return to their homes in a voluntary, safe and dignified
manner.
In spite of the comprehensive efforts of the
Government of Georgia to alleviate the burden of the
displaced, the failure of a relevant actor to recognize
their inalienable right to return prevents any sustainable
solution. Furthermore, that creates an obstacle to the
implementation of international humanitarian law,
human rights law and refugee law, not only in Georgia,
but worldwide.
The continuous endeavours of the Geneva
international discussion co-chairs, among them the
representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador
Antti Turunen, and other United Nations actors who
aimed to remedy the humanitarian challenges, have
been repeatedly undermined. Those endeavours, which
the Government of Georgia highly values, still require
continuous political support and practical assistance
from the United Nations community.
Five years after the war, unfortunately, the
unresolved conflict continues to exacerbate the
already fragile humanitarian situation, and it affects
the everyday lives of the local population. The
Government of Georgia is extremely concerned about
the humanitarian and human rights consequences of the
installation of barbed-wire fences and embankments in
the Tskhinvali and Abkhazia regions, a process that
has been intensified since January. As a result, local
residents were compelled to leave their permanent
places of residence, thereby creating a new wave of
internally displaced persons and refugees.
People residing within the Tskhinvali and
Abkhazia regions of Georgia and in the adjacent areas
are deprived of their fundamental rights and freedoms,
including, but not limited to, the freedom of movement,
the right to receive education in their mother tongue,
and other civil and economic liberties. Sadly, the drastic
regulations imposed for crossing the occupation lines
and heavy restrictions on the freedom of movement
extend even to the most vulnerable of the population
seeking immediate medical assistance.
Another vital matter pertains to the ability of the
international community to assess and monitor the
human rights situation in the areas where the central

72

Government is denied its sovereign rights and that are
under foreign effective control and military presence.
After the unilateral blocking of the mandate of the
United Nations monitoring mission in Georgia in 2009,
the vacuum in terms of international presence has not
been overcome. As a result of artificially imposed
obstacles, the European Union Monitoring Mission, the
only international mission on the territory of Georgia,
lacks the ability to thoroughly implement its mandate
and monitor the security and human rights situation
inside the regions of Georgia.
In those circumstances, to comply with the human
rights law, a party exercising effective control has the
primary responsibility to provide such protection of
human rights, and accountability for violations in the
case of their infringement.
The paramount problem — clearly stressed by the
European Union — concerns the importance of safe
and unimpeded humanitarian access to the conflictaffected population. The Government of Georgia
urges the relevant party to grant unimpeded access by
humanitarian organizations to the conflict-affected
population residing in the Georgian regions under its
control. We believe that humanitarian issues should
not be used as instruments for political considerations,
but should be implemented purely on the basis of
humanitarian needs. The relevant international actors
must be allowed to carry out their activities according to
their respective mandates. International humanitarian
law prescribes the threshold for the minimum level of
protection for the civilian population; that needs to be
respected by all.
Strengthening our common efforts to protect
civilians in armed conflicts is our responsibility, which
is fully realized by every member of the United Nations
family. We need to take concrete and tangible steps
to alleviate the consequences of armed hostilities on
civilians and to safeguard their rights and freedoms.
I would like to once again subscribe to the European
Union statement and to call on all the relevant actors in
ongoing armed conflicts and hostilities to ensure rapid,
safe and unimpeded humanitarian access to affected
populations. For its part, Georgia stands ready to
contribute to concerted international efforts and ensure
more effective protection of civilian populations during
armed conflicts and in the post-conflict phase, while
also siding with the global effort towards peace and
security.

13-43092

S/PV.7019

The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of Israel has asked for the floor to make
a further statement. I now give him the floor.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic has asked for the floor to
make a further statement. I now give him the floor.

Mr. Nitzan (Israel): Based on the remarks made
earlier today, it would seem that the High Commissioner
for Human Rights has a mistaken understanding of the
situation in Israel. Her criticism ignored simple facts
on the ground.

Mr. Falouh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I apologize for taking the floor once again. I
simply wanted to respond to what the representative of
the Israeli occupation said.

Only yesterday, Hamas declared that it would not
be a party to operations at the Rafah border, which is
a major crossing point for people and goods to travel
between Egypt and Gaza. In contrast, Kerem Shalom,
the Israeli crossing into Gaza, has remained open and
is handling increased quantities of goods, including
humanitarian assistance.
To be clear, there is no humanitarian crisis in the
Gaza Strip and no shortage of basic goods.
While I have the floor, I would also like to take
this opportunity to respond to comments made by
certain delegations that are attempting to trample on
the democratic process in the United Nations in the
same way that they trample upon the freedoms of their
own peoples.
In particular, it comes as quite a surprise that the
Syrian representative has the nerve to lecture us on
protecting civilians. Having killed more than 100,000
of their own people, with the assistance of Iran and
Hizbullah, it would seem that the Syrians and the
Iranians are intent on being known not only for creating
a humanitarian crisis but also for filling these halls
with lies and misinformation.

In fact, the instability and the emergence of wars
in the Middle East region is a direct consequence of
the aggressive policy of Israel. Everyone knows that
Israeli aggression has been documented by numerous
international organizations. Israel has a long tally of
massacres and acts of aggression. That has lasted for
more than 60 years throughout the Arab territories.
Israel’s State terrorism has resulted in horrific
massacres in Palestine, the Syrian Golan Heights and
Lebanon.
The representative of the occupation pretends to
have pity for the Syrian situation. However, he overlooks
the fact that the Syrian Golan is still occupied by Israel
and that its inhabitants are subject to assassinations.
Israel would not be able to continue in this
international organization without the protection of
those who sponsor it.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. The
Security Council has thus concluded its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 6.15 p.m.

13-4309273
