S/PV.9137

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9137th meeting

Tuesday, 27 September 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Broadhurst Estival. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mrs. Koumba Pambo
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Kamboj
Mr. Mythen
Mr. Kiboino
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Juul
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2022/692)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-60253 (E)
*2260253*

S/PV.9137

The situation in Afghanistan

women and girls to the home not only deprives them of
their rights, but Afghanistan as a whole is denied the
benefit of the significant contributions that women and
girls have to offer.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2022/692)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Afghanistan,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Kyrgyzstan and Pakistan
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Marcus
Potzel, Deputy Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Afghanistan; Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime; and Ms. Fawzia Koofi, Former
Deputy Speaker of the Afghan Parliament.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/692, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
I give the floor to Mr. Potzel.
Mr. Potzel: I am afraid that patience is running
out among many in the international community
regarding a strategy of engagement with Afghanistan’s
Taliban authorities. There have been some positive
developments in the past few months, but they have
been too few and too slow and are outweighed by the
negatives. In particular, the ongoing ban on secondary
education for girls — unique in the world — and
growing restrictions on women’s rights are signals that
the Taliban are indifferent to more than 50 per cent
of the population and are willing to risk international
isolation. Yet in our discussions with numerous
members of the de facto authorities at all levels,
Taliban leaders state that that decision has been made
and is maintained by Emir Haibatullah Akhundzada,
defended by hardliners around him but questioned by
most of the rest of the movement, who are either unable
or unwilling to change that trajectory. The relegation of
2/27

27/09/2022

Some of the Taliban’s claimed and acknowledged
achievements are also eroding. In the past months,
there has been a steady rise in security incidents
monitored by the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), both armed clashes and
criminality, as well as high-profile deadly terrorist
attacks. Our earlier warnings about the capabilities
of the Islamic State-Khorosan Province (ISKP) were
dismissed by the Taliban. But, in the past few months
alone, ISKP has demonstrated that it can carry out
assassinations of figures close to the Taliban, attacks
against foreign embassies, as well as fire rockets across
Afghanistan’s border to attack its neighbours, all while
maintaining its long-standing sectarian campaign
against Shia Muslims and ethnic minorities. We are
particularly concerned about the recent attack at the
Russian Embassy in Kabul, which killed 10 people,
among them a Russian diplomat. In addition to attacks
carried out by ISKP, a number of unclaimed incidents
killed and wounded Afghans going about their daily
lives, in particular while attending places of worship. I
take this opportunity to express our condolences to all
the victims and their family members.
The reported presence of the Al-Qaida leader,
Al-Zawahiri, in the heart of Kabul and the strike against
him, as well as the continued presence of other terrorist
groups, have forced a questioning of the Taliban’s
counter-terrorism commitments, further deepening
the trust gap with the international community. Those
questions are still unanswered.
Armed clashes persist between the de facto security
forces and armed opposition groups in the Panjshir,
Baghlan, Kapisa, Takhar and Badakhshan provinces.
There are disturbing reports, as well as videos and
photos, indicating possible serious human rights
violations committed in Panjshir. UNAMA has called
on the de facto authorities to investigate allegations
of extrajudicial killings in Panjshir in line with
international standards. The de facto authorities have
stated that they will conduct serious investigations into
these allegations. The status of these investigations is
unknown. UNAMA will continue to carefully monitor
this and other reports of serious human rights violations.
The economic situation in Afghanistan remains
tenuous. While the Taliban claim they have increased
22-60253

27/09/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

exports, maintained the value of the Afghani currency
and generated solid revenue collection, per capita
income has collapsed to 2007 levels, erasing 15 years
of economic growth. However, like many aspects of
Taliban governance, the details behind their claims
remain opaque. Part of the enduring economic
downturn is due to liquidity problems that are related to
Afghanistan’s isolation from the international banking
system. Liquidity remains heavily dependent on the
cash that the United Nations continues to bring in for
humanitarian operations — cash, I must stress, that
supports the needs of the Afghan people and does not
directly reach the de facto authorities.
But even this funding is uncertain. To date, the
2022 humanitarian response plan has only received
$1.9 billion out of a $4.4 billion requirement. That is not
even half. Amid growing needs and a worsening foodsecurity situation, such a funding gap is all the more
alarming given that winter is almost upon us again.
In the immediate term, humanitarian partners require
$614 million to support priority winter preparedness,
in addition to the $154 million required to preposition
essential supplies before areas get cut off by weather.
We have noted the creation by the United States of
the Afghan Fund, which will place half of the $7 billion
of Afghan reserves in an account in Switzerland,
where they will be used to help stabilize Afghanistan’s
macroeconomy. We have been informed that this should
be seen as a temporary measure until there is greater
confidence in the ability of Afghanistan’s Central Bank
to create safeguards against money laundering and
potential financing of terrorist groups.
But these humanitarian and economic measures will
not meet the Afghan people’s longer-term requirements.
Humanitarian assistance alone cannot replace
essential-service delivery systems, such as health and
water, nor prevent an economic collapse. UNAMA has
been urging donors to take a complementary approach
to meeting people’s needs by supporting, in addition to
humanitarian action, some basic human-needs projects
that leverage the capacity of local communities, address
underlying structural issues, promote economic growth
and seek to minimize the effects of climate change,
which are particularly severe in Afghanistan.
There is, so far, no consensus among donors on
the provision of limited technical assistance to de facto
line ministries or on whether to complete construction
of small-scale infrastructure projects. Many donors

S/PV.9137

feel that the Taliban should not be relieved of their
responsibility to meet the needs of the population
they control. This includes making their own budget
more transparent so that donors can better assess
where the real needs are that cannot be met by the de
facto authorities.
In the meantime, the Taliban themselves state they
are committed to private-sector-led growth that will
prevent aid dependency and conditionality. But this will
require practical steps that, so far, have not been taken,
including a clear legal framework, public investments,
a functioning banking system, reliable energy and
communication services, and an educated workforce
that includes women. Two days ago, I met with a group
of women entrepreneurs in Kabul who decided to stay
in Afghanistan and continue their business activities.
These women must be supported and not forgotten by
the international community.
There is also a continued lack of political
inclusiveness and transparency in decision-making.
Most Afghans do not see themselves represented
at any level of governance. There are no consistent
mechanisms for citizens to provide feedback to the
authorities and little indication that the Taliban wish
to even hear any. UNAMA, through its field offices,
consistently works to bring together the de facto local
authorities and representatives of Afghan communities,
including women, to improve the level of consultations.
In its human rights report issued in July 2022,
UNAMA set out the human rights situation in
Afghanistan since the Taliban took power last year.
In addition to the significant curtailment of the rights
of women and girls, as well as potential violations
of international human rights, UNAMA continues
to record violations of the amnesty declaration that
the Taliban laudably declared but have inconsistently
enforced. Media, previously one of the most vibrant
in the region, is struggling from intimidation and
restrictions, while civil society remains under threat.
The de facto Ministry for the Propagation of Virtue
and the Prevention of Vice takes on a larger and more
intimidating presence in Afghan society.
Since taking over Kabul, the Taliban’s selfidentified emirate has not been recognized by any State.
At the same time, the international community also did
not want to see the country collapse. Afghanistan’s
neighbours in particular adopted a pragmatic approach
and sought to deepen economic and trade ties and build

22-602533/27

S/PV.9137

The situation in Afghanistan

stability. The 26 July Tashkent conference, which for
the first time brought together representatives of the
Taliban, Member States of the region and traditional
donors, provided a platform for engagement and an
opportunity for the international community to express
its united position on what it expects from the de facto
authorities. It was regrettable that the Taliban delegation
did not take the opportunity to constructively address
these expectations. Nonetheless, we believe that the
Tashkent format is useful and should be continued.
Initially, the de facto authorities made commitments
with regard to the security and independence of
humanitarian assistance. These commitments have
also gradually been eroded. We viewed with great
concern the detaining by the de facto Ministry for the
Propagation of Virtue and the Prevention of Vice and
the General Directorate of Intelligence of three women
working for United Nations agencies in Kandahar three
weeks ago, as well as increasing pressures on our staff
and premises and those of other agencies. In general,
the de facto authorities are creating operational
obstacles that make the work of the United Nations and
its humanitarian partners increasingly difficult and
in some cases contravene global and well-established
humanitarian principles.
If the Taliban do not respond to the needs of all
elements of Afghan society and constructively engage
within the very limited window of opportunity with
the international community, it is unclear what will
happen next. Further fragmentation, isolation, poverty
and internal conflict are among the likely scenarios,
leading to potential mass migration and a domestic
environment conducive to terrorist organizations, as
well as greater misery for the Afghan population.
That is why we have to engage. The objective of our
engagement is to promote governance in Afghanistan
that works for the benefit of the Afghan people and
respects the norms of the global community. While
success is not certain, continued qualified engagement
remains the most realistic chance of achieving
these objectives.
I thank the presidency for this opportunity to brief
the Council. We at UNAMA are looking forward to
the arrival of our new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Roza Otunbayeva, in Kabul.
In the meantime, it has been my honour to convey to
the Security Council UNAMA’s understanding of the
situation at this critical moment.
4/27

27/09/2022

The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Potzel
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Waly.
Ms. Waly (spoke in French): I would like to thank
the French presidency of the Security Council for the
opportunity to address the Council again today.
When I last briefed the Council on the situation
in Afghanistan in June 2021 (see S/2021/601, annex
II), illicit drug production there had reached a record
high of 6,800 tons of opium poppy, and I highlighted
an alarming increase in methamphetamine production.
The figures for seizures show an increase in trafficking
of both heroin and methamphetamines in South Asia
and Africa from 2018 to 2021. Heroin seizures at sea
in the Indian Ocean have increased since 2021. The
events of the past year have led to a situation that is
more uncertain than ever, especially with regard to the
possible long-term effects on cultivation, production
and trafficking in a country that remains the world’s
largest producer of opiates. Only international action
can address those threats to peace and security and
support the Afghan people.
(spoke in English)
In April of this year, the Taliban de facto authorities
announced a complete ban on the cultivation and
production of all narcotics, while granting a grace
period that practically exempted the most recent major
opium-poppy harvest, which ended in July. Following
the announcement of the narcotics ban, the national
average price of opium skyrocketed, reaching $190
per kilogram of dry opium and $127 per kilogram of
fresh opium in July — more than double the price of a
year ago.
Meanwhile, severe droughts have destroyed
food harvests at a time when the Afghan economy is
collapsing. More than half the population is living below
the poverty line, and close to 19 million people are
facing acute food insecurity. For many, illicit cultivation
may seem the only alternative to starvation. In the next
few months we will see how the narcotics ban and its
consequences truly unfold as farmers in Afghanistan
make decisions on opium-poppy cultivation for the
next major harvest in dire economic and political
circumstances. At the same time, it remains unclear
to what extent the ban can or will be enforced by the
de facto authorities, considering the economic and
political realities in Afghanistan and the presence of at
22-60253

27/09/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

least a dozen armed groups challenging the authorities’
rule across 18 provinces, as identified by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.
In the absence of the rule of law, terrorists and
organized criminal groups can profit from illicit drugs
and other forms of trafficking such as firearms, while the
desperate conditions in the country are conducive to the
trafficking and exploitation of human beings. We must
prevent such threats from destabilizing the region and
beyond by monitoring the situation, improving regional
capacities and helping people. The United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) is conducting its
Afghanistan opium-cultivation surveys remotely, and
in a week we will be publishing estimates of how much
heroin was produced from the most recent harvest. We
are also tracking seizure data in the region through
our drug-monitoring platform, and we will be tracking
human trafficking and migrant smuggling flows as
well. In countries that are neighbours of Afghanistan,
we are bolstering the capacities of border liaison
offices and port-control and air cargo-control units,
as well as supporting practical measures to counter
illicit firearms trafficking. Meanwhile, we are assisting
with the procurement of specialized law-enforcement
equipment and promoting regional and interregional
cross-border cooperation and information exchange.
Interventions inside Afghanistan are also necessary
to help Afghans at risk and in need to the extent that the
circumstances allow. In support of the United Nations
Transitional Engagement Framework for Afghanistan,
UNODC is jointly working with United Nations partners
on health interventions related to the use of illicit drugs
in the south, north and central regions. We are providing
health services to address drug use as well as diagnostic
kits for HIV and hepatitis, and we have launched an
initiative to map treatment facilities and identify the
factors facing high-risk drug users. UNODC is also
supporting alternative livelihoods for opium-poppy
farmers in Kandahar and Helmand provinces, which
account for 72 per cent of the cultivation of opium.
That has included income-generation and food-security
support to more than 1,000 female-headed households
at a time when Afghan women are being deprived of
their rights, opportunities and livelihoods.
Afghanistan is at a sensitive juncture. The
international community needs to be ready to respond
to the drug challenges and illicit flows emanating from
Afghanistan, while extending as much help as possible
to those affected by illicit drugs inside the country.

S/PV.9137

We remain committed to supporting the United
Nations response.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Waly
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Koofi.
Ms. Koofi: As I was preparing to come to speak
before the Security Council, I talked to a lot of
women and men in my country, Afghanistan, about
the message they wanted me to transmit to everyone
here on their behalf. This is what they told me. The
people of Afghanistan are disappointed, horrified and
feel betrayed that the world is still not vocal about the
current gender apartheid under the Taliban, a group
that has no international or national legitimacy. The
people of Afghanistan are disappointed that during the
general debate of the General Assembly at its seventyseventh session, our world leaders did not talk about the
40 million people suffering in Afghanistan or the gender
apartheid that the regime is perpetrating on its people.
Yet they are still hopeful that the Security Council, the
main international body accountable for ensuring world
order and stability and protecting the rights and dignity
of all human beings, will act on their behalf.
My people and our imprisoned homeland want the
Council and the world to know what is happening under
the Taliban regime in Afghanistan. According to various
estimates by the United Nations refugee institutions
and other groups, more than 2.3 million Afghans have
fled the country since August 2021. Millions more are
looking to leave the country and are desperately trying
to obtain passports and find a way out of Afghanistan.
The mass departures of Afghans speak volumes about
how they feel about being ruled by a militant group
whose ideology represents the darkness of the past and
personifies repression and terror. In the past, millions
of Afghans left the country because of violence, and
we are grateful to those who hosted them then. Now
they are fleeing because of violence, uncertainty and
economic deprivation, and because of the Taliban’s
brutality and lack of governance. Under the Taliban,
Afghanistan has become a lawless country. In fact, it
is probably the only country in the world that does not
have a constitution. Our Constitution is in limbo. It
does not have a place for women, and it holds no future
for the people of Afghanistan.
I would like everyone, especially my brothers in
this room, to imagine for one minute what it would
be like if Afghanistan — or indeed the world — was

22-602535/27

S/PV.9137

The situation in Afghanistan

ruled by women and they, as men, were not allowed
to leave their homes without being accompanied by a
woman. I want them to imagine not being allowed to
wear what they want and being deprived of their basic,
fundamental human and Islamic right to education and
work. Can they put themselves in the shoes of Afghan
women for one minute and feel the pain? I am sure it is
hard to imagine.
Under the Taliban, Afghanistan has yet again
become a safe haven for international military extremist
groups in the region, inspired by the Taliban’s victory,
that are trying to overthrow their own Governments.
And it has become a place of horror for women and
other groups. The Taliban has issued more than 31
sanctions, edicts and orders to eliminate women in
Afghanistan, banning all their basic human rights such
as access to education, employment and liberty. As a
result, a generation of Afghan women have become
prisoners within the walls of their homes. Under the
Taliban, the continued elimination of women from
public life has made Afghanistan an open prison for
women, who make up 55 per cent of Afghan society.
Under the Taliban regime, Afghanistan has become the
only country in the world where girls from grades 6 to
12 are banned from going to school, and they do it in
the name of tradition and religion. In fact, what they do
is in contradiction with religion. Our beautiful religion
places emphasis on education — the first verse that
came to our Prophet, peace be upon him, was: “Read!”.
The Taliban also blame the culture, while just last week,
hundreds of girls in Paktia province protested, calling
for respect for their right to education.
The Taliban’s systematic elimination of women’s
rights has become tougher day by day. Afghan women
continue to ask me and the members of the Security
Council: What have they done to deserve such a burden
and to pay the price for such unjust policies? We must
admit that we have all failed Afghan women.
Women who used to be the sole breadwinners
in their families, who constituted 30 per cent of the
country’s civil servants, can no longer go into their
offices. Their posts are being filled by men, leaving
them with no means of income. In fact, when some
of those women were asked to come in to sign their
monthly payroll, the Taliban asked all the men to leave
the office and not to come in to work that day. They
do not even let women inside the offices. Can anyone
here begin to imagine the indignity that the women of
Afghanistan are enduring?
6/27

27/09/2022

Afghanistan used to enjoy a highly dynamic
free media, for which all credit goes to the nation for
safeguarding. In the past year, however, 300 media
outlets were closed. In 17 provinces, there are now no
woman journalists. Before Kabul was handed over to the
Taliban, there were 2,756 women journalists working
in the media — there are now only 600 of them. The
rest of those women were either fired or faced with
enormous security challenges, compelling them to give
up their jobs.
Those women, who like the Security Council were
at the forefront of protecting our common values and
efforts to build an equal and just society, are now
humiliated and oppressed and are becoming invisible.
Those women are former security forces personnel,
journalists, judges, Government employees and
activists, inter alia. When they take to the streets to
protest, they are being silenced with violence. They
are being arrested, tortured and disappeared with no
accountability. They leave the country in search of
peace and a better future, taking extremely dangerous
roads to neighbouring countries, whose hospitality we
are most grateful for. Their destiny in neighbouring
countries is in limbo as they await their final destination.
The Taliban see the women of Afghanistan as the main
threat to their ideology.
People in my country are experiencing a terrible
human rights catastrophe, but that is not the only problem
they face. The compromise, flexibility and willingness
of the people of Afghanistan and the international
community, including the Security Council, to look
beyond a dark past of systematic Taliban atrocities
and into a future of hope, trust, confidence and peace
extends back over a decade.
Let us not forget that, in June 2011, the Council took
the difficult decision to separate the Taliban Sanctions
Committee from that of Al-Qaida. The Council decided
to delist a significant number of Taliban from the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to the
sanctions regime under resolution 1988 (2011). That is
what the Taliban called for, while promising to abandon
violence and choose the path of peace. But what was the
result? Sadly, the answer was seen in the new wave of
violence that brought fresh and prolonged grief, anger
and despair to the thousands of Afghan families that
have lost their sons, daughters and loved ones.
As of now, that wave of violence has taken on a
new form, including through targeted extrajudicial and
22-60253

27/09/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

mass killings of different segments of the population,
amounting to war crimes and crimes against humanity.
I would therefore like to ask the Council to recognize
what is happening in Afghanistan as a crime
against humanity.
Everyone living in Afghanistan is in immediate
need of food. It is not a matter of whether it is
24 million or 30 million people — the entire population
in Afghanistan is in immediate need of food and aid
assistance, as a harsh winter is coming.
The Taliban have a good division of power. They
claim that they have increased domestic revenue.
They pay their soldiers through the domestic revenue
that they have collected and, they want the rest of
the international community to feed the people of
Afghanistan. There is no accountability from their side
to the people.
What comes next? What now? It is high time for
the Council to identify and list the individuals involved
in those atrocities. Can such a measure influence the
Taliban to change their course? We believe that it
can. It is only appropriate that the Council extend and
strengthen sanctions on the Taliban figures concerned
as one of several measures needed to influence the
group to leave the path of violence and commit to
real dialogue and talks for the true and genuine peace
desired by the international community and, more
important, deserved by the Afghan people.
I request that the Council initiate, and indeed
facilitate, a stronger mechanism for a political
dialogue. Today millions of eyes are on the Council and
its decision. There is no room for violence. The only
solution to the question of Afghanistan is a political
dialogue. The Taliban believe that power is a gift to
them from God, hence they feel no need to commit to
a peaceful dialogue. We must collectively use all the
leverage we have — if any — over the Taliban towards
a meaningful and genuine commitment to dialogue and
a peace process.
That leverage includes engagement, which must be
conditional on a basis of give and take. I would like
to ask all of those here what they have gained in the
past year by engaging with the Taliban. It must be made
clear that we are in support of engagement, but only
with clear conditions, including with regard to funding
and recognition. All of that should be met with an
enormous level of flexibility by the Taliban.

S/PV.9137

A safe and stable Afghanistan that can be a home
to all of its citizens is in the interests of our neighbours,
the wider region and global security. Let us not trap
ourselves into the narrative that the Taliban have
created — that they themselves are the only reality for
Afghanistan and they are the only ones fighting other
military extremist groups. The truth is that no military
extremist group can dismantle another; only the people
of Afghanistan, including its brave women in their
long struggle, can dismantle all military extremist
groups. I therefore ask the Council to stand with the
people of Afghanistan, especially with its women. In
fact, contrary to what the Taliban claim, their return
has inspired many military extremist groups that
are now operating on Afghan soil in order to pursue
their missions.
I must say that we have all worked hard for the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) to be extended. With all due
respect to my UNAMA colleagues, they have failed to
fulfil their commitment on political dialogue and human
rights. It is time for all of us to stand on the right side of
history, together with the people of Afghanistan in their
struggle to restore constitutional order. A safe, secure
and peaceful Afghanistan can be a reliable partner of
the world and a place for all of its citizens to live.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Koofi
for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Mr. Potzel, Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, and Ms. Waly, Executive Director of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, for
their briefings. I also thank Ms. Fawzia Koofi for her
powerful remarks.
One year after the Taliban takeover in Afghanistan,
many of the worst fears of the Afghan people are
playing out before our eyes, especially for women
and girls. It is therefore imperative that the United
Nations and other humanitarian organizations be able
to reach everyone in desperate need in Afghanistan,
including prisoners, internally displaced persons and
ethnic and religious minority communities. Against the
background of a deteriorating humanitarian situation,
the United Nations Population Fund is also warning
of alarming disruptions to women and girls’ access
to basic health services, with potentially catastrophic

22-602537/27

S/PV.9137

The situation in Afghanistan

27/09/2022

consequences. Vital services for survivors of genderbased violence are limited, following the elimination of
dedicated reporting pathways, justice mechanisms and
shelters. The lack of access to sexual and reproductive
health care and rights is having a devastating impact
on the lives of women and girls and dealing with it
must be a priority. We are also alarmed by the reports
of extrajudicial killings, torture, arbitrary arrests and
detention and a lack of accountability for those grave
abuses of international law.

main responsibility for responding to the humanitarian,
economic and human rights crisis lies with the de facto
authorities, UNAMA is uniquely placed to support the
Afghan people.

We echo the Secretary-General’s call on the
Taliban to adopt concrete measures to end and prevent
violations and abuses against children, including their
recruitment and use as combatants. And we welcome
the recent opening of the Analysis and Outreach Hub
in Doha by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict and fully
support its work on Afghanistan.

Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): Let me begin by thanking
Mr. Marcus Potzel, Deputy Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, and Ms. Ghada
Fathi Waly, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, for their briefings. I also
thank Ms. Fawzia Koofi, former Deputy Speaker of the
Afghan Parliament, for her contribution.

As we heard from Ms. Waly, the cultivation of
opium in Afghanistan remains a major source of illicit
drugs distributed globally, and we hold the de facto
authorities responsible for addressing the issue. We
are also concerned about the possibility that proceeds
from opium cultivation and processing may be used to
finance terrorism in Afghanistan and abroad.
Since the Taliban takeover, the entire United Nations
system has been clear in its determination to stay and
deliver for the Afghan people. As the penholder on
Afghanistan in the Security Council, Norway has also
been steadfast in its approach. The United Nations and
the international community must continue to support
the Afghan people, and if we are to do so, we must
engage with the de facto authorities. Non-engagement,
isolation and total collapse are in the interests neither
of the Afghan people or the international community.
In March, the Council agreed on a renewed and
reinforced mandate for the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) to support and
promote women’s participation and girls’ education;
to monitor and report specifically on abuses and
reprisals against women, including human rights
defenders; and to promote inclusive and responsible
governance, including the rule of law, all of which will
be key to achieving sustainable peace and stability in
Afghanistan. Since March, UNAMA’s mandated tasks
and priorities have become ever more vital. But, instead
of progress, we have seen the de facto authorities choose
a path of greater oppression and exclusion. While the
8/27

No country in the world denies girls the right to a
secondary education, with one exception — Afghanistan.
It is a devastating and avoidable tragedy. Leaders
who oppress half of the country’s population will not
gain legitimacy either from the Afghan people or the
international community.

We take note of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2022/629) and commend the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for its
tireless efforts in assisting the people of Afghanistan
to lay new foundations for sustainable peace and
development. However, a year after the Taliban’s
takeover as the de facto authority, we note the worrisome
trends of human rights abuses, a deteriorating security
situation and a worsening humanitarian context. We
continue to be concerned about the reversals of the
rights of women and girls, restrictions on freedom
of assembly and expression and indiscriminate and
targeted killings, which have reached record levels. We
therefore want to emphasize the following points.
First, we hold the view that education is a
fundamental right that also serves as a foundation
for sustainable development in thriving societies.
We therefore join the calls of the Organization of
the Islamic Conference, several councils of Islamic
religious scholars and many Islamic countries for
an end to the restrictions imposed by the Taliban on
fundamental rights and freedoms of Afghan women and
girls, including the ban on girls’ secondary education.
A modern, progressive and prosperous Afghanistan
is in the interests of all parties, and we encourage the
Taliban to see the role of women in that context.
Secondly, the grave violations against children
and the incidents of attacks on schools, hospitals and
key infrastructure must stop. Recruiting children as
combatants and using them for supporting roles are
clear infringements of their fundamental rights. We
22-60253

27/09/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV.9137

remind the de facto authorities, as those currently
in charge of the State, of their obligation to the
international community, and we urge them to refrain
from inhumane acts that jeopardize the well-being and
safety of the Afghan children.

Afghanistan’s humanitarian needs, which have been
compounded by the sharp economic decline and
the devastating combination of decades of conflict,
recurring natural hazards, protracted vulnerability and
recent earthquakes.

Thirdly, we are appalled, but not surprised, by the
Taliban authorities’ continued harbouring of terrorist
groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant/
Da’esh, the Islamic State in Iraq and the LevantKhorasan and Al-Qaida. The situation contradicts the
Taliban’s commitment to countering terrorism and
further jeopardizes the fragile security of the country
and the region. We remind the de facto authorities of
their State responsibilities and the consequences of
such actions under international law.

Finally, as a matter of priority, we urge the de
facto authority to focus its attention on issues such as
girls’ education, the removal of restrictions on women,
poverty alleviation and improved trade and economic
conditions, which are the legitimate expectations of the
governed from those who seek to govern.

Fourthly, we condemn the continuing incidents of
extrajudicial and high-profile killings, arrests, torture,
ill-treatment and other violations targeting former
Government officials and the Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces. The Taliban should make genuine
efforts to achieve reconciliation in the furtherance of
the general amnesty it announced in August 2021. It
should undergird such efforts by releasing all civilians
who have been arbitrarily detained by various Taliban
members and groups over accusations of moral or
religious infractions.
Despite those four concerns, we are cautiously
encouraged by the decision of the de facto authorities to
facilitate the return from abroad of Afghans, including
former Government officials and political figures,
and the desire to provide them with safety guarantees
and limited employment opportunities. We also note
the recent diplomatic engagement between the de
facto authorities and countries in the region focusing
on regional and border security, counter-terrorism,
drug trafficking, women’s rights, girls’ education and
inclusive governance.
We particularly welcome the meeting of national
security advisers of regional countries at which the de
facto authorities were encouraged to create inclusive
political structures, pursue a sustainable domestic
and foreign policy, ensure compliance with the norms
of international law, promote inclusive governance
and respect for human rights, especially the rights
of women, including girls’ education, and address a
potential security vacuum in Afghanistan.
Before concluding, we encourage further support
by donors in addressing the shortfall in meeting

Mrs. Kamboj (India): Please allow me to
acknowledge and thank the briefers for their briefings
on the situation in Afghanistan.
India is deeply concerned about the unfolding
humanitarian situation in Afghanistan. In response to
the needs of the Afghan people and the urgent appeals
made by the United Nations, in the past several months
India has dispatched several shipments of humanitarian
assistance to Afghanistan, consisting of 40,000 metric
tons of wheat, 36 tons of essential medicines, 500,000
doses of coronavirus disease vaccines and 28 tons of
disaster relief aid. Those consignments were handed
over to the Indira Gandhi Children’s Hospital in
Kabul, the Afghan Red Crescent Society and United
Nations specialized agencies, including the World
Food Programme and the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs. In order to closely monitor
and coordinate the efforts of various stakeholders for
the effective delivery of humanitarian assistance and
in continuation of our engagement with the Afghan
people, an Indian technical team has also been deployed
at our Embassy in Kabul.
As always, our approach to Afghanistan will be
guided by our historical friendship and our special
relationship with the people of Afghanistan. I would
therefore like to take this opportunity to reiterate our
firmly held conviction that humanitarian assistance
should be based on the principles of neutrality,
impartiality and independence. The disbursement
of humanitarian aid should be non-discriminatory
and accessible to all Afghans. In particular, aid and
assistance should reach the most vulnerable first,
including women, children and minorities.
As a contiguous neighbour and long-standing
partner of Afghanistan, India has direct stakes in
ensuring the return of peace and stability to the country.
Our approach is guided by the expectations of the

22-602539/27

S/PV.9137

The situation in Afghanistan

international community, set forth in resolution 2593
(2021) and reiterated in subsequent pronouncements of
the Security Council. They include ensuring that the
territory of Afghanistan is not used to launch terrorist
attacks against other countries, forming a truly
inclusive and representative Government, combating
terrorism and drug trafficking and preserving the rights
of women, children and minorities.
India closely monitors the security situation
in Afghanistan and is actively engaged with the
international community on issues related to
Afghanistan. We strongly condemn the recent attack
on Gurudwara Dashmesh Pita Sahib Ji in Kabul on
18 June. Terrorist attacks on the places of worship
of the minority community and the targeting of the
innocent civilian population continue to be a matter of
serious concern. The recent attack outside the Russian
Embassy is equally condemnable.
Our collective approach was articulated in
resolution 2593 (2021), which unequivocally demands
that Afghan territory not be used for sheltering, training,
planning or financing terrorist acts and specifically
mentions the terrorist individuals proscribed by the
Security Council, including Lashkar-e-Tayyiba and
Jaish-e-Mohammed. India notes the useful role that the
United Nations has played.
Drug trafficking is another menace for the region.
We recently seized large shipments of drugs on our high
seas and at our ports. As we just heard from Ms. Ghada
Fathi Waly, the reports issued by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime are indeed concerning.
Illicit drug traders and terrorists have a symbiotic
relationship. That is another area in which we need to
closely cooperate and work together to build up more
effective and efficient networks so that we can strongly
act against such illegitimate networks. Those networks
and groups operate in a way that need to be understood,
identified, tracked and ultimately disrupted. We need
to further strengthen such cooperation.

27/09/2022

of that objective. The interests of the Afghan people will
continue to be at the heart of our efforts in Afghanistan.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): I too thank Deputy
Special Representative Marcus Potzel, Executive
Director Ghada Fathi Waly and Ms. Fawzia Koofi for
their briefings.
Ireland warmly welcomes Ms. Koofi as she takes
her place at the Security Council table today. She does
so as an Afghan political leader and a vital voice for
democracy, human rights and the rule of law. She also
does so as a representative of every Afghan woman
who has been denied her right to an active public life
by the Taliban.
On a daily basis, we hear reports from Afghanistan
of Taliban repression, night raids, extrajudicial killings
and torture. We hear of human rights defenders,
journalists and media workers being deliberately
targeted. That is compounded by the targeting of
civilians, places of worship, schools and marketplaces
by terrorists operating with freedom of movement.
Ireland condemns in the strongest terms the use
of collective punishment by the Taliban against the
Hazara community. We deplore incidents of inhumane
and degrading punishments by the Taliban for so-called
moral infractions.
Women continue to bear the brunt of Taliban
control. They are erased from public life, denied health
care for lack of a mahram, blocked from attending
university and shut out of the workplace. They are
threatened and abused for how they wear or cover their
hair. Ominously, the targeting of women, which the
Security Council has consistently condemned for the
past year, continues to escalate. Some 370 days ago, the
Taliban shut the school door in the faces of a generation
of Afghan girls, denying their right to education and
their ability to learn and reach their full potential and
contribute to Afghanistan’s future.

On the political front, India continues to call for an
inclusive dispensation in Afghanistan that represents
all sections of Afghan society. A broad-based, inclusive
and representative formation is necessary for long-term
peace and stability in Afghanistan.

Those abusive and oppressive tactics serve only
to underline what we already know. The Taliban know
only how to maintain power and consolidate control
at the expense of minorities, on the backs of Afghan
women and girls. It is the Taliban alone who conduct
that regime of repression. It is the Taliban alone who
can undo such harm.

Peace and security in Afghanistan are critical
imperatives for which all of us need to collectively
strive. India will continue to play its role in the pursuit

As winter approaches, the humanitarian situation
in Afghanistan continues to deteriorate. The most
recent update from the Office for the Coordination

10/27

22-60253

27/09/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

of Humanitarian Affairs on conflict-induced hunger
was clear — Afghanistan faces alarming levels of
food insecurity, driven by economic shocks and
aggravated by climate change, continuing violence and
political upheaval.
The protracted humanitarian crisis has devastated
families and communities across Afghanistan. Their
capacity to cope has been exhausted, and their needs
are multiplying. Sustained levels of support from the
international community will be required. We urge
donors to continue their commitment to the urgent
humanitarian response. However, humanitarian support
alone will not be enough. The international community
must look at constructive ways to make space to provide
more basic needs assistance to Afghans, which will help
to build resilience and prevent the worsening of crises.
Against that context of crisis, Taliban attacks,
intimidation and aggression against women and
humanitarian workers are truly reprehensible. Those
actions have driven capable women from their jobs,
denying them the agency to work and provide for
their families. They also prevent many households,
and in particular those led by women, from receiving
the aid they so desperately need. Taliban actions
are crippling the ability of United Nations agencies
and non-governmental organizations to provide
life-saving and life-sustaining support. Ireland wholly
condemns those senseless acts. We reiterate our calls
to the Taliban to ensure unimpeded humanitarian
access and to guarantee the safety and security of
humanitarian workers.
We can and must hold the Taliban to account for
its actions. As has been made clear today, what the
Taliban is doing in Afghanistan with its actions against
the Afghan people and Afghan women and girls is
undermining peace and security. It is therefore our
responsibility, as members of the Security Council, to
respond, to call out abuses and violations and to insist
on constructive dialogue in order to find a negotiated
path forward. That must include all Afghans and with
Afghan women at the table as equal participants. It is
our responsibility to take action against the Taliban
when necessary and to not be rendered silent in the face
of the devastating reality in Afghanistan. That is our
mandate, and the Council must live up to it.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank Mr. Potzel, Deputy Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, and Ms. Waly, Executive

S/PV.9137

Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, for their briefings. I also listened carefully to
Ms. Koofi’s statement.
Afghanistan has been experiencing vicissitudes and
hardships for the past two decades. Its efforts to achieve
peace and development have gone through twists
and turns and have been full of challenges. Ordinary
Afghans have suffered tremendously and endured
enormous difficulties. With the hasty withdrawal of
foreign troops in August last year, the 20-year war
came to an end. Afghanistan has entered a new phase
of recovery, healing and peaceful reconstruction.
The history of the past 20 years has once again
proved that military intervention and external models
simply do not work, and that the future of Afghanistan
can be decided only by the Afghans themselves, who
must take charge of their own destiny. The international
community, including the United Nations, should
draw lessons from those 20 years and not pay mere lip
service to the phrase “Afghan-led and Afghan-owned”
but rather bear it in mind and put it into practice. The
international community should remain pragmatically
engaged with the interim Afghan Government, interact
constructively, provide patient guidance, enhance
mutual trust and understanding and help the interim
Government build inclusive and moderate governance.
It is not constructive to keep accusing or pressuring
the interim Government or to instrumentalize the
issue of travel-ban exemptions as a bargaining chip for
negotiations. That only narrows the space for dialogue
and deepens confrontation and divergences. We
hope that the members involved will reconsider their
positions and show flexibility.
With winter fast approaching, the humanitarian
and economic crises in Afghanistan are bound to
worsen. The international community should see its
most urgent priority in helping Afghanistan alleviate
the humanitarian crisis and stabilize its economy. It
should not politicize humanitarian and economic issues,
nor should it link humanitarian aid and economic
development to other political issues.
The right of Afghan women and girls to receive
an education and access employment should be
guaranteed. We expect the Afghan authorities to
make greater efforts to that end and to respond to the
international community’s concerns. At the same time,
safeguarding the rights and interests of Afghan women
and girls also means providing them with much-needed

22-6025311/27

S/PV.9137

The situation in Afghanistan

27/09/2022

humanitarian assistance so that women and children
can first have access to basic daily necessities, such as
food and clothing. In that context, Afghanistan’s frozen
overseas assets should be made use of as quickly as
possible to improve Afghan lives and advance economic
reconstruction. In the light of recent developments and
the Central Bank of Afghanistan’s statement, we call
for the frozen assets to be fully returned to the Afghan
people as soon as possible so that they can be used
effectively to alleviate the humanitarian crisis and the
Afghan people’s suffering.

We support seeing the United Nations play
an important role in the peaceful reconstruction
of Afghanistan and hope that the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan will actively
carry out its mandated activities and form synergies
with international and regional efforts. China will
continue to provide assistance to Afghanistan within its
capabilities through bilateral and multilateral channels,
and will deliver concrete, tangible assistance to the
Afghan people with the aim of bringing them warmth
and hope.

The security, counter-terrorism, counter-narcotics
and refugee issues facing the country are intertwined
and require a comprehensive approach if they are to
be fully resolved. We hope the Afghan Taliban will
genuinely fulfil its commitments, completely sever ties
with all terrorist groups and work with the international
community to resolutely combat the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant, the Eastern Turkistan Islamic
Movement and other terrorist groups so as to prevent
Afghanistan from becoming a hub for terrorism again.

Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
join others in thanking Deputy Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Potzel, Executive Director
Waly and Ms. Koofi for their sobering briefings, as
well as the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the Secretary-General for
his quarterly report (S/2022/692).

The interim Afghan Government’s efforts to
combat poppy cultivation should be encouraged and
the international community should actively support
Afghanistan’s efforts to cultivate alternative crops
and completely eliminate sources of drugs. In the long
run, all parties should help Afghanistan restore its
domestic market, integrate into regional cooperation
and connectivity, thoroughly eradicate the underlying
causes of unrest and embark on a path to lasting peace
and development.
Countries adjacent to Afghanistan, as well as its
other neighbours, have long given active support to the
Afghan peace process and made tremendous efforts to
that end. This month the leaders’ summit of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization (SCO), held in Samarkand,
Uzbekistan, reached a significant consensus on
Afghanistan that emphasizes supporting it in building
an independent, neutral, unified, democratic and
peaceful country and eliminating terrorism, war and
drugs. China looks forward to working with Russia,
Pakistan, Iran and other countries of the region to
continue fully leveraging the SCO-Afghanistan Contact
Group, the mechanism of coordination and cooperation
among Afghanistan’s neighbours and other platforms
in making unique contributions to the maintenance of
peace and stability in Afghanistan.
12/27

As we have heard, nearly 60 per cent of the population
of Afghanistan officially requires humanitarian
assistance, but the true need is much greater. The World
Bank projects that the country’s gross domestic product
will have contracted by one third by the end of this
year, and the Taliban continues to increase restrictions
on human rights and fundamental freedoms. I cannot
speak more eloquently than Fawzia Koofi did about the
restrictions on freedom of movement for women and
girls and the political, economic, educational and social
exclusion that they face. UNICEF estimates that the ban
on schooling for girls has cost the Afghan economy at
least $500 million during the past year, but the human
cost for each of those Afghan girls is immeasurable.
Some Council members appear determined to
politicize the crisis in Afghanistan. I think their
assertions are neither accurate nor helpful. The United
Kingdom disbursed $306 million in humanitarian and
development assistance for Afghanistan in the last
financial year and has committed a further $306 million
this financial year. We are the second largest donor
to the World Bank’s Afghanistan Reconstruction
Fund, and we continue to work with the World Bank,
the International Monetary Fund and others on
economic stabilization.
We recognize the importance of restoring liquidity
to the banking system, including a functioning Central
Bank able to access Afghanistan’s overseas reserves.
That requires an independent Central Bank, operating
transparently, with professional leadership and the
22-60253

27/09/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

proper controls in place to prevent funds being diverted
to terrorism. Calling for reserves simply to be returned
before those essential steps is neither responsible nor
compatible with a genuine commitment to stopping
terrorist financing.
Humanitarian and financial support can help, but
it will not resolve Afghanistan’s problems unless the
fundamental building blocks for stability are put in
place. To do that, the Taliban must uphold, rather than
repress, human rights, allow unhindered humanitarian
access and meet the counter-terrorism commitments
made in the Doha agreement. The Taliban must take
responsibility for stabilizing the economy. That
means creating an enabling environment for greater
investment, including ensuring transparency regarding
revenue and the budget and enabling women — half the
population — to contribute to economic activity.
I take this opportunity to welcome the appointment
of Special Representative Otunbayeva. It is vital for
Afghanistan’s future that the Taliban cooperate with
her and the United Nations, and we urge all Council
members to support her as she implements UNAMA’s
critical mandate.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): I thank Mr. Potzel, Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Waly,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, and Ms. Koofi for their important
and valuable inputs.
I will address two issues of crucial importance on
which the Taliban made promises to the international
community, which clearly have not been fulfilled.
The first is the situation of women and girls. The
recent reports of the Secretary-General and the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
corroborate the regression in the rights of women and
girls in Afghanistan. That regression is visible in the
complete marginalization of women in political life,
the difficulties that they face in accessing justice, the
renewal of their work permits and licences and the
obstacles to obtaining basic services, such as health care
and education. In that regard, we again call for a reversal
of the decision to suspend girls’ secondary education.
The harmful effects of that decision have made them
vulnerable to forced labour and early marriages.
The second issue is combating terrorism. Despite
the fact that the Security Council has been unequivocal

S/PV.9137

about the priority of fighting that scourge, terrorist
groups continue to operate in Afghanistan and direct
links between Al-Qaida and the Taliban are reported.
Over the past few weeks alone, several attacks, including
one targeting a Russian diplomatic representation in
Kabul, left dozens dead or wounded. Many of those
attacks targeted minorities. Mexico reiterates that
Afghan territory cannot again become an operating
base for terrorist activities or a safe haven for them.
Economic recovery is essential for a stable
Afghanistan. Mexico believes that priority should be
given to economic development without neglecting
efforts to protect human rights and combat terrorism.
The effects of segregating women are clear:
UNICEF estimates that depriving girls of secondary
education has resulted in losses of at least $500 million
to the Afghan economy in the past 12 months. The
World Bank forecasts contraction in the gross domestic
product by a third in the period between the end of 2020
and the end of 2022.
How can the Taliban ask for the international
community’s support for the revival of the Afghan
economy when women’s participation in economic life
is obstructed? Given the severe humanitarian needs,
the Afghan people cannot do without the significant
economic contribution of women.
Meanwhile, we recognize the important work
being done by States of the region, and we urge
them to exert their influence to make progress in
stabilizing Afghanistan.
The international community has also shown its
commitment to support, both in humanitarian assistance
and in terms of adapting UNAMA’s mandate. It is time
for the Taliban to respond by respecting the rights of
more than 20 million women and girls living confined
to their homes and by protecting the population from
the scourge of terrorism.
I would like to conclude by acknowledging the work
of UNAMA and the agencies, funds and programmes
on the ground. I would like to highlight the important
work undertaken by the Mission to combat the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons, in accordance
with its mandate. We hope that that will help to mitigate
the negative impact of those weapons in the region.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): Let me join other speakers
in thanking the Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Markus Potzel, Executive

22-6025313/27

S/PV.9137

The situation in Afghanistan

Director Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly and the former Deputy
Speaker of the Afghan Parliament, Ms. Fawzia Koofi,
for their briefings this morning.
Over the past year, there has largely been consensus
on the need to address the situation in Afghanistan.
What we now need are decisive actions, moving
forward. Our approaches require a thorough review of
the challenges experienced, the progress made and how
we can engage better and more effectively with all the
relevant stakeholders.
The economic, humanitarian and security
challenges facing Afghanistan remain a pressing
concern. They must be confronted through concerted
efforts. They also demand that the Taliban engage in
open dialogue and demonstrate flexibility, with a view
to improving the livelihoods of the millions of Afghans.
The Taliban should also urgently take steps to
unite the country, including through the formation of
an inclusive Government that represents the interests
of all the different ethnic communities and vulnerable
groups, including women, young people and persons
with disabilities.
The security situation is of great concern. August,
marked by a series of attacks by the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province, reoccurring
clashes with opposition forces and the continued
presence of foreign terrorist groups, was one of the
deadliest months. It is the obligation of the Taliban to
ensure that the territory of Afghanistan is not a haven
for any terrorist group to conduct its heinous activities.
The Taliban must therefore take concrete actions to
addressing those threats.
With the fast-approaching winter, the already
dire material needs will increase correspondingly.
We encourage all donors to scale up their assistance.
But even as we address the humanitarian concerns,
there is an urgent need to consider long-term solutions
and pragmatic approaches, including investing in
climate-resistant agriculture to improve food security
and self-reliance.
The decision by the Taliban on 3 April 2022 to ban
the cultivation of opium is a positive step. We welcome
the efforts of the UNODC and encourage other relevant
United Nations agencies and international partners to
support those efforts, in particular those being made
to provide farmers with the necessary resources and
capacity to cultivate alternative crops.
14/27

27/09/2022

The issue of how to manage the frozen Afghan assets
remains contentious. We urge all relevant stakeholders
to work together to identify suitable mechanisms and
frameworks to enable the disbursement of these funds
in a manner that can revive the ailing economy.
As we have heard today from Ms. Fawzia Koofi,
there has been no tangible progress in relation to the
repugnant restrictions on women in Afghanistan. It is
therefore regrettable that a year on, Afghan girls are still
unable to attend secondary education and women are
denied opportunities to work and rightfully contribute
to the development of their country. We must all demand
that the Taliban do what is right: allow the girls their
right to get an education and mainstream women into
the economy by granting them opportunities to work.
In conclusion, I reiterate that, if they desire and
expect to receive any form of international respect
and recognition, the Taliban must take seriously its
obligations on all fronts, from ensuring that women and
girls have their rights to education and opportunities
for gainful employment to uniting the country through
inclusive governance and fighting terrorism. Kenya
welcomes the appointment of Ms. Roza Otunbayeva
as the new Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Afghanistan and Head of UNAMA and
stands ready to work with her and her team. I reaffirm
Kenya’s solidarity with the people of Afghanistan and
its willingness to support all endeavours aimed at
securing their safety and well-being.
Mrs. Koumba Pambo (Gabon) (spoke in French):
I thank the Deputy Special Representative, Mr. Markus
Potzel, and the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly,
for their briefings on the situation in Afghanistan. We
followed with interest the briefing of Ms. Fawzia Koofi,
civil society representative.
The briefings we have just heard remind us of the
seriousness of the political, security and humanitarian
situation in Afghanistan, the consequences of which
have an impact on peace and security in the whole
region and beyond. In this regard, my country reiterates
its appeal to the Afghan authorities to be more open.
Mechanisms for inclusion and representation within the
administration are essential to calming the political and
social climate.
We renew our call on the Taliban to end restrictions
on the freedoms of women and girls and violations of
their hard-won rights. Access to education for girls,
22-60253

27/09/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

including secondary education, must be guaranteed.
The right to education is an inalienable human right.
To this end, we call on those in power to return women
to the centre of the country’s political, social and
economic life by facilitating their access to all areas
and sectors of activity.
On the security front, the expansion of drug
trafficking, the intensification in recent months of
terrorist attacks by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant-Khorasan and the frequent clashes between
the opposition and the security forces, as well as
the presence of foreign forces on Afghan territory,
are all causes for concern. We condemn the use of
terror and improvised explosive devices against the
civilian population, particularly children. We echo
the Secretary-General’s appeal for good faith dialogue
while calling for the protection of civilians and respect
for international humanitarian law.
The humanitarian situation is most alarming. Food
insecurity has reached a worrying level. As the winter
season approaches, it is urgent that the humanitarian
response plan be effective in order to assist the most
vulnerable Afghans. The consequences of climate
change aggravate this situation and rekindle the
urgency to act to avoid a humanitarian disaster. To this
end, we call on donors to continue their solidarity by
contributing more to the humanitarian response plan.
In conclusion, we reiterate the need for dialogue
between the Afghan forces and encourage the
international community to maintain its efforts in
favour of stability and lasting peace in Afghanistan.
Finally, I would like to reaffirm our full support for the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan for
its remarkable work on the ground.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Let me start by
thanking today’s briefers: Mr. Markus Potzel, Ms. Ghada
Fathi Ismail Waly and Ms. Fawzi Koofi. I would also
like to welcome the delegations of Afghanistan, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Kyrgyzstan and Pakistan to
today’s meeting.
Brazil acknowledges the highly important work
performed by the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and remains deeply committed
to upholding and supporting its mandate in favour
of a more cohesive, stable and prosperous future for
all Afghan citizens. The most recent report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security

S/PV.9137

(S/2022/692) sheds light on a number of positive
developments, which we note with satisfaction. These
include the return of former government officials and
political figures from abroad; greater engagement
between de facto cabinet members and local leadership
and constituencies, such as tribal leaders, civil society
and the media; and a decrease in the overall number
of conflict-related security incidents and civilian
casualties compared to the same period in 2021.
Nevertheless, the report also raises unsettling
concerns in relation to the establishment of sustainable
peace and unity in the country. Chief among such
concerns are allegations of extrajudicial killings,
torture and other forms of human rights violations
undertaken by the de facto security forces, as well
as threats, arbitrary arrests and detentions against
human rights activists, journalists and media workers.
Particularly disturbing are the report’s observations on
the continuing hardship of Afghan women and girls,
who still endure discriminatory policies that jeopardize
their future and are at complete odds with relevant
international law statutes, including the Convention on
the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against
Women. In the same vein, the rights of women and girls
must be entirely upheld and their presence in public life
guaranteed if Afghanistan is to follow a sustainable
path forward.
Moreover, the de facto administration seems to
have failed to take steps in a sincere and meaningful
manner to safeguard the rights of the Afghan people
and bring about more inclusive and representative
structures of governance. In such a scenario, we must
renew our call on the de facto Administration to respect
its previous commitments and effectively form an
inclusive Government, with the adequate participation
of women and ethnic and religious minorities.
Brazil also urges the de facto authorities to promote
and protect the human rights of the Afghan population
with a view to decisively curbing the unacceptable
violations noted in the report of the Secretary-General.
Finally, we wish to reiterate that any travel bans
on the de facto leaders should be subject to in-depth
assessment. Isolating them from interactions with
foreign counterparts may prove counterproductive, and
therefore may be unlikely to contribute to moderating
some of the regime’s hardened positions.
Afghanistan’s viability as a fully integrated nation
among its neighbours and the wider international

22-6025315/27

S/PV.9137

The situation in Afghanistan

27/09/2022

community also hinges on long-term development
policies that can push the country past the restrictions
and uncertainties associated with humanitarian
and emergency relief. For that reason, we renew
our call for the unfreezing of all assets of Afghan
financial institutions.

secure order and the rule of law in Afghanistan. We
cannot sacrifice that in the name of resolving more
urgent issues. That is why Albania considers ensuring
those rights as a necessary condition for addressing any
of the major challenges facing Afghanistan today and
in the future.

We also recall our policy of providing humanitarian
visas for Afghans threatened by the crisis in their
country, with a particular focus on women and girls.
To date, more than 5,000 humanitarian visas have
been issued.

We strongly support the work of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
in helping the de facto authorities to implement what
they have committed to. We urge them to work with the
newly appointed Head of UNAMA and engage with her
to implement the Mission’s mandate.

On 15 August, we marked the one-year anniversary
of the regime change and the situation on the ground
has yet to improve. As ever, Brazil is ready to support
the dedicated efforts of UNAMA and to work alongside
the Security Council in order to bring about the future
of peace, stability and progress that the people of
Afghanistan deserve.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I too would like to thank
all the briefers for their updates today, especially
Ms. Koofi for her powerful call to action. We must
make sure that the women and girls of Afghanistan are
not forgotten.
It saddens us to see the Afghan people deprived of
their basic right to lead a dignified life. As mentioned
in the stakeout today of the 10 elected members of the
Security Council and the incoming five, the Taliban has
made Afghanistan the only country in the entire world
in which girls are banned from attending secondary
school. They are restoring the total oppression of women
and denying them their specific rights, depriving them
from what we as the international community have
affirmed and reaffirmed in our words and actions as
universal rights.
In excluding women from rights, the de facto
authorities are effectively treating roughly half of the
population as lesser human beings. They are denying
them their humanity. No matter how bad the economic
situation is, no matter how bad the security situation
is, no matter how much tradition and religion are
misconstrued, there can be no rationale for excluding and
oppressing women. We as the international community
cannot afford to concede on such fundamental norms.
We know that there can be no lasting peace and
security, no development or prosperity if half the
population are deprived of their basic rights. Ensuring
those rights should be front and centre of all efforts to
16/27

Given the fact that winter is approaching, we call
for more humanitarian support to be distributed to
international organizations. We also call on the de facto
authorities to respect and ensure the full and unimpeded
freedom of movement of UNAMA, as well as to ensure
humanitarian access. We also call on them to cut all ties
with terrorist networks and groups that are responsible
for violent attacks in Afghanistan and beyond. We
insist that the de facto authorities earn the international
community’s acceptance by fulfilling the minimal
demands it places on them if they want Afghanistan to
be accepted as a member of world society.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I thank all the briefers for their
statements, which have once again confirmed the bleak
situation in Afghanistan. The discrimination against
women and girls, the collapse of the local economy,
the lack of liquidity and the continued terrorist attacks,
in addition to extreme weather phenomena, global
commodity price spikes and aid shortages, have created
what can be described as a perfect storm in Afghanistan.
The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs noted that humanitarian agencies are compelled
to provide fewer rounds of assistance than originally
planned. With limited aid available, there are increasing
concerns that the ongoing harassment and intimidation
of female humanitarian staff will mean that women and
girls who live in regions that are hard to reach will be in
danger of being left behind in Afghanistan.
To say that the current situation is unbearable
and will lead to further suffering and instability is
an understatement. In order to avoid a humanitarian
catastrophe, the Afghan economy must be revitalized.
In that respect, the United Arab Emirates welcomed the
announcement by the United States of the establishment
of the Afghan Fund, which will manage $3.5 billion of
22-60253

27/09/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

Afghan Central Bank reserves to benefit the people of
Afghanistan. That is a step in the right direction.
Further similar steps must be taken to facilitate
financial transactions and reactivate banking services
in order to increase liquidity in the Afghan economy. As
Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths highlighted
to the Security Council in August (see S/PV.9118),
international financial institutions and others must step
up their efforts to ease financial arrangements in order
to reduce risks with a view to keeping the economy
running. We hope that the measures taken to operate
the Afghan Fund will be helpful in that regard.
For its part, the United Arab Emirates continues
its solidarity with the people of Afghanistan,
including through its efforts leading to the signing of
a memorandum of understanding with the International
Committee of the Red Cross on contributing $4 million
to cover the operational and administrative expenses of
hospitals in Afghanistan, including payments to cover
staff wages and medical supplies, as well as electricity
and fuel expenses.
We stress that revitalizing the Afghan economy
will be impossible if half the population is excluded
from the country’s social and economic life. According
to UNICEF and as noted by some Council members,
depriving girls of secondary education translates into
a loss of at least $500 million for the Afghan economy
in the past 12 months. That demonstrates the close
relationship among the participation of women, the
economy’s performance and development.
We regret that the Council was not able to reach
consensus to issue a statement earlier this month on
girls’ education in Afghanistan and other challenges
facing the country. The situation of women and girls,
economic recovery and security concerns are all
challenges that threaten peace and security. The Council
must be ready to tackle them with the support of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.
The Council should focus on our shared objectives
in order to help the people of Afghanistan and avoid
unnecessary divisions concerning the priorities that
should be addressed in relation to this dossier.
We also stress that it is not just the Security Council
that wants Afghan girls to be educated. It is primarily
what Afghan families want for their girls and it is what
the girls want for themselves. The Afghan people are
doing everything they can to see their girls back in
school. The de facto authorities must listen and respond.

S/PV.9137

That leads me to my final point on the security
situation. One of the observations in the SecretaryGeneral’s latest report (S/2022/692) concerns the
emergence of new anti-Taliban groups and an increase
in related anti-Taliban security incidents. The Taliban’s
methods of governance and policy-setting, particularly
by issuing edicts that do not take due account of the
interests or wishes of the Afghan people, will further
fuel discontent in the mid- to long term. If the Afghan
men and women are not heard by those who govern,
lasting peace in the country will be difficult if not
impossible to achieve.
In the light of the latest security challenges, the
Security Council should insist on its expectations, as
articulated in the relevant resolutions, with regard to
the need to establish an inclusive Government and
the full participation of women. Such a Government
must be able to impose security on all territories in
Afghanistan and prevent it from becoming a safe haven
for terrorists, which would constitute a threat to regional
and international peace and security. We reaffirm the
importance of keeping lines of communication open
with the Taliban, because closing those channels will
not achieve the desired results in the areas where the
international community hopes to see progress.
The United Arab Emirates will remain steadfast
in its support to the Afghan people and will continue
to constructively engage in the Council, as well as
through regional arrangements, to improve the situation
in Afghanistan.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Ms. Ghada Waly, the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC), for her briefing on the narcotics
situation in Afghanistan. We also listened carefully to
Mr. Markus Potzel, the Deputy Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Acting Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
and to Ms. Fawzia Koofi, the representative of civil
society. We took note of the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in that long-suffering country
(S/2022/692). We also want to express our condolences
to those affected in the wake of yet another bloody act
of terror in Kabul last week.
On 29 August we held a very useful discussion in
the Security Council Chamber (see S/PV.9118) devoted
to the anniversary of the infamous 20-year campaign
in Afghanistan and its sad consequences, which the

22-6025317/27

S/PV.9137

The situation in Afghanistan

people of Afghanistan continue to deal with to this
day. However, today we are still hearing our Western
colleagues, led by the United States — including from
the rostrum of the General Assembly — lamenting the
horrific results of the Taliban’s 12 months in power,
while trying to shift all responsibility for the failure of
their 20-year war and the deteriorating situation onto
the new authorities.
The current internal political situation in
Afghanistan is indeed a very difficult one. The security
risks are worrying. The country is once again being
shaken by terrorist attacks organized by militants
from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)Khorasan Province, with religious and ethnic minorities
victimized by their heinous acts, including women and
children. Tragically, two employees of the Russian
Embassy in Kabul also died at the hands of terrorists
at the beginning of September. It is clear that ISIL is
using all the resources at its disposal to aggravate the
internal political situation, creating an atmosphere of
fear and despair among the population and a hotbed of
instability that could ultimately spill over into Central
Asia and then Russia. We see this as an attempt to
demonstrate the inability of the Taliban authorities to
control what is happening in the country.
We are also concerned about the increase in
narcotics production, which has reached unprecedented
proportions over the years. We realize that the
authorities’ efforts are inadequate, but that comes as
no surprise, considering that the issue of drugs was
swept under the carpet for years by the Administration
in Kabul and its masters in Washington while being
used exclusively for money-laundering. We welcome
the participation of the representative of UNODC in
today’s discussion and count on UNODC’s concrete
assistance in the context of the international efforts to
help curb the drug threat.
It is simply inappropriate to criticize the social
and economic situation in the country. Despite the
Council’s efforts through resolution 2615 (2021) to
expand the channels for unconditional humanitarian
assistance to Afghanistan, the reality is that the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and
other humanitarian agencies continue to face a slew of
problems due to fear of sanctions. It is clear that Western
donors are not interested in expanding assistance
beyond basic needs and early-recovery programmes. In
that context, the situation regarding the unfreezing of
assets is particularly blatant. It would seem that after
18/27

27/09/2022

numerous appeals to the United States and its allies by
the Afghan people themselves, American academia and
a number of civil-society representatives, there should
have been some progress on the issue. Alas, we have
merely become witnesses to an announcement about the
transfer of the Afghan assets to a special account in a
Swiss bank, which will be inaccessible to the country’s
authorities and will be spent on the implementation of
temporary socioeconomic and humanitarian projects.
We call for the stolen assets to be immediately returned
to the Afghan people.
At the same time, we are hearing constant
accusations against the Taliban leadership of systematic
violations of human rights, especially of women and
girls. We consider the problems in Afghanistan today
extremely serious, and they should be remedied. But
neither should we ignore the fact that the result of the
country’s 20-year democratization process has been
to put Afghan women and girls’ principal right — the
right to life — under threat. However, it has been a long
time since we were surprised by the methods used by
Washington, with the support of its allies, in relation
to regimes that it deems undesirable. We are familiar
with their use of unilateral sanctions, political pressure
and ultimatums. At the same time, our colleagues will
carefully erase from history evidence of the war crimes
that the United States and other NATO countries
committed in Afghanistan, ensuring that those crimes
will never end up in the reports of United Nations bodies
or the International Criminal Court (ICC), as though
they never happened. Nevertheless, we expect the ICC
to resume its work collecting evidence on war crimes
by the United States and its allies in Afghanistan and
that the perpetrators will be held to account.
Building a sustainable peace in Afghanistan will
be impossible without international assistance to its
people in post-conflict reconstruction and economic
development, while also resolving its long-standing
problems in the areas of terrorism and drugs. At the
same time, it is important to maintain dialogue with the
new authorities while refraining from using blackmail.
Its own history of relations with the Taliban should have
taught the United States the futility of such a policy. It
will be essential to work patiently with the Afghans to
create a State that is politically and ethnically inclusive,
free from terrorism and drugs, economically stable
and developed, and where the rights of all its citizens,
including religious and ethnic minorities, women and
girls, are respected and protected.
22-60253

27/09/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

The work of UNAMA should be based on just such
constructive, pragmatic and comprehensive approaches.
We have high hopes for the efforts of the incoming
Head of UNAMA, Ms. Roza Otunbayeva, considering
her understanding of the specifics of the situation, the
country and the region as a whole. However, these issues
should not be used as preconditions for the resolution
of urgent humanitarian and economic problems. In that
regard, it is unacceptable to tie the Taliban delegation’s
travels to attend negotiations on issues of peace and
stability to the human rights situation. That approach
only harms the cause and hinders regional players in
contributing effectively to a peaceful solution.
Russia has consistently advocated efforts
to strengthen cooperation with our brother
people of Afghanistan, whom we will continue
to provide with assistance aimed at achieving a
comprehensive settlement.
We also continue to provide humanitarian
assistance to Afghans, despite attempts to exclude
Russia — one of the world’s major agricultural
Powers — from international trade and the obstacles
created to prevent our cooperation even with the World
Food Programme. We will continue to cooperate
with Afghanistan through bilateral contacts with the
de facto authorities and other Afghans in regional
formats, including the Moscow format, meetings with
regional neighbours, the Collective Security Treaty
Organization, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
and the member States of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
We thank Executive Director Waly, Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Potzel and
Ms. Koofi for their briefings. We also thank the newly
appointed Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Roza Otunbayeva, for accepting the
Secretary-General’s call to lead the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) at
this critical juncture. The leadership and staff of
UNAMA deserve special praise for their tireless efforts
in Afghanistan.
The most recent quarterly report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2022/692) makes clear the dire implications
of the Taliban‘s takeover. The security situation is
deteriorating. The Taliban have restricted most human
rights for women and girls, refusing to let girls go to
school past the sixth grade. Afghanistan’s economy

S/PV.9137

continues to decline. And the already overwhelming
humanitarian needs are growing.
With regard to the security situation, two deadly
terrorist attacks occurred in Herat and Kabul since the
Security Council previously met to discuss Afghanistan
(see S/PV.9118). We condemn those heinous acts of
terrorism, which, coupled with the recent revelation
that the Taliban were sheltering the leader of Al-Qaida,
underscore the importance of remaining clear-eyed in
our dealings with the Taliban.
Concerning human rights for women and girls,
we must recognize that 17 September marked one
year since the Taliban banned girls from attending
secondary school. Indeed, the United States regrets
that some members of the Security Council prevented it
from acknowledging that reprehensible milestone more
formally. A Taliban spokesperson recently affirmed to
an international news outlet that Islam grants women
the right to education, work and entrepreneurship. The
spokesperson then claimed that the Taliban first need
to create a so-called safe environment for women and
girls in the workplace and in schools. We saw a similar
media report along those lines this morning. But we
need action, not words.
Let me remind the Taliban that Afghan girls had
attended secondary school for two decades until one
year ago. During that time, the primary threat they
faced was from the Taliban. The United States and most
other members of the Council are merely echoing what
Afghan parents have already told the Taliban. Afghan
parents in many provinces are in the streets demanding
that schools be reopened to their daughters. The Taliban
should listen. In the past month, Ambassador ThomasGreenfield and I have met with several different groups
of Afghan women. They told us that not all Council
members have accepted their invitations to meet since
the Taliban takeover. All Council members should
listen too.
For our part, we are doing everything we can to assist
Afghan women and girls in the light of the Taliban’s
destructive policies. Last week, United States Secretary
of State Antony Blinken announced the launch of the
Alliance for Afghan Women’s Economic Resilience,
which will foster career-enhancing, educational and
entrepreneurial opportunities for Afghan women living
in Afghanistan and third countries. We ask that Council
members join us in pursuing creative ways to support
all Afghans during this particularly harrowing time.

22-6025319/27

S/PV.9137

The situation in Afghanistan

The United States is taking action to address
Afghanistan’s dire economic situation as well. This
month, in coordination with international partners
and Afghan economic experts, we announced the
establishment of the Fund for the People of Afghanistan,
which will protect, preserve and make targeted
disbursements of $3.5 billion in Afghan Central Bank
reserves to provide greater stability to the Afghan
economy. Robust safeguards are in place to prevent the
funds from being used for illicit activity.
As we just heard, some Council members have made
it a sport to criticize our efforts. Let me repeat what we
have said before: in the light of what we know about the
Taliban’s apparently renewed willingness to harbour
the leader of Al-Qaida, no country that is serious about
containing terrorism in Afghanistan would advocate
giving the Taliban ready access to $3.5 billion in
Afghan Central Bank assets at this time. We believe
that Council members’ attention would be better spent
on what more they can do to address the ongoing
humanitarian and economic crisis in Afghanistan.
For its part, just four days ago, the United States
announced an additional $327 million in humanitarian
assistance to Afghanistan to respond to the ongoing
crisis, which brings United States humanitarian
assistance for Afghanistan to more than $1.5 billion
since August 2021. We will continue to focus these
discussions on what Council members can do to help
Afghanistan. The United States has stepped up. We
have contributed more than $1 billion in humanitarian
assistance since August, issued seven general licenses,
championed a Security Council resolution (resolution
2626 (2022)) that was explicitly designed to enable relief
organizations to meet basic needs and have worked with
international financial institutions to make available
another $1.5 billion for basic services in Afghanistan.
We remain deeply committed to providing essential
assistance to the Afghan people and will continue to
work closely with UNAMA to aid the Afghan people
now and in the future.
I would just say to my Russian colleague that
Russia was chased out of Afghanistan in the 1990s.
She is therefore not in a position to lecture us — or
anyone else — on how to go about our affairs. Russia
had a security blanket free of charge for 20 years, while
we were there. And I know that Russia would like
nothing more than for our troops to be bogged down in
Afghanistan. As my Russian colleague has said many
20/27

27/09/2022

times, it is their neighbourhood, and now they need to
step up.
I do not mind saying that the previous time we
had this discussion, the representative of the Russian
Federation could claim only the supposed industrial
achievements of the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan
as Russia’s contribution to the Afghan people in its
current time of need. Let me repeat that they need to
step up.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
France.
First of all, I would like to thank Mr. Potzel,
Ms. Waly and Ms. Koofi for their informative briefings.
I would like to make three points.
First, with regard to human rights, in particular the
rights of women and children, they are being trampled on
by the Taliban in flagrant defiance of the commitments
that were made. Women and girls bear the brunt of
the Taliban’s edicts, which govern all aspects of their
daily lives and deprive them of their most basic rights
and freedoms. We are extremely concerned about the
persistence of violence against women, their exclusion
from public life, the imposition of the full veil and
the restrictions of women’s access to public services,
secondary education, the economy and most positions,
including in the Administration.
We are also concerned about women being denied
access to justice, the rising rates of forced marriages,
including of children, the restrictions on the freedom
of peaceful demonstration, arrests, ill-treatment and
arbitrary detention. The myriad forms of repression
also affect children, who are particularly vulnerable.
We call for an end to impunity for the perpetrators of
such violations and the implementation of human rights
recommendations by the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). There can be
no recovery for Afghanistan, including economic
recovery, without the full participation of women and
girls in the process.
Secondly, we have seen that the security situation in
the country has remained extremely fragile for several
months. On the counter-terrorism front, the attacks
by Da’esh-Khorasan have continued, and it has shown
that it can strike in new provinces and attack civilians
and diplomatic targets alike. It is also obvious that the
22-60253

27/09/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

ties between the Taliban and Al-Qaida have not been
broken, despite the Council’s clear demands.
As we have seen, drug trafficking remains
a destabilizing factor at both the regional and
international levels. Afghanistan remains one of the
three countries that produce more than 95 per cent of
the world’s opium-poppy cultivation. Trafficking in
methamphetamines manufactured in Afghanistan is
also expanding, and we see no tangible signs of any
progress being made in that regard.
Lastly, France will not turn a blind eye to the
humanitarian situation, which remains worrisome.
France has disbursed more than €120 million in
humanitarian aid since August, as well as providing
emergency aid to the victims of flooding and the
earthquake that occurred in June. We are contributing
to the funding provided by the European Union,
which has mobilized more than €1 billion this year
for Afghanistan. Amid reports of attempts by the
Taliban to interfere in the delivery of humanitarian
aid, we continue to demand that the entire population
have full, unimpeded access to that assistance. The
Taliban has shown no sign that it considers the needs
and expectations of its own people. The international
community is ready to work with Afghanistan, under
certain non-negotiable conditions, and we will continue
to evaluate compliance with them based on the Taliban’s
actions. The terms of resolution 2593 (2021) could not
be clearer on commitments, which cannot be bartered
or relegated to the background. This is not the time to
be less demanding or to grant the Taliban unilateral
financial concessions.

S/PV.9137

Socialist Republics left Afghanistan. I am sure that
some Afghans still remember it very well. However,
the United States cannot boast of the methods it used
to combat that Soviet legacy in the 1990s or of what
became of Afghanistan with the assistance it provided
during those years. Nor can it be proud of the shape it
left Afghanistan in last year. The issue here is not who
was worse or who was better. The issue is that we are
against Washington shifting the blame onto anyone for
what was done in those 20 years.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the United States of America has asked for the floor
to make a further statement.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
I do not want to get into a back-and-forth dialogue.
However, I just want to say that it seems that our
Russian colleagues are determined, perhaps even
desperate, to demonstrate that the United States is as
violent, duplicitous and manipulative as Russia is in
Ukraine, for example. They will never succeed in that.
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
remind all participants in Council meetings to deliver
their statements in five minutes or less, so that the
Council can conduct its work in a timely manner.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Afghanistan.

The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.

Mr. Faiq (Afghanistan): I thank you, Madam, for
convening today’s meeting. I would like to congratulate
you and your team on your successful presidency of the
Council during the month of September. I also want to
join others in thanking the briefers for their thorough
and alarming briefings on Afghanistan. I thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2022/692). I
would also like to take this opportunity to express the
appreciation of the people of Afghanistan to SecretaryGeneral António Guterres for appointing Ms. Roza
Otunbayeva, a dedicated and highly experienced
woman, as his new Special Representative for
Afghanistan and head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).

Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I feel compelled to respond to the statement
made by our United States colleague and his claims
that Russia has done nothing to benefit Afghanistan. In
that regard, just as at the last meeting of the Security
Council on Afghanistan (see S/PV.9118), it is important
to recall the state in which the Union of Soviet

Today’s meeting is being held at the start of the
seventy-seventh session of the General Assembly.
During last week’s plenary session in the Assembly,
we heard from world leaders about the unprecedented
challenges facing the world today and ways to address
them. Unfortunately, Afghanistan is currently suffering
from the combined impact of those global challenges,

France reiterates its full support for the Afghan
people and the United Nations, in particular UNAMA,
whose excellent and crucial action on the ground I want
to commend.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

22-6025321/27

S/PV.9137

The situation in Afghanistan

as well as a severe social, political, economic and
humanitarian crisis following the takeover by
the Taliban.
While our main motto at the United Nations is to
leave no one behind, and while Afghan women, who
make up half of Afghan society, played a critical role in
all aspects of political and socioeconomic development
under the Millennium Development Goals and the
Sustainable Development Goals in Afghanistan for two
decades, Afghan women and girls under the rule of the
Taliban are now deprived of their fundamental human
rights and freedoms. They are being systematically
erased from all social, political and economic areas of
life. It has been more than a year since secondary and
high schools were closed to girls. More than 24 million
people in Afghanistan need humanitarian assistance
and 90 million are suffering from acute food insecurity.
Afghan refugees and migrants face a dire situation and
an uncertain future. While many countries continue to
make every effort to deliver on the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, Afghanistan’s two decades’
worth of hard-earned gains, including national action
plans and progress on the social, economic, security and
political fronts, devised and adopted by Afghan experts
with the support of the international community, have
been reversed or completely undone.
I want to reiterate that the fundamental rights
and freedoms of all Afghan women and girls must
be restored, and the schools must be reopened to
girls immediately. Women should be allowed to fully
exercise their God-given rights, build their capacities
and make an equal contribution to rebuilding our wartorn country. I call on the Council to join us in that
appeal and to support Afghan women. I would like to
thank the previous speakers who strongly expressed
their support for the people of Afghanistan, particularly
women and children.
Let me express our profound appreciation to all the
international partners, countries of the region, United
Nations funds and programmes, local and international
non-governmental organizations and donors that have
stood by the Afghan people during this difficult time,
and despite all the challenges and impediments have
continued to deliver humanitarian aid and essential
services to the people of Afghanistan. We hope that the
pledging countries will continue to provide support to
the humanitarian response plan. It is very important to
ensure that humanitarian aid continues to be delivered
22/27

27/09/2022

without hindrance to all vulnerable people, including
women, children and minorities, across the country.
Let me stress, however, that humanitarian
assistance is not a sustainable solution to prevent the
growing humanitarian crisis or to combat poverty in
the long run. A sustainable, long-term approach will
involve taking concrete steps, including the resumption
of development assistance based on national
economic and development programmes, which must
be implemented by an accountable, legitimate and
inclusive Government.
It has been more than a year that the people of
Afghanistan and the international community have
waited and expected the Taliban to respond to their calls
and fulfil their commitments towards core issues. Those
include the opening of girls’ schools and protecting and
respecting the fundamental human rights of all citizens
without any gender, ethnic or religious discrimination,
as well as the formation of an inclusive and accountable
system based on the rule of law, justice and the will
of people. However, that has not materialized, and the
Taliban has disappointed all of us.
I want to thank all regional and international
partners for supporting the demands of the people of
Afghanistan and for constantly highlighting those
calls in their statements and in their engagements with
the Taliban.
Contrary to the Taliban’s claims and their announced
general amnesty, there are credible reports by the
United Nations and other international institutions
on widespread violations of human rights, including
extrajudicial killings, torture, ill-treatment, arbitrary
arrests and the detention of former Government
officials, security forces members, journalists, human
rights activists, civilians, protesters, individuals
accused of affiliations with armed groups and the
National Resistance Front, the forced displacement
of particular ethnic groups in different provinces of
Afghanistan, including Baghlan, Panjshir, Takhar, Sari
Pul and Badakhshan, as well as the shooting of prisoners
of war. Those acts are gross violations of human rights
and war crimes and subject to the prosecution of the
International Criminal Court.
The restrictions on the freedom of opinion and
expression, as well as the repression of media, mean
that many incidents, including cases of forced marriages
and child marriages, are not reported and perpetrators
are not held accountable. The Taliban must stop those
22-60253

27/09/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

acts, which contradict international humanitarian law
and international human rights law and Islamic values.
Those acts have also caused fear and uncertainty
about the future and have pushed human capital to
leave the country and increased the flow of migrants
and refugees.
Let me thank the Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in Afghanistan for his efforts
and for presenting the first report on the situation of
human rights in Afghanistan since the takeover by the
Taliban on 15 August 2021 (A/HRC/51/6). I want to
highlight that there is a need for an effective reporting,
monitoring and investigation mechanism to avoid
impunity and ensure a stronger response to human
rights violations in Afghanistan.
In the course one year alone, owing to the
Taliban’s stubbornness and unwillingness to adhere
to its commitments and their continued ruling by
force, Afghanistan has become entrenched in the
worst economic and humanitarian crises in its history,
making Afghanistan the only country in the world that
denies girls the full right to education and the worst
place for women and girls. In addition, natural hazards,
earthquakes and droughts, along with the fallout of the
banking system, the precarious security situation and
inadequate access to services have further exacerbated
that dire situation.
Furthermore, the continued presence and operation
of terrorist groups in Afghanistan, including Al-Qaida
and Da’esh, have greatly increased the security threats
to the people of Afghanistan, the region and beyond. The
presence of the leader of Al-Qaida, who was killed in
Kabul last month, is a clear indication of the continued
ties with Al-Qaida and other terrorist groups and an
evident violation of counter-terrorism commitments
by the Taliban. In addition, the recent attacks by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province
on civilian targets, including Shia Hazaras, Hindus,
Sikhs and Sufis, are indicative of the inability of the
Taliban to ensure peace and security across the country.
I would like to underline that the Afghan people have
been victims of terrorism in the past and are victims now.
Let me stress that there are no good and bad terrorists,
and terrorism does not recognize borders. We must
collectively and genuinely condemn and fight against
all forms and manifestations of terrorism — inside
and outside of our borders — including its root causes,
sanctuaries and financial resources.

S/PV.9137

As Afghanistan stands on the verge of a large-scale
economic collapse, there is a need for collective and
genuine cooperation by all stakeholders — Afghan
people, including the Taliban, regional and international
partners — to support the convening of a national
dialogue to overcome the current political deadlock and
provide the people of Afghanistan with the opportunity
to agree on core issues through a framework or road map
for the formation of a representative and accountable
system based on the rule of law, justice and the will of
the people.
I would like to welcome the recent communiqué
of the United States-Europe Group on Afghanistan,
which, among other important issues, emphasized
that enduring peace and stability in Afghanistan
requires a credible and inclusive national dialogue
leading to a constitutional order with a representative
political system.
I reiterate that only with an inclusive, representative,
accountable and functional system, involving
professionals and credible people from all backgrounds
with good reputations, and the full participation of
women can we save Afghanistan from the ongoing
crisis. Hence, we call on the Council to extend its full
support to that plea in line with the mandate entrusted
upon it by the Charter of the United Nations and
existing Security Council resolutions on the situation
in Afghanistan.
I thank UNAMA and the entire the United Nations
family for staying and delivering humanitarian aid and
for helping prevent a humanitarian catastrophe so far.
However, we expect a stronger and more effective role
and engagement by the United Nations in Afghanistan.
I want to thank the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and other international
organizations for their efforts in addressing the issue of
Afghan migrants, but I want to call on them to continue
in that direction and to stress that Afghan migrants and
refugees require their support and attention.
I would like to call on the Security Council
to effectively use all existing resources, including
sanctions, for ensuring peace and stability in
Afghanistan. We urge the international community to
stay actively engaged in Afghanistan and in helping
create people-centred and long-lasting solutions that
will improve the lives and livelihoods of all Afghans.
In conclusion, I would like to remind the Taliban that
no system can survive without respecting and embracing

22-6025323/27

S/PV.9137

The situation in Afghanistan

27/09/2022

the will of the people and that ruling the country by
force and fear will result only in continued conflict and
will deprive Afghanistan of sustainable peace, security
and development. We appeal to the Security Council
to take a united position in addressing the situation
in Afghanistan to eliminate terrorist threats, protect
Afghan women and girls, increase humanitarian support
to Afghanistan and help ensure a truly inclusive future
for all Afghans, including by implementing Security
Council resolutions for self-sustaining and long-lasting
solutions for Afghanistan — an Afghanistan that is at
peace with itself, the region and the world. The people of
Afghanistan deserve peace, tranquility and prosperity.

with Afghanistan. The sanctions should not have an
impact on efforts to revitalize the Afghan economy,
as the Secretary-General has repeatedly called for
measures to give the Afghan economy breathing room.

I end with a quote from Somaya Faruqi, the former
Captain of the Afghan Robotics Team, “Do not let our
country become the cemetery of our goals and dreams.”

Terrorism and the emergence of terrorist groups pose
another serious threat to Afghanistan, its neighbours, the
region and the international community. The reports on
the resurgence of Da’esh-affiliated terrorist groups are
of concern, especially in the light of the recent terrorist
attacks, claimed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant-Khorasan Province, outside the Embassy of the
Russian Federation in Kabul on 5 September, which
resulted in the deaths of at least six people, including
two Russian Embassy employees, and injured several
more. The de facto authorities must commit to fighting
terrorism and must ensure that they take all appropriate
steps to protect diplomatic and consular premises
against any intrusion or attack. Afghanistan must no
longer serve as a haven for terrorist groups, such as
Da’esh and Al-Qaida.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mrs. Ershadi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank
you, Madam President, for convening this meeting. I
also thank the briefers for their insightful briefings and
updates on the recent developments in Afghanistan.
Over a year since the Taliban took over, the situation
in Afghanistan remains challenging. According to the
recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/692),
Afghanistan is dealing with a rising humanitarian
crisis, a major economic downturn, challenges
associated with the establishment of an inclusive
Government and women and girls being denied their
basic rights, including access to education. Given the
dire circumstances, I would like to emphasize the
following points.
The international community must continue to
assist Afghanistan. Other conflicts must not divert
attention from, or lead to ignoring, the situation in
Afghanistan. While humanitarian and development
assistance is critical to keeping Afghans alive,
maintaining basic services and bolstering the economy
are not long-term solutions and must be supplemented
by sustained economic growth.
As we have constantly said, the frozen assets belong
to the Afghan people and must be returned in full,
without being politicized or made conditional in any
way. Sanctions imposed against specific individuals
and entities in Afghanistan must also not obstruct
humanitarian, economic or development cooperation
24/27

Afghanistan is a member of the international
community, and the de facto authorities must
acknowledge that fact and fulfil their international
obligations, particularly the repeated calls for the
formation of an inclusive and representative Government
that accurately reflects Afghans’ multi-ethnic society.
Only a Government comprised of all Afghans can
guarantee and protect their rights.

Equally critical, efforts to combat drug trafficking
must be a priority. Every year, Iran is directly affected
by that menace and pays a high price for it. Over the past
40 years, Iran has played an active role in combating
drug trafficking in the region, during which time nearly
4,000 members of Iran’s law enforcement forces were
martyred, and more than 12,000 other people injured.
As a neighbour to the country, Iran has used
its capacities and resources to help the people of
Afghanistan to overcome the challenges that they have
faced. We have been hosting millions of refugees, who
unfortunately received minimal international assistance
in the past 40 years. After the Taliban takeover, we
did not at any time close our border with Afghanistan.
Since last year, thousands of Afghans have entered Iran
on a daily basis. However, neighbours of Afghanistan,
including Iran, should not bear the entire burden
associated with receiving Afghan refugees. Other
countries should also welcome refugees.
22-60253

27/09/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

We welcome the recent appointment of Ms. Roza
Otunbayeva as Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Afghanistan and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
We continue our support for UNAMA in its efforts
to address the humanitarian crisis and facilitate the
intra-Afghan political process to promote peace and
stability in the country.
The Islamic Republic of Iran continues its efforts
to assist the people of Afghanistan and work with
Afghanistan’s neighbours and other partners to
ensure durable peace and sustainable development
in Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kyrgyzstan.
Mr. Utebae (Kyrgyzstan): At the outset, we would
like to express our appreciation to the French presidency
for convening this briefing. At the same time, I would
like to join other speakers in thanking our briefers for
their remarks. We express our congratulations to Her
Excellency Ms. Roza Otunbayeva on her appointment
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan. We are confident that her vast experience
in various positions, including as the President of
Kyrgyzstan, will contribute to achieving significant
results regarding the United Nations efforts in the
country and, ultimately, for the benefit of the people of
fraternal Afghanistan.

S/PV.9137

regarding the future development, stability and peace
of the region.
We welcome the decision of the Taliban leadership
to ban opium-poppy cultivation and drug production.
At the same time, Kyrgyzstan expresses its concerns
over the terrorist attacks in Afghanistan and conveys
its condolences to the families of the victims, including
those in front of the Russian Embassy in Kabul. We
reaffirm the importance of countering terrorism in
Afghanistan and ensuring that its territory is not
used as a platform or haven by any terrorist group
or organization.
As a traditionally friendly country to Afghanistan,
Kyrgyzstan, located in the same region, is interested in
a stable and prosperous Afghanistan, and it will always
stay strong to create peace in that country. Based on
humane principles, our country, among others, provided
humanitarian assistance to the Afghan people last
year. Kyrgyzstan also welcomes the general amnesty
announced by the current authorities of Afghanistan
and hopes for its full practical implementation.
The main priority for the international community
should be restoring the Afghan economy and
reintegrating Afghanistan into interregional economic
processes. It is also important to invite the Afghan
authorities to create an inclusive Government, as well
as ensure human rights, including the rights of women
and girls to education, work and social activity.

We also commend the efforts of the United
Nations, including the Secretary-General, the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
and other international organizations in addressing
the humanitarian needs of the people of Afghanistan.
Kyrgyzstan expresses solidarity with the international
community in overcoming the humanitarian crisis
and stabilizing the situation in Afghanistan. At the
same time, we extend our support to the United
Nations personnel in Afghanistan, who, despite all the
challenges, continue to carry out the noble mission of
supporting the Afghan people at this critical time.

Kyrgyzstan has created a dialogue with the current
Government of Afghanistan and continues to interact
with it on various issues.

Despite the temporary shift in the priorities of the
global agenda due to the conflict in Ukraine, the issue
of Afghanistan remains relevant at the international
and regional levels. The international conference on
Afghanistan held in Tashkent on 26 July, with the
participation of many key countries of the world,
is a testimony to the important role of that country

Mr. Khan (Pakistan): The delegation of Pakistan
congratulates you, Madam President, and the French
delegation, for a very successful presidency of the
Security Council during this month. We are also
grateful to you, Madam, for convening this discussion
and wish to thank Deputy Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Potzel, Ms. Waly and Ms. Koofi

We hope that the international community will
move forward in a coordinated manner on the Afghan
issue and actively cooperate with each other, especially
with the countries of the region, in order to ensure
peace and stability in that country and provide the
Afghan people with the necessary humanitarian and
economic assistance.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.

22-6025325/27

S/PV.9137

The situation in Afghanistan

for the briefings we have had today. I would also like
to take this opportunity to congratulate Ms. Roza
Otunbayeva of Kyrgyzstan on her appointment as the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
Afghanistan today presents a unique challenge.
Some 95 per cent of the 30 million Afghans are living
in virtual destitution, without a functioning economy
or banking system that would allow ordinary Afghans
to make a living or be able to have a better future.
Pakistan would like to see in Afghanistan a country
that is at peace with itself and the world and that
respects and nurtures all its citizens without regard to
gender, ethnicity and religion. A peaceful, prosperous
and connected Afghanistan is in our collective interest.
As a neighbour, Pakistan has a vital stake in
peace and stability in Afghanistan. We have led the
humanitarian efforts to help our Afghan brothers
and sisters in their present situation. We must avoid
another civil war, rising terrorism, drug trafficking or
new refugees that none of Afghanistan’s neighbours
are in a position to accommodate. Pakistan urges the
international community to respond in a positive way
to the Secretary-General’s appeal for $4.2 billion in
humanitarian and economic assistance to Afghanistan
and to release Afghanistan financial reserves, which are
essential to reviving its banking system. As reported
by the Secretary-General (S/2022/692), there remains a
shortfall of $2.59 billion in the humanitarian response
plan he presented.
The early resumption of reconstruction activities
and implementation of regional connectivity projects
with Central Asia that are shovel-ready, as well as the
extension of the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor to
Afghanistan, can provide a pathway to economic growth
and stabilization in the country. However, that requires
funds and financial stability. Afghanistan’s frozen
national reserves should be released and channelled
through Afghan institutions that can contribute to
reviving the Afghan economy and its banking system.
Without this, neither can trade take place effectively,
nor can investment be expected. In the absence of
such conditions, Afghanistan shall continue to remain
on external life support and be in constant danger of
economic collapse.
On human rights and girls’ education, the
countries of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
26/27

27/09/2022

(OIC), including Pakistan, remain engaged through
conversations between the Taliban and delegations
of Islamic scholars in Ulama for finding ways and
means to address the questions of sharia law and its
interpretation, particularly with a view to facilitating
educational prospects for Afghan women and girls.
We are hopeful that progress can be made through
this process if it is done with patience and persistence.
Meanwhile, of the 4 million Afghans in refugee camps
in Pakistan, all the girls are going to school and
colleges, and we know that many Afghans are sending
their daughters to attend school in Pakistan.
As noted in the Secretary-General’s report, the
efforts by the interim Afghan Government to encourage
the return of former Afghan officials to the country and
the announcement of a general amnesty are elements
that should be built upon in order to promote the goal of
greater inclusiveness in the governance of Afghanistan.
For Pakistan and for most of the international
community, a most serious concern is terrorism
emanating from and happening within Afghanistan.
The recent rise in high-profile targeted killings and
bombings, including against the Russian embassy, is
a cause for special concern. Should we fail to provide
the Afghan people and the authorities in Kabul with
necessary and ongoing long-term economic solutions,
there is a risk that anti-Taliban groups, particularly
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan (ISIL-K),
will gain further strength in the country.
We expect the Taliban to prevent Afghanistan’s
territory from being utilized for terrorism against
neighbours or any other country. In particular,
eliminating the threat posed by ISIL-K, that is, Da’esh,
Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan, the Eastern Turkistan Islamic
Movement and the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan, as
well as Al- Qaida and other terrorist groups, is of vital
importance for Pakistan. We will support all sincere
efforts to neutralize and eliminate these terrorist groups,
while fully respecting Afghanistan’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity.
The role of spoilers who wish to aid and abet
terrorism against Pakistan from Afghan soil must
also be checked, and the terrorist networks they have
established must be dismantled in Afghanistan and
the region. Similarly, counter-narcotics efforts by the
Taliban are at risk of getting reversed in the absence of
alternative means of supporting livelihoods.
22-60253

27/09/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV.9137

Pakistan believes that the Security Council, the
international community and UNAMA must develop a
workable road map to advance the objectives they seek:
human rights, inclusiveness and counter-terrorism. The
much-maligned Doha agreement and the resolutions
adopted by the Security Council itself since then
contain elements that can provide such a road map
towards normalcy in Afghanistan.

For lasting peace and security in Afghanistan,
sustained engagement remains the only practical way
forward. To this end, we hope that the travel-ban
exemptions will be reinstated forthwith. Pakistan will
continue its endeavours to build peace and normalcy
in Afghanistan within the format of Afghanistan’s six
immediate neighbours plus Russia, within the OIC,
with UNAMA, with the European Union and with other
friendly countries.

Pakistan is hopeful that the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General will continue
to maintain UNAMA’s constructive engagement with
the interim Government and find practical solutions to
deal with the challenges that we face in Afghanistan.

The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

22-6025327/27
