United Nations

A/RES/60/192

General Assembly

Distr.: General
20 February 2006

Sixtieth session
Agenda item 52 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 December 2005
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/60/488/Add.1)]

60/192. International Year of Planet Earth, 2008
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming Agenda 21, 1 the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on
Sustainable Development (“Johannesburg Plan of Implementation”) 2 and the Hyogo
Framework for Action 2005–2015, 3
Noting that the wealth of scientific information available on planet Earth
remains largely untapped and hardly known to the public or to policymakers and
decision makers,
Convinced that education in Earth sciences provides humankind with tools for
the sustainable use of natural resources and for building the scientific infrastructure
essential for sustainable development,
Welcoming the decision of the General Conference of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to support the declaration of 2008
as the International Year of Planet Earth with a view to highlighting the importance
of Earth sciences,
Taking into account the crucial role the Year could play, inter alia, in raising
public awareness of the importance for sustainable development of the Earth’s
processes and resources; disaster prevention, reduction and mitigation; and
capacity-building for the sustainable management of resources; and its important
contribution to the United Nations Decade of Education for Sustainable
Development,
1.

Decides to declare 2008 the International Year of Planet Earth;

_______________
1
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June
1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and
corrigendum), resolution 1, annex II.
2
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–
4 September2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I,
resolution 2, annex.
3
Hyogo Framework for Action 2005–2015: Building the Resilience of Nations and Communities to
Disasters (A/CONF.206/6 and Corr.1, chap. I, resolution 2).

05-49912

A/RES/60/192

2.
Designates the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization as the lead agency and the focal point for the Year to organize
activities to be undertaken during the Year, in collaboration with the United Nations
Environment Programme and other relevant entities of the United Nations system,
as well as the International Union of Geological Sciences and other Earth science
societies and groups throughout the world, and in this regard agrees that the
activities of the International Year of Planet Earth will be funded from voluntary
contributions, including, inter alia, from industry and major foundations mobilized
by a consortium of international organizations, led by the International Union of
Geological Sciences;
Encourages all Member States, the United Nations system and all other
3.
actors to take advantage of the Year to increase awareness of the importance of
Earth sciences for the achievement of sustainable development and to promote
action at the local, national, regional and international levels;
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
4.
sixty-second session on the progress of the preparations for the International Year of
Planet Earth.
68th plenary meeting
22 December 2005

2
