S/PV.7139

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7139th meeting

Monday, 17 March 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Lucas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Luxembourg)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Oyarzábal
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Errázuriz
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Bertoux
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Laro
Ms. Paik Ji-ah
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Manzi
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-Geneal on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2014/163)

14-26620 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1426620*

S/PV.7139

The situation in Afghanistan

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2014/163)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Afghanistan,
Canada, Germany, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Italy, Japan, Pakistan, Slovakia, Sweden and Turkey to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ján Kubiš,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2014/184, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Australia.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2014/163, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kubiš.
Mr. Kubiš: Khanjar Wabel Abdallah of Lebanon,
Basra Hassan of the United States and of Somali origin,
Nasreen Khan of Pakistan and Vadim Nazarov of the
Russian Federation are four members of the United
Nations family who were brutally murdered in January.
They died, along with 17 other Afghan and international
civilians, in a suicide assault in Kabul city. I offer my
deepest condolences to their families in recognizing the
sacrifice of those dedicated international civil servants.

2/33

17/03/2014

In less than three weeks’ time, Afghanistan intends
to hold presidential and provincial council elections,
which will effect the country’s first democratic transfer
of power. Leadership and commitment remain critical
to the holding of that historic event. In underscoring
a stable political dispensation, those elections are a
defining moment that will earn President Hâmid Karzai
a place in history.
I urge all eligible Afghan citizens — men and
women — to exercise their franchise on 5 April. I urge
them to not let spoilers and terrorists deprive them of
their choice or of their future. Participation as voters,
elections officials and observers is a rejection of force,
violence and intimidation as the means by which their
proud nation decides its leadership. At this delicate
juncture in Afghanistan’s transitions, it is a credible
electoral transition that can provide much-needed
stability and predictability through a popular mandate
across ethnic lines for broader political, economic
and social development agendas, including peace and
reconciliation.
Technical preparations for what is an Afghanmanaged and Afghan-led electoral process remain
on track and are of a better quality than previously,
including in fraud prevention and mitigation.
In addition to the electoral authorities, the
responsibility for peaceful and credible polls largely
rests with political leaders, candidates and their
supporters. I urge all candidates to guide and shape the
actions and attitudes of their supporters with serious
public commitment to opposing fraud committed in
their name. Where there are alleged electoral violations,
complainants should seek immediate redress through
institutional means.
Elections will necessarily have losers, but, in
particular in the current conditions in Afghanistan,
they should not be a winner-takes-all contest. While in
no way replacing the people’s voice at the polls, I urge
candidates to come to the understanding that not being
the winner is not prima facie evidence of fraud. Threats
of civil disobedience over alleged fraud now, weeks
before the elections, or the resort to civil disruption
only increase tensions and create confusion.
Security will have a major impact on the polls. To
date, election-related violence has been of a lower order
than in 2009 or 2010, even as general security incidents
have increased. However, even election violence is on
the rise.

14-26620

17/03/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

I welcome the support for the electoral process
expressed by parts of the insurgency, notably Gulbuddin
Hekmatyar’s armed wing of Hezb-e Islami. However, I
want to make very clear that even groups such as the
Taliban that reject the elections have an obligation to
respect a civilian process. I am gravely disturbed by
the Taliban’s recent declaration that it will seek to
disrupt the process by force, unleashing a campaign
of terror. Voters, electoral workers, candidates and
observers are all civilians. Targeting civilians or
carrying out indiscriminate attacks on polling centres
and other civilian locations undermine any claims to
legitimate political status and are acts punishable under
international law.
I bear with me, for the Secretary-General, a
message signed by a quarter of a million Afghan women
in support of peace. I commend the organizers and
petitioners who have raised their voice — the voices
of the majority of Afghans. These women demand only
the chance for a secure future for their families. It is
a message of hope and resilience amid the misery and
death inflicted by terrorism, extremism, transnational
criminal networks and local power-holders.
A breakthrough in direct talks between Afghan
authorities and the Taliban remains elusive thus far,
despite some interesting recent initiatives by the High
Peace Council. Efforts to build understanding and agree
on frameworks must continue while patiently building
an environment conducive to later, more formal efforts,
in which the United Nations should, and will, have a
more prominent role.
Afghanistan’s ultimate stability and sustainability
lies in the region. As other international actors draw
down, I am pleased to see neighbouring countries
and regional powers recognizing the need for active
engagement in support of Afghan solutions. There is
a realization that a peaceful, stable and prosperous
Afghanistan is ultimately in the self-interest of all.
I am pleased to note continued practical progress
being made under the Istanbul Process on Regional
Security and Cooperation for a Secure and Stable
Afghanistan. Peace and stability in Afghanistan will not
be sustainable without economic and social transitions
assisted by donors meeting their commitments in the
years to come. At January’s special Joint Coordination
and Monitoring Board meeting, in which all 11
presidential candidates participated, representatives of
50 Member States underscored their continuing support

S/PV.7139

for Afghanistan. The levels of international assistance
pledged remains truly exceptional, while remaining
dependent on successful political transition and
demonstrable progress in Government commitments
to governance, reforms, economic sustainability and a
rights-based agenda.
I welcome assurances by the presidential
candidates of their commitment to sustaining and
accelerating momentum under the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework. There are risks, but there
are even more opportunities in returning to a more
normalized development agenda. In looking forward to
the ministerial-level development conference with the
new Government later this year, it cannot be business
as usual. Strengthening employment, generating licit
economic activity and undercutting the burgeoning
illicit economy should be central to all development
approaches.
Narcotics production and trafficking undermine the
well-being of the population, economy and institutions
of Afghanistan and the wider region and increasingly
contribute to the financing of terrorism. A shared
long-term strategy, high-level leadership and genuine
political will are required of both the Government and
the international community.
Sustaining the gains Afghanistan has made in
human rights over the past decade and, in particular, the
rights of women and children is not a luxury and must
not be sacrificed to short-term political expediency.
Justice, good governance, the rule of law and human
rights are crucial elements of lasting peace, equitable
development and human security.
I welcome the Government’s commitment to
ending child recruitment by 2016, which requires
that implementation of the action plan on underage
recruitment be expedited.
As the new United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) mandate is renewed, I again
stress the United Nations’ long-term commitment
to a peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan. Given
the current elements of uncertainty, interlocutors
almost unanimously stress the continuity and value
that UNAMA brings in the exercise of good offices,
the protection and promotion of human rights and the
facilitation of international development coherence.
The Mission’s national footprint continues to be an
invaluable asset in undertaking mandated elections,
outreach and human rights activities. Indeed, as

14-266203/33

S/PV.7139

The situation in Afghanistan

other international institutions and Member States
reduce their sub-national presence, the international
community is increasingly seeking our support in
understanding and accessing a diverse country. All that
work in implementing our complex mandate requires
adequate and predictable resources.
In highlighting progress and positive momentum,
I emphasize that gains are fragile. Yet Afghanistan is
not poised atop an inevitable post-2014 abyss, as some
doomsayers have predicted. What is needed in such
a period of unpredictability is the smooth and timely
transfer of political power. The success of the April 2014
elections will be of critical significance in reinforcing
Afghanistan’s institutional and political stability and
instilling confidence in the future.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Kubiš
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Afghanistan.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): I thank you, Madam
President, for your able leadership of the Council
this month. My thanks also go to our friend Special
Representative Ján Kubiš for his briefing and for his
skilful leadership of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We convey our gratitude to
Australia and Ambassador Quinlan for his country’s
committed work as the penholder in the Council on
Afghanistan and for the spirit of cooperation shown
during the course of negotiations on the UNAMA
draft resolution (S/2014/184). I would also like to take
this opportunity to welcome the recent SecretaryGeneral’s report on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security
(S/2014/163).
On 28 March 2002, in the wake of the Bonn
Conference, the Council voted on resolution 1401
(2002), on the establishment of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan — a political mission
to lead international civilian coordination efforts and to
support Afghanistan in building a democratic, stable and
peaceful country. Since then, its comprehensive focus
on security, the economy, governance and development
challenges has been essential to my Government’s work
to lay the foundations for sustainable development and
peace in the country, and the UNAMA mandate has
been renewed regularly with the full support of the
Government of Afghanistan.

4/33

17/03/2014

Throughout the past decade, UNAMA has
remained at the centre of international engagement in
support of Afghanistan, an engagement characterized
by the involvement of more than 70 countries and
dozens of international organizations, known as the
donor community. The international community’s
collective efforts have spanned all dimensions, and our
achievements attained through shared efforts have been
exceptional. The country is more unified, millions of
boys and girls are in school, more Afghans have access
to health care than ever before and all Afghans enjoy
their fundamental human rights as guaranteed by our
Constitution.
We reached the final stage of transition this year,
as the country began to stand on its own feet and take
charge of its own destiny. Afghan National Security
Forces assumed full security responsibility nationwide,
showing even more capability and professionalism
as international forces draw down. The Government
began to renew its international partnerships while
asserting greater Afghan ownership and leadership
over the country’s future. And now, after 12 years
of unprecedented international cooperation and
engagement, the Afghan people are less than a few
weeks away from the pinnacle of transition, that is,
presidential and provincial elections.
On 5 April, Afghans will cast their votes to choose
the future leader of the country and their provincial
representatives. That will be a historic event, marking the
first peaceful transition of power through a democratic
process. Moreover, a legitimate political transition is
essential to our efforts to secure a brighter and more
peaceful future. After decades of war, Afghans have
worked intently to build a new foundation for progress
in Afghanistan. Elections represent the hope that the
work will continue and provide an opportunity for its
advancement throughout the transformation decade.
Election preparations have been long under way,
with the help of the international community and
the United Nations. It is crucial that the elections be
legitimate, credible and transparent, as expected by all.
To that end, the Independent Election Commission is in
the lead in administering, adjudicating and managing
the polls and in overseeing logistical and technical
preparations, with the support of our international
partners. The Independent Electoral Complaints
Commission is well positioned to prevent fraud and
misconduct. Furthermore, the Ministry of the Interior
has intensified efforts to ensure security on election

14-26620

17/03/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

day, preparing 400,000 Afghan security forces to
protect the 7,168 polling stations on 5 April, with plans
to deploy 13,000 female polling station searchers and
provide security to the 308 female provincial council
candidates. The number of international and national
observers will be in the thousands.
The participation of Afghans in the lead-up to the
elections has been monumental. All segments of society
are deeply involved in the elections, many of them for
the first time, keenly participating to ensure they have
a say over the country’s future. Importantly, women are
involved in the elections as candidates, campaigners,
electoral workers and voters. Today, of the 3.4 million
new voters registered for the April election, 35 per cent
are women. Additionally, presidential candidates have
had historical media exposure, particularly through
a number of televised debates, allowing candidates
the opportunity to present their programmes to the
electorate and enhancing countrywide involvement in
the political process. That sets a new precedent for our
young democracy.
With all Afghans focused keenly on the elections,
we have not lost sight of the challenges facing us this
year. That is crucial to the preservation of the gains of
the past decade and to a successful departure towards
the transformation decade. To address those challenges,
a serious focus is needed on the following three main
areas.
The first area is Afghanistan’s continuing
cooperation with the international community. That
is essential to a successful transition this year, to
the transformation decade ahead and to long-term
peace, security and development in the country. As
demonstrated by the consultative Loya Jirga of November
2013, the Afghan people believe in the importance of
continuing strategic relations with the United States,
NATO and the wider international community. To that
end, we are certain that the bilateral security agreement
with the United States will be signed soon.
The second aspect is fiscal stability and the
sustainable economic growth and development of
Afghanistan. We welcome the progress made towards
fulfilling the commitments set out in the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework, which is essential to the
country’s long-term stability and sustainability. In
addition to that Framework, the Government continues
to further the agreements reached at the London,
Kabul, Bonn and Tokyo Conferences and the Lisbon

S/PV.7139

and Chicago Summits, which aim to enhance national
leadership and ownership and Afghanistan’s economic
self-sufficiency strategy.
The third element is regional cooperation. As
we move towards the end of the transition this year,
it is fundamental to Afghanistan’s stability that its
neighbours and countries in the region play their role
in contributing to peace and security in the country. It
is clear that the prosperity and security of all countries
in the region are deeply interlinked. My Government
therefore continues to strengthen regional cooperation
networks through multilateral processes, such as the
Istanbul Process, as well as bilateral efforts. Regional
cooperation is also essential to peace and reconciliation,
as well as related outreach to the Taliban and other
groups that continue to fight against the Government.
Throughout all the that, protecting the rights of
all Afghans remains a fundamental priority. That
includes ensuring the right of all Afghan people to good
governance, justice, health care and education and to
live free from violence. In that regard, Afghanistan
is committed to preventing and mitigating the toll of
violence on civilians, particularly women and children.
We condemn in the strongest terms the continuing
violence against the Afghan people, including women
and children, by extremists. With elections presenting
an opportunity for all Afghans to come together in
unity, the impetus for the armed opposition to reject its
brutal tactics, contribute meaningfully to the country
and heed the call for peace have never been stronger
than today.
As we renew the mandate of UNAMA for another
year, we are well aware of the continuing importance of
the role of the United Nations as a whole at this crucial
time for the country. We expect the international
community to stand firmly for peace and security in
Afghanistan and to further our work to ensure that the
hard-won achievements of the past decade are protected.
After decades of war and instability and 12 years of
tremendous progress, it is crucial that the momentum
continue towards our goal of achieving a long-lasting,
stable, peaceful and democratic Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in French): It is my
understanding that the Council is ready to proceed to
the vote on the draft resolution before it. I shall put the
draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

14-266205/33

S/PV.7139

The situation in Afghanistan

In favour:
Argentina, Australia, Chad, Chile, China, France,
Jordan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Nigeria, Republic
of Korea, Russian Federation, Rwanda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and United States of America
The President (spoke in French): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2145 (2014).
I shall now give the floor to members of the Council.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank Special
Representative Ján Kubiš for his briefing this morning
and for his leadership of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I also thank
Ambassador Tanin for his statement and his close
engagement in the Council’s work on Afghanistan.
I also want to recognize the dedication and efforts
of all United Nations personnel in Afghanistan. The
death of four United Nations staff, as well as Afghan
and international civilians, in the attack of 17 January
on the Taverna restaurant in Kabul was a reminder of
the risks faced by civilians in Afghanistan, including
United Nations and other international staff. The
Council condemned that attack in the strongest terms,
and I reiterate our condolences to the families, friends
and colleagues of those involved.
Resolution 2145 (2014), which we have just adopted,
is a firm statement of the international community’s
continuing commitment to Afghanistan and its people.
The resolution provides the right mandate to ensure that
the United Nations can continue to support Afghanistan
during the completion of security transition. This
12-month renewal preserves UNAMA’s core mandate,
ensuring continuity in UNAMA’s support for Afghanled efforts to strengthen governance and build capacity.
As we know, 2014 is a pivotal year for Afghanistan,
with the Government assuming full responsibility
for security as well as the management of political
transition, which is as critical to Afghanistan’s
transformation as the continuing security, stabilization
and reconstruction efforts.
The international community will be closely
watching the presidential and provincial council
elections early next month. They constitute a historic
moment for Afghanistan’s transition. An inclusive,
transparent and credible presidential election process
is necessary.

6/33

17/03/2014

Australia welcomes the United Nations role in
supporting the elections and encourages the Afghan
Government to continue to work with the United
Nations in order to strengthen the sustainability,
integrity and inclusiveness of the electoral process.
We encourage continued efforts to ensure that women
are able to safely exercise their right to vote and to
participate in the process. Their participation will be a
decisive measure of the representativeness and success
of the elections. It is also essential that the Independent
Election Commission and the Independent Electoral
Complaints Commission be enabled to fulfil their
critical roles.
Beyond the elections, we look to a new Afghan
Government to address key political, governance and
security challenges, with the support of the United
Nations. The leadership and considered decisions of
the new Government will be the key determinant of
the international community’s support for Afghanistan
post-2014.
The 2012 Tokyo Conference saw an unprecedented
level of resources pledged to Afghanistan. Progress
against Afghanistan’s commitments by a new Afghan
Government, as well as by the international community,
is necessary to support sustainable economic and social
development in Afghanistan. Of particular importance
will be progress by the Afghan Government to improve
governance and the rule of law, including transitional
justice, budget execution, combating corruption and
improving accountability.
On human rights, Afghanistan needs to be vigilant
in building on the gains of the past decade, particularly
in relation to the rights of women and girls. Today’s
resolution reaffirms that message. We continue to urge
the full implementation of the law on elimination of
violence against women and to encourage the Afghan
Government to finalize and implement a national
action plan on women and peace and security so as to
support the active participation of women in the peace
and reconciliation process.
We remain concerned about the increasing number
of civilians killed and wounded in conflict, as outlined
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2014/163). That
includes development and humanitarian workers. We
support further sustained efforts by Afghanistan to
track civilian casualties.
We also encourage the Afghan authorities to provide
full support to the Afghanistan Independent Human

14-26620

17/03/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

Rights Commission so that it can fulfil its necessary
role as an effective and independent institution.
The Afghan Government must send a strong
message to the international community about its
commitment to security over the long term. Security
challenges limit the international community’s ability
to provide effective support. The Afghan National
Security Forces (ANSF) has demonstrated its capability
in fighting the insurgency and providing security for the
Afghan people, but it must continue to expand security
across Afghanistan. Australia will continue to support
the ANSF, through our sustainment commitment,
agreed in Chicago in 2012, and through the continued
presence of Australian military personnel in training
and advisory roles.
We continue to encourage Afghanistan to sign the
bilateral security agreement with the United States
and to conclude NATO status-of-forces agreement
negotiations as soon as possible to provide the legal
basis for the post-2014 mission and to enable planning
for a post-2014 military presence to proceed.
In conclusion, Australia, along with the United
Nations and international community, will continue to
support Afghanistan at the national level. But reform
and progress are naturally the responsibility of the
Afghan Government and people. Leadership by the
Afghan Government will be critical in meeting the
security, political and economic challenges in 2014 and
beyond transition.
Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): I thank
Special Representative Ján Kubiš for his informative
briefing. I appreciate the dedication he has shown in
implementing his mandate and commend the continued
resilience of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I also thank Ambassador
Tanin for his remarks.
My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to express our deep condolences for the loss of United
Nations and other international staff members in the
attack on a restaurant in Kabul in January.
Afghanistan has achieved considerable progress in
its political, security and economic transition over the
past decade. The final year of transition is critical in
making that progress sustainable and irreversible. In
that vein, I would like to touch upon three main areas
where more effort is required to facilitate a peaceful
transition and lasting development in Afghanistan.

S/PV.7139

First, the presidential and provincial council
elections scheduled for 5 April will be a significant
milestone in Afghanistan’s political transition. We
welcome the electoral preparations made by the Afghan
Government, including the mobilization of observers for
the presidential elections and the security assessment
of polling centres. Given the growing attacks from a
number of groups, including the Taliban, security for
electoral personnel and voters must be ensured. It is
also important that any incitement to defamation and
violence not be tolerated, with a view to safeguarding
the integrity of the electoral process.
Secondly, with regard to the security situation,
while we welcome the ongoing efforts to strengthen
the capacity of the Afghan National Security Forces
and police, the growing number of security incidents
demonstrates that grave security challenges remain.
In particular, we strongly condemn indiscriminate
attacks on civilians and humanitarian personnel. We
reiterate that all parties must take every feasible step to
comply with their obligations under international law.
The ongoing support of the international community in
strengthening Afghan security capacity and enhancing
cross-border cooperation are crucial to the improvement
of the overall security situation.
Thirdly, as noted at the special meeting of the
Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board in Kabul
in January, the Afghan Government should continue
to implement the key commitments of the Tokyo
Mutual Accountability Framework. In particular, the
Government needs to reinforce its efforts to tackle
corruption and the illicit economy.
We also urge the Afghan Government to make
additional efforts in partnership with the United Nations
for the protection of women and children. The law on
the elimination of violence against women should be
fully implemented to end impunity for violence against
women. It is also necessary to support the Afghanistan
Independent Human Rights Commission in assuming
its full functions.
In conclusion, in facing the final year of transition,
the sustained support of the international community
remains essential for the improvement of predictability
and confidence in Afghanistan. We appreciate
UNAMA’s contribution to stability and development in
Afghanistan and fully support resolution 2145 (2014),
on the extension of its mandate.

14-266207/33

S/PV.7139

The situation in Afghanistan

Mr. Oyarzábal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Special Representative Ján Kubiš for introducing
the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Afghanistan and its implications for international peace
and security (S/2014/163), as well as the representative
of Afghanistan, Ambassador Tanin, for sharing with
the Security Council the vision and priorities of his
Government, which are essential to our work.
Today Afghanistan is preparing for the 5 April
elections, which the Secretary-General rightly considers
to be a landmark event, as they will be the first transfer
of power in Afghanistan from one president-elect to
another. Argentina wishes to express to the people
and the Government of Afghanistan its desire that the
presidential and provincial elections will allow the
country to consolidate its political transition, which
will form the basis for strengthening its stability,
reinforcing its national unity and promoting its
sustainable development in an equitable manner.
In order for the political transition to be legitimate,
the elections of 5 April must be transparent, inclusive
and credible. The role of the United Nations in
providing technical support and in facilitating
coherence in international support for the electoral
process, including international observers, is certainly
important. But it is the Afghans themselves who have the
primary responsibility for making the electoral process
complete and inclusive and for making the results
truly representative. In that context, the responsibility
incumbent upon electoral officials is clear, as it is on
the candidates and their followers to comply with the
electoral laws and accept the results from the polls,
channelling their complaints through the institutions
established for that purpose. Fundamentally, it is
necessary that the qualified Afghan citizens come
together en masse to vote in order to ensure the
representativeness of the elections and the elected
authorities that result therefrom.
The participation of women as voters, candidates
and elected officials is crucial. We are concerned
about the disqualification of candidates by the
Independent Electoral Complaints Commission on the
basis of education, not least because such decisions
principally affect women. The number of women on
the Commission, which represents less than 8 per cent
of the Commission as a whole, in a country where the
female population is larger than the male population,
is insufficient, although we recognize the efforts
undertaken to increase the participation of women.

8/33

17/03/2014

Finally, citizens should exercise their rights in a safe
environment, not only in Kabul but also in the interior
of the country. Security will be critical to ensuring
that voters trust that they can express their will. The
challenges in that regard cannot be underestimated.
The challenges that the authorities elected in
the 5 April elections will face are both known and
overwhelming. They include achieving the generalized
desire for peace of the Afghan people through the
realization of agreements that prevent or mitigate in
the short term the growing cost in lives of civilians as
a result of the complex conflict affecting the country.
In that context, a peace process or direct talks among
the Government of Afghanistan and the principal
armed opposition groups is essential, as is continuing
to strengthen bilateral ties between Afghanistan and
countries of the region at a time when the international
community is reducing its presence in the country.
There is no substitute for meaningful discussions that
include the Taliban and other insurgent groups to bring
an end to the spiral of violence that continues to bloody
Afghanistan, as is seen in the number of attacks that
took place in 2013 — the second highest number in
terms of levels of violence since the fall of the Taliban
regime.
A modern, democratic and prosperous Afghanistan
depends in large measure on the success of the
reconciliation process in the framework of a
comprehensive strategy for the protection and promotion
of human rights and access to education, health care and
employment for all Afghans. In that respect, prioritized
efforts should focus on the acceleration and consolidation
of Afghanistan’s progress on human rights since 2001.
It is the absolute responsibility of the Government of
Afghanistan to ensure the full implementation of the
law on the elimination of violence against women
and that perpetrators of violence, particularly against
women, are held accountable for their actions.
It is no surprise that a country with the human, cultural
and natural resources of Afghanistan is considered one
of the least developed countries in the world, when
its security sector demands nearly 50 per cent of its
annual budget. In that context, the implementation of
the Kabul process and the coordination of development
assistance remain essential. It is important that the
international community continue to provide for the
5.4 million Afghans lacking access to health care and
the 2.2 million facing food insecurity.

14-26620

17/03/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

Argentina voted in favour of resolution 2145 (2014)
because it believes that the role of the United Nations
will remain equally critical in the election process,
in assisting the future Government to coordinate
international aid, in good offices and the peace process,
as well as in human rights and humanitarian assistance
and economic and social development in the long term.
Mr. Manzi (Rwanda): I wish to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ján Kubiš
for his comprehensive briefing. His self-motivated
leadership and the effective role of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) have
contributed to the stabilization of Afghanistan. We fully
support the dedicated work of the Special Representative
and his staff. I would also like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his
statement.
In less than one month, Afghans will decide
their future leadership through the electoral process
scheduled to take place on 5 April. The elections
will become an important milestone for Afghans, the
region and the international community as a whole.
We welcome the progress made in the process of
organizing the elections. We encourage all parties to
take ownership of the electoral process, supported by
the United Nations and other partners, and expect the
elections to be held in an inclusive, transparent and
peaceful atmosphere.
As we take note of the Government’s efforts to
try to create a secure environment in which the people
of Afghanistan can live without fear of terrorism
and violence, following the transfer of security
responsibilities to Afghan security forces in June 2013,
we remain concerned, as highlighted by the SecretaryGeneral in his report (S/2014/163), of the increased
security incidents in the country ahead of the presidential
elections. We condemn those cowardly acts of violence
mainly targeting international staff and innocent
civilians, especially the recent attack that took the lives
of four United Nations personnel and 17 Afghans. Our
condolences go to the families and Governments of the
victims. We appeal to the international community to
continue supporting and strengthening the capacities
of the Afghan forces to enable them to deal with the
security challenges the country faces. Support to the
Afghan security forces will become vital after the
withdrawal of the International Security Assistance
Force. We hope that modalities for further cooperation

S/PV.7139

between NATO and Afghanistan will be positively
defined in months ahead.
On the political process, Rwanda supports an
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned national reconciliation
process, with a view to achieving sustainable peace and
stability in the country and in the region as a whole.
We express our strong support to the active role played
by the High Peace Council in promoting national
reconciliation efforts. We hope that the international
community will support and work with the Afghanistan
Government and people in their efforts to create an
enabling environment for the reconciliation process.
The extension of the UNAMA mandate today is again
another expression of the support and confidence of
the Council for Afghanistan’s transitional political
process. UNAMA will continue to play a central role
in assisting Afghanistan as it moves forward in its
transition process.
On the pledges made to support Afghanistan, it
is important, as declared in Tokyo and in Chicago,
for the international community to remain engaged in
serious long-term partnerships with Afghanistan, by
supporting its efforts through the transitional phase
and beyond 2014. Even as progress is being reviewed
under the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework to
address key challenges, pledges and commitments of
assistance to Afghanistan must be honoured.
On drug trafficking and use, the opium production
in Afghanistan in 2013 increased by 36 per cent as
compared to the figures of 2012. It poses a serious
threat to the health and well-being of the population,
the economy of the region and the entire international
community. Opium plays a key role in financing
insurgency, hence causing instability in the country and
the region. All preventive measures put in place have
not yielded any tangible results. We strongly believe
that it is the responsibility of everyone, especially
the Afghan Government, regional countries and the
entire international community to prevent narcotics
trafficking and the resulting earnings that sponsor
insurgents and acts of terrorism.
In conclusion, Rwanda stresses its firm belief that a
sincere and inclusive Afghan-led political process will
lead to sustainable stability, peace and development.
Challenges will continue to exist, but the international
community must remain united by the side of the
Afghan Government in seeking a durable solution to
terrorism and extremism.

14-266209/33

S/PV.7139

The situation in Afghanistan

Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Kubiš for his update and
Ambassador Tanin for his statement.
I would like to comment on two aspects of the
situation in Afghanistan, that is, political developments
and the security situation.
On political developments, we are pleased to note
that preparations for the elections of 5 April remain on
track and that vigorous political activity can be observed
across the country, including large-scale rallies. The
recent pronouncement by President Karzai that the
Government would not interfere in the April elections
is commendable. That commitment by the Government
is particularly significant as the elections will mark the
first time since 2001 that there is a democratic transfer
of power from one president to another. We also applaud
the use of televised debates in the campaign, as it will
allow candidates to get their message across to a broad
spectrum of the Afghan public.
We are deeply concerned by reports of threats
against campaign workers and election officials. We are
also concerned by the reported assassination attempts
and killings linked to the elections. We are, however,
encouraged to note that politically motivated violence
has so far not constituted a strategic threat to the
elections.
The risk assessment of the 7,168 polling units
conducted by the Government, which certifies that
Afghan security forces could secure 94 per cent of the
units, is also encouraging. We strongly urge all the
citizens of Afghanistan to shun violence in the run-up
to the elections.
With regard to security, we note that, although the
situation remains volatile, Afghan security forces have
proven capable of defending territory from attacks by
anti-Government elements. We regret that this is at
the cost of significant casualties. We also note with
concern that the reporting period saw an unprecedented
number of suicide attacks, killings and other criminal
acts that had a negative impact on both the people
of Afghanistan and the ability of the United Nations
to undertake mandated tasks and activities. In that
regard, we strongly condemn the coordinated attack of
17 January on a Kabul restaurant in which a number of
civilians, including four United Nations officials, lost
their lives. An attack on United Nations officials is an
attack on the international community.

10/33

17/03/2014

We welcome the cooperation between the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF)
in developing a strategy for the disposal of explosive
remnants of war from military bases, firing and
demolition ranges and other sites across the country.
In 2013, 5 per cent of civilian deaths in conflict in
Afghanistan resulted from explosive remnants of war.
We therefore see their disposal as vital to reducing the
number of civilian deaths in the conflict.
As ISAF prepares to leave Afghanistan at the end
of 2014, we encourage the Afghan Government to
continue to engage with all regional and international
partners in order to ensure that a security vacuum is
not created that could be exploited by anti-Government
elements.
We welcome the adoption of resolution 2145 (2014),
which will enable UNAMA and the Government of
Afghanistan to consolidate the gains made in the
country in recent times.
Finally, Nigeria is hopeful that in the near future we
shall see a stable, peaceful, prosperous and democratic
Afghanistan where the human rights of all its citizens
are promoted and protected.
Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I welcome
the presence of Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Ján Kubiš in the Chamber and I thank him for
his briefing and his work at the head of United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). Through
the Special Representative, I would like to commend
the efforts of the international and local Mission staff,
who work in complex conditions and, unfortunately,
sometimes even sacrifice their own lives. I wouldalso
like to welcome the Ambassador of Afghanistan,
Mr. Tanin, and thank him for his intervention.
I associate myself in advance with the statement to
be made by
​​ the observer of the European Union.
Afghanistan has entered a period marked by
profound changes: two transitions, a security transition
and a political transition are under way. The year
2014 will see the end of the military presence of the
international coalition in the form that we have known so
far. A new mission of advice, training and support will
take over from the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF), in accordance with the commitments
entered into at the NATO Summit in Chicago in 2012
to support the Afghan security forces over the long run.

14-26620

17/03/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

Similarly, Afghanistan has already been preparing
for many months for the presidential election, the first
round of which is scheduled for 5 April. That election
will clearly show that democracy has taken root in the
country. The peaceful and lawful transfer of presidential
authority is a sufficiently rare event to celebrate. A new
President, the second since the fall of the Taliban, will
take over the stewardship of the country, and we will be
there to support him in fulfilling his mission.
We have just adopted resolution 2145 (2014).
UNAMA’s mandate has been extended for one year
without major changes because of the election of the
new Afghan Government in 2014 and because of other
uncertainties that still have an impact on the shape
of the future security arrangement. In that context,
we believe that UNAMA, which is the centre of the
international community’s action in Afghanistan and
which has proved itself over the course of 10 years,
must be able to act next year based on a solid mandate.
The international community’s efforts should
adapt to the changes in the situation on the ground. In
particular, the model of development, which is based
on a counter-insurgency strategy, should be revised.
However, we will not abandon the values ​​we fought
for alongside Afghans for 10 years. I have in mind
in particular the role and rights of women in Afghan
society.
We have less than 12 months ahead of us to evaluate
and determine how the international community will
be able to support Afghanistan in the long term. The
mandate of UNAMA that we will adopt a year from
now will have to be different, refocused on the priorities
of the international community.
Put in a more visible and more central position,
but also more complex, UNAMA’s political role must
be strengthened. The Mission, including the Special
Representative, will have to provide its good offices
to facilitate the implementation of the Afghan political
process, especially in the areas of reconciliation and
the strengthening of the rule of law, and support the
efforts aimed at strengthening regional cooperation.
UNAMA must also have additional capacity in the
protection and promotion of human rights, an area in
which it provides real expertise and an added value. It
will have to play the role of coordinator of the United
Nations funds, programmes and specialized agencies to
promote a model of development that meets the needs
of an economy weakened by the decline in international

S/PV.7139

aid and the emergence of an illicit economy that fuels
instability. To that end, we believe that it is important to
simplify the mandate. However, we remain committed,
as far as possible, to maintaining UNAMA’s presence
throughout the Afghan territory, which is essential for a
clear and comprehensive view of the situation.
As others have said before, we are also concerned
about the resurgence of drug trafficking. Unfortunately,
the year 2013 saw a new record in opium production.
Furthermore, Afghanistan has become the world’s
largest producer of cannabis resin. There are now even
amphetamine production centres in the country.
We know about the efforts of Afghans to address that
challenge. We know that taking up the challenge requires
the commitment of everyone, especially Afghanistan’s
regional partners. We will stand alongside the Afghans
in that task. But today I would like to address the entire
international community. As the Secretary- General
underscored in his report (S/2014/163), the risk of the
emergence of a narco-State exists and it is serious. We
have to consider actions today that will make it possible
to shield Afghanistan tomorrow from the deleterious
effects of drug trafficking, which are corruption and
violence.
We know, as experience has shown, that drug
trafficking often goes hand in hand with insurrection
and a challenge to a central authority. We must do
everything to avoid the worst: to leave Afghanistan to
its own devices with an insurrection that is certainly
weakened but not totally reduced; with the Afghan
security forces, who have shown that they are robust
and effective, but are concerned about the international
community’s withdrawal; and with a socioeconomic
and institutional fabric that has been rewoven but is
still very fragile.
In that respect, the role that the fight against
drug trafficking plays in UNAMA’s mandate must
be strengthened. Clearly, we do not want to make
UNAMA a counter-narcotics agency. However, all
possible synergies between the activities of UNAMA
and the the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
in Afghanistan should been strengthened. UNAMA
must also support regional cooperation in that area by
supporting the development of the law enforcement,
judiciary and health capacities of the Afghan State.
The Afghanistan after 11 September is now a
chapter in the history books, but if we want to help

14-2662011/33

S/PV.7139

The situation in Afghanistan

Afghans to write a truly different chapter in the future
we have to act now.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2014/163) and Special Representative Ján Kubiš for
his briefing today. I also thank Ambassador Tanin for
his remarks this morning.
This is the first opportunity for the Council to
express directly to Special Representative Kubiš
and his team the sadness that we all felt at the tragic
loss of the lives of four United Nations colleagues on
17 January. That appalling attack was a stark reminder
of the dangers that international civilian staff face, and
we pay tribute to the efforts of Mr. Kubiš and his team
in Afghanistan.
The United Kingdom welcomes the adoption
of today’s resolution 2145 (2014), which renews the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). UNAMA plays a vital role
in peacebuilding in Afghanistan and will continue
to do so in 2014. I will focus my statement today on
four key areas: security, elections, the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework and the United Nations
future engagement in Afghanistan.
First, with regard to the security situation, we
should be proud of our achievements. The determination
and dedication of the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) and the Afghan National Security Forces
have allowed the Government of Afghanistan to build
the foundations of a stable and democratic country.
The Afghan National Security Forces have risen to
difficult challenges since taking full responsibility for
Afghan security in June 2013, and we are encouraged
by polling that shows growing confidence in their
work. We expect the first all-female cohort of officer
cadets to commence training in June. That is another
significant achievement. However, we know that the
support of NATO and the international community will
continue to be vital in ensuring long-term security in
Afghanistan. As a sign of our enduring commitment, the
United Kingdom will contribute moer than $100 million
a year until at least 2017 towards sustaining the Afghan
national security forces. The United Kingdom also
looks forward to hosting the NATO Summit later this
year, which will provide the international community
with an opportunity to reflect on ISAF’s legacy and to
set out NATO’s post-2014 engagement in Afghanistan.

12/33

17/03/2014

Secondly, on elections and the political transition,
Afghanistan is entering the final phase of campaigning
and technical preparations for elections. The presidential
and provincial council elections are now less than four
weeks away. This is truly a groundbreaking moment
in Afghan politics, as Afghanistan moves into its
transformation decade. The most recent figures show
that over a third of those taking part in top-up voter
registration are women. That is good news and will
contribute to the inclusiveness of the elections. The
United Kingdom has pledged $11 million to build the
capacity of the women elected to provincial councils
to ensure that their voices are heard in the democratic
process. Transparency and inclusiveness are vital to
ensuring the credibility of the elections. In that regard,
we welcome the recent decision of the European Union
to send an election assessment team to Afghanistan.
The United Kingdom encourages the Government of
Afghanistan to give all election observers the access
they need to the electoral process so that, when the
time comes, they can provide informed reports on the
process.
Thirdly, I would like to address the issue of
the next steps on the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework. The Framework, which was agreed in
2012, remains the blueprint for the international
community’s development efforts in Afghanistan.
Progress in priority areas such as the role of women
is essential for long-term development and to sustain
donor funding. We encourage UNAMA to assist in
monitoring, coordinating and reporting on progress
over the coming months, as requested in the resolution
we have adopted today (resolution 2145 (2014)). The
United Kingdom looks forward to co-chairing, with the
Afghan Government, the development conference to be
held later this year, which will be an opportunity for the
international community to assess progress against the
Framework and set our ambitions for the future.
Finally, the United Kingdom firmly supports a
strong United Nations presence in Afghanistan. The
United Nations will have an essential role next year,
working with the Government of Afghanistan, to lock
in the gains made by the international community over
the past decade. We want the United Nations to have the
resources it needs to enable a country-wide presence and
carry out its responsibilities in line with the mandate
endorsed today. But we urge the United Nations and its
agencies to work more closely together, share resources
and work with NATO and other relevant organizations

14-26620

17/03/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

to spot the opportunities and tackle the challenges of
the post-2014 environment.
One of the main challenges for Afghanistan, and
indeed the work of the United Nations, is human rights,
specifically the rights of women and girls. Women and
girls in Afghanistan continue to face huge challenges,
and the gains made are fragile. We encourage the
United Nations to continue working closely with the
Government of Afghanistan, international partners and
civil society to improve the status of women and girls.
Afghans are taking charge of their security and
their democracy. Afghanistan is changing fast, with a
growing economy, a young population and a revolution
in access to the outside world through social media.
Despite the many challenges, therefore, 2014 is a year
full of opportunity for Afghanistan. We pledge to
continue our support to the Government of Afghanistan
as it seeks to build a more peaceful, democratic and
prosperous future for all Afghans.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the presence of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
Mr. Ján Kubiš, and thank him for his briefing. We also
welcome Ambassador Zahir Tanin and thank him for
his statement.
Chile welcomes the holding of the presidential and
provincial council elections on 5 April. Preparations
are on track, with an existing electoral framework, a
final list of presidential candidates and a functional
Independent Electoral Complaints Commission.
We must stress that the efforts to promote and
strengthen women’s participation as voters, candidates
and observers will provide a gauge of how representative
the process is. The elections will be a fundamental
and legitimate political transition in Afghanistan’s
stability. In that respect, the process must be credible,
transparent, inclusive and entirely in line with the
country’s legal and constitutional norms.
It is important that the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) continue at all levels so as to ensure that
women can participate in decision-making processes
and that their needs are adequately met. The inclusion
of women in the police and security forces is important
and should remain a priority for the new authorities.
Chile reiterates the need to strengthen the
protection of civilians and condemns the use of force

S/PV.7139

against unarmed civilians, including women and
children, whether by pro- or anti-Government forces.
The authorities’ primary responsibilty is to ensure the
protection of civilians.
In addition, progress in the area of human rights is
a crucial element for the stability of the country, which
remains fragile. We agree with the Secretary-General
in his call on the authorities to adopt any measures
necessary to support the Afghanistan Independent
Human Rights Commission in its crucial role.
Food insecurity, the situation of internally
displaced persons and the ongoing vulnerability to
natural disasters, against the backdrop of a conflict
that has lasted for decades, are humanitarian challenges
that need to be faced in a coordinated manner by the
international community and the new authorities. That
will not be possible without ensuring full, prompt and
unhindered access for humanitarian personnel.
In that regard, the United Nations should continue
its presence on the ground through the work of
UNAMA, in the same way that the country team
does in the area of development. Initiatives such as
World Health Organization support to the efforts of
local authorities in the fight against polio must be
maintained. The conditions to achieve a transition
from relief to development must also be created. The
international community must provide its cooperation
in such efforts.
We regret that terrorism, in all its various forms and
manifestations, continues to intensify in some regions.
The number of events and victims has continued to grow
and is at its worst level since 2011. We condemn the
terrorist attack on a restaurant in Kabul on 17 January,
which took the lives of four United Nations officials and
17 Afghan civilians, and we express our condolences to
the families of the victims.
Given the withdrawal of the International Security
Assistance Force at the end of 2014, Chile believes
the capabilities of the Afghan security forces to deal
with the threats and challenges on the horizon should
continue to be strengthened. That will mean mitigating
the current uncertainty prevailing in Afghanistan. A
concrete example in this general area is the approval
by the consultative Loya Jirga of the bilateral security
agreement with the United States. It is important that
the agreement be signed to ensure that such assistance
is provided and maintained and a transition to stability
is achieved.

14-2662013/33

S/PV.7139

The situation in Afghanistan

It is essential that the next Government have
the stability needed for an orderly transition to be
carried out. Given the uncertainty that has prevailed
in Afghanistan during the last year of the transition, it
is important that UNAMA’s mandate be extended for
12 months, and we welcome that extension. Equally
important is the need to provide the Mission with
the necessary priority measures to fully discharge its
duties.
In conclusion, I would like to express the support
of Chile for the efforts of the Afghan people to build
a democratic State based on the rule of law and the
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
which are essential for its stability and development as
well as for the sustainability and development of the
region of which it is a part.
Ms. Murmokaité (Lithuania): I would like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General Ján
Kubiš for his briefing on the situation in Afghanistan
and Ambassador Tanin for his remarks.
Like others before me, I would like to extend my
delegation’s condolences over the tragic loss of lives
of United Nations family members and all other victims of
the brutal attack on 17 January in Kabul. We pay tribute to
the dedication of all international staff facing continuous
security challenges and risking their lives for the sake of the
people of Afghanistan.
Lithuania is firmly committed to contributing to building
a peaceful and stable future of Afghanistan. Since
2005, we have been leading a provincial reconstruction
team in Chaghcharan, the provincial capital of Ghor.
Our goal of assisting the Afghan people in building
a secure, democratic, inclusive and self-sufficient
Afghanistan remains unchanged.
Lithuania aligns itself with the statement to be made
later in this meeting by the observer of the European
Union (EU).
This year, Afghanistan stands at a critical
milestone. The presidential elections scheduled for
5 April will see power transferred from one elected
president to another for the first time in the history
of Afghanistan. We welcome the advancements in the
electoral process made through the timely adoption
of legal framework, the functioning of established
electoral bodies, the declared non-interference by the
Government, the vigorous political campaigning and
the enhanced public outreach throughout the country.

14/33

17/03/2014

An important development of the campaign is
the progress in ensuring female participation in the
upcoming election, with 35 percent of new voter
registration cards being distributed to female voters. In
addition, 13,000 women searchers were trained to work
in polling centres on election day.
We also salute women candidates for the position of
Vice-President, as well as over 100 women provincial
council candidates. Ensuring the safety of women
candidates and voters is key to ensuring that the outcome
of the election represents the will of the entire nation
and engages the full potential of Afghanistan’s women
in building its future. Security during campaigning and
on the day of voting remains a major concern and must
be addressed with all due seriousness.
The support of the United Nations Assistnace
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) to Afghan-led
elections that live up to inclusiveness, transparency,
credibility and legitimacy standards is of critical
importance. We welcome the fact that Afghan authorities
are encouraging observation of the election, including
by international observers and the invitation extended
to European Union and Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe observer teams.
The limited progress towards the establishment of
a peace process with the armed opposition continues to
be an issue of concern. We stress the importance of an
inclusive Afghan-led process and we call on UNAMA
to continue to facilitate local dialogue on reconciliation.
UNAMA initiatives aimed at mitigating inter-ethnic
and inter-tribal tensions and linking Government
officials, community leaders, religious scholars and
civil society, including women, are welcomed and need
to continue.
Serious concerns remain about the security
situation in the country. The gradual withdrawal of
international troops has left Afghan Government forces
more vulnerable to attacks by insurgents. Due to the
rise in casualties, 2013 was the second most violent
year since the fall of the Taliban regime. The secure
functioning of UNAMA, especially that of its field
offices, is also directly impacted by the withdrawal of
international forces.
Armed clashes and improvised explosive devices
account for 75 per cent of deaths. It is particularly
troubling that casualties among children increased
by more than one third as compared to those in 2009.
About three fourths of the death toll is attributed to the

14-26620

17/03/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

Taliban. Reduced civilian suffering and fewer civilian
casualties, together with improvements in human rights
protection, should be the core principles of improved
stability and security for Afghanistan in 2014. My
delegation would support tracking civilian casualties
disaggregated by gender.
The anti-Government elements targeting Government
institutions and the international community is totally
unacceptable. The efforts by Afghan forces to counter
such attacks are crucial. Having further international
assistance in support of the Afghan army and police
forces will remain essential. Lithuania has pledged
to contribute its support to the Afghan National
Security Forces with a new training mission after
2014, once the necessary legal framework is in place.
As an International Security Assistance Force country,
we encourage our Afghan partners to finalize the
conclusion of the NATO status-of-forces agreement as
soon as possible.
The progress made by Afghanistan in improving
the human rights situation remains fragile. We urge
the Afghan Government to take the necessary steps to
support the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights
Commission so that it can fulfil its critical role.
Violence against women in particular reached
record levels in 2013, according to the Afghanistan
Independent Human Rights Commission. A major
concern is the failure to enforce the law on the elimination
of violence against women, which leaves perpetrators
at large. Too many victims of violence keep silent for
fear of reprisals. We commend the decision of President
Karzai not to sign the current draft criminal procedure
code into law, as it would limit women’s rights to seek
justice. UNAMA must continue its work in identifying
the challenges as well as remedies regarding national
and international efforts to advance women’s rights and
women’s participation in the political, economic and
social life of the country.
Attacks on schools, teachers and students continued
unabated by the Taliban and other armed groups. Such
violence is interfering with access to education, and in
some areas actually rolled back progress already made.
A particular point of concern for my delegation is
the 36 per cent increase in opium cultivation in 2013.
Given the nexus between drug trafficking, arms,
violence and terrorism, we stress the importance of
more resolute measures and Afghan initiatives aimed at
accelerating counter-narcotics policies by including the

S/PV.7139

implementation of a National Drug Control Strategy,
as well as efforts aimed at addressing the flourishing
illicit economy and corruption. In all of that, UNAMA
has an important role to play.
Strengthening Afghanistan’s regional ties is vital
for its long-term stability. Active Afghan leadership
within the Istanbul Process and bilateral steps to
engage with neighbouring countries, including
increased recognition of shared interests with Pakistan,
is welcomed by my delegation.
Lithuania is committed to the long-term development
of Afghanistan through the EU and bilateral development
projects focusing on good governance, capacitybuilding and infrastructure. UNAMA has a vital role
in ensuring effective coordination of donor assistance,
especially implementing mutual commitments made at
the Tokyo Conference on Afghanistan in 2012 through
the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework.
In conclusion, the UNAMA presence in Afghanistan
is perceived by the Afghan people as an overall stability
factor and an indication of long-term commitment by
the international community. The United Nations must
continue its presence in Afghanistan to ensure that
the gains of more than a decade are not lost and all
sacrifices were not in vain. We welcome the UNAMA
mandate extension and call for its implementation,
especially in its field presence, with determination.
Assisting Afghans in the challenging transformation
decade is our responsibility.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Ján Kubiš for his briefing and the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, Mr. Tanin, for his
statement.
This year represents a crucial year of transition
for Afghanistan, during which it will undergo a
three-pronged transition — on political, security
and economic fronts — to comprehensively build on
Afghanistan’s stability, prosperity and harmonious
coexistence among various communities. Those
transitions will require unremitting efforts on the part
of the Afghan Government and its people, which would
not be possible without the persistent support and
assistance from the international community.
The presidential and provincial council elections
slated for 5 April represent an important milestone in
Afghanistan’s political transition. China welcomes the

14-2662015/33

S/PV.7139

The situation in Afghanistan

smooth progress in the preparations for the upcoming
major elections and wishes for their success in leading
to smooth transitions that are in keeping with the
common interest of Afghanistan and the international
community.
The security situation in Afghanistan remains
fragile, as represented by the major increases in various
types of security incidents since last year. We express
our concerns over rising civilian casualties, and we
support capacity-building for Afghanistan’s national
security and police forces to enable them to effectively
fulfil safety and security responsibilities. The parties
concerned should fully take into account the need to
protect the security and stability of Afghanistan and
steadily and responsibly reduce their armed forces
in order to ensure smooth progress in Afghanistan’s
security transition.
China supports the efforts of the Afghan Government
and of the High Peace Council to promote an Afghanled and Afghan-owned reconciliation process. We hope
that the international community will help Afghanistan
to advance the reconciliation process on its own terms,
and we welcome the neighbours of that country playing
an active role.
China highly appreciates the efforts of the Afghan
Government to develop its economy and to promote
employment. We expect the international community
to effectively fulfil its assistance commitments
by giving top priority to helping Afghanistan to
implement its national development strategy, thereby
enabling Afghanistan to achieve economic and social
development and to gradually eliminate conditions that
favour terrorism, drug production, drug trafficking and
transnational organized crime.
Afghanistan’s peace, reconstruction and longterm security are closely linked to regional peace
and stability. China supports Afghanistan’s efforts to
participate more actively in regional cooperation and
to enhance mutual trust and good-neighbourly relations
with countries in the region on the basis of mutual
respect, equality and mutual benefits. We encourage
Afghanistan to make better use of the various regional
mechanisms, such as the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization, in a common effort to address the many
regional security threats and challenges.
We support the United Nations in continuing to
play an important role in coordinating international
assistance to build peace in Afghanistan. We welcome

16/33

17/03/2014

resolution 2145 (2014), adopted earlier this morning,
which renews UNAMA’s mandate. China supports
providing adequate funding for the Mission to implement
its mandate. We hope that UNAMA will strengthen its
cooperation with the Afghan Government, fulfil its
responsibilities under the Council’s mandate, effectively
coordinate international assistance and strengthen the
international community’s confidence in Afghanistan’s
smooth transition and transformation. China supports
the efforts of the international community and of the
Afghan Government to explore ways to make better use
of UNAMA’s post-2014 role, in line with the evolving
situation in Afghanistan.
Afghanistan is an important neighbour of China.
We look forward to a friendly, unified, stable and
developed Afghanistan. We always respect that
country’s sovereignty, independence, territorial
integrity and the path of development chosen by its
people, in line with its circumstances. China has
long participated actively in rebuilding peace in
Afghanistan by providing assistance to the best of its
ability. In August, for the first time China will host the
Foreign Ministers Conference on the Istanbul Process
on Afghanistan. Through that meeting, China hopes
to garner consensus in our common effort to support
the long-term transition of Afghanistan and to promote
regional peace and stability.
China stands ready to work with the international
community in playing a constructive role in helping
Afghanistan to achieve early political reconciliation
and economic revitalization and to embark upon a path
towards lasting peace and sustainable development.
Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank
the Secretary-General and Special Representative
Mr. Ján Kubiš for the detailed report (S/2014/163) on
developments in the situation in Afghanistan since the
end of 2013. I also thank the Permanent Representative
of Afghanistan to the United Nations for his statement.
Chad’s vote in favour of resolution 2145 (2014) to
renew the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) is a vote of
encouragement, as we note with satisfaction the
political, economic and human rights developments
with the establishment of the Kabul process. We are
also encouraged by progress on integration, regional
cooperation and human rights, as well as the improved
coordination and conditions for humanitarian assistance
thanks to the Mission’s support.

14-26620

17/03/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

We call on all the parties concerned to commit
themselves, in a spirit of conciliation and reconciliation,
to restoring and strengthening peace in Afghanistan.
We also welcome the inclusive direct talks involving
all stakeholders, namely, politicians, traditional
community leaders, religious scholars and civil society,
towards the restoration of peace in Afghanistan. We
think that the elections due to be held in April will help
to further stabilize the country.
However, we are very concerned about the
recent security situation in Afghanistan, given the
significantly increased number of incidents in 2013,
including the killing of four UNAMA staff members in
January. In that regard, Chad calls for respect of human
rights, in particular international humanitarian law,
which protects civilian populations in armed conflicts.
Particular attention should be paid to the situation of
children and women and other vulnerable people, who
often find themselves victims of incidents involving
anti-personnel mines. We are very concerned about the
increase in the trafficking in drugs and other narcotics,
which has a negative impact on the international
security situation, as was the case in Mali, where the
situation deteriorated with the rise in criminal networks
and funding for international terrorism.
Chad encourages Afghanistan’s neighbouring
States to continue to cooperate in the transnational
fight against drug and arms trafficking. Chad support
UNAMA and the work of the international community
aimed at finding a political solution to the crisis
and joins the Secretary-General’s call for increased
humanitarian assistance to vulnerable populations.
Finally, we condemn armed groups that recruit
child soldiers and commit violence against women. The
perpetrators of such crimes should be prosecuted and
brought to justice. In conclusion, we support the United
Nations staff in Afghanistan, in particular Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mr. Ján Kubiš,
for all their ongoing efforts for the Afghan people.
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan)
(spoke in Arabic): I would like to thank Mr. Ján Kubiš,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Afghanistan, for his briefing. I also thank the
staff of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their sacrifice in very
dangerous circumstances. I would also like to thank the
representative of Afghanistan for his comprehensive
statement.

S/PV.7139

Jordan is concerned about the volatile security
situation in Afghanistan and the increased number of
civilian victims, in particular women and children.
We strongly condemn all terrorist attacks on staff of
the various United Nations organizations present in
Afghanistan and those that target civilians and Afghan
security forces. We extend our sincere condolences
to the families of the victims and to the people and
Government of Afghanistan and the States whose
nationals died in those attacks. Jordan calls on States
and the entire international community to continue
to provide support and assistance to the Afghan
Government in the fight against terrorism and in
de-mining activities, not to mention the elimination
of explosive remnants of war. We must meet our
international commitments and provide assistance to
Afghanistan.
Jordan contributes to international efforts seeking
to establish a favourable environment for Afghanistan’s
security, stability and development and to rebuilding
the State on the basis of our commitment to actively
participate in peacebuilding and humanitarian
assistance efforts. We have a duty to oppose any
attempt to take hostage the great religion of Islam,
distort its image or misrepresent its content. Islam calls
for tolerance and dialogue, respect for human dignity
and security.
Afghanistan is on the threshold of historic elections.
We hope that they will strengthen the capacities of the
stakeholders to deal with the numerous challenges
that the country faces. In that regard, we welcome the
ongoing preparatory work for the elections, which are
on the right track and which we hope will take place
next month in accordance with Afghanistan’s legal and
constitutional framework.
We are encouraged by the intensive political
activity within all political parties in the country. We
are also encouraged by the peaceful political statements
made by all of the candidates. We would call upon
the Special Representative to continue his meetings
with the stakeholders in order to ensure the integrity,
inclusiveness and fairness of the electoral process.
Jordan welcomes the reform efforts undertaken by
the Afghan Government, including the measures being
taken in the area of human rights, particularly the fight
against violence against women. We reiterate the need
for the Afghan Government to pursue its efforts to
strengthen human rights and the rule of law.

14-2662017/33

S/PV.7139

The situation in Afghanistan

At the end of the year, Afghanistan will come to
a new crossroads. The international community’s
message to Afghanistan under those circumstances
should be clear, namely, that the Afghan Government
and people will be able to count on the assistance of the
international community. We must strengthen the role
of the United Nations and deepen our partnership with
Afghanistan. None of us can countenance the effects of
a return to the past or a reversal of the accomplishments
made in the country to date.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): We
welcome Mr. Ján Kubiš to the Security Council once
again and thank him for his briefing. We also thank
Ambassador Tanin for his remarks today.
To begin, I want to extend my Government’s
condolences to the families and friends of the United
Nations personnel who, on 17 January, were killed by
a suicide bomber at a restaurant in Kabul. That attack
also claimed the lives of three United States citizens
and the local representative of the International
Monetary Fund. The tragedy reminds us of the need
to recognize and support the many dedicated men and
women from the United Nations and other international
organizations, international civil society and coalition
military forces who work every day to support the
Afghan people as they strive to build a more peaceful,
democratic and prosperous homeland.
On 5 April, Afghan citizens will head to the
polls, at a time of both rising promise and ongoing
challenges. That historic balloting can pave the way for
Afghanistan’s first peaceful and democratic transfer of
political authority from one Head of State to another.
One of the best ways to ensure the credibility of the
elections is through independent monitoring. To that
end, more than 12,000 Afghan observers are expected
to have a role in verifying the integrity of the process.
The Independent Election Commission (IEC) is also
inviting international observers. We encourage the IEC
and the Afghan National Security Forces to do all they
can to ensure access for voters, observers and party
representatives to all polling centres, including those in
remote and high-risk areas.
In particular, we call on all authorities to ensure
that women are able to participate as voters, candidates,
observers and election officials in a meaningful way.
Credible, transparent and inclusive elections will
pave the way to democratic progress in Afghanistan.
A successful transfer of presidential power this year

18/33

17/03/2014

following democratic elections will solidify the gains
made over the past 12 years and contribute much to the
country’s future development and stability. It will also
show all Afghans, including the Taliban, that the rule
of law matters and that Afghanistan’s constitutional
system is resilient enough to overcome grave obstacles.
For its part, the United States Government will
provide nearly $100 million to facilitate the April
elections through a variety of programmes, including
monitoring and observation. I emphasize that my
Government strongly supports the democratic process
but that we neither favour nor oppose any particular
candidate. It is up to the Afghan people, and only the
Afghan people, to choose their leaders.
This morning, the United States was pleased to join
the Security Council in extending the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for
another year, with its core mandate intact. That renewal
will enable the Mission to meet the challenges of the
ongoing transition period, particularly through support
for the political process and regional diplomacy,
coordinating humanitarian and other assistance, human
rights monitoring, institution-building and capacity
development.
Of course, UNAMA’s support alone cannot
guarantee success. The international community
as a whole has made a long-term commitment to
Afghanistan. My Government welcomes the engagement
of the Heart of Asia countries, including their effort to
further integrate Afghanistan’s economy through the
Istanbul Process. Regional support will also be critical
in supporting Afghanistan’s democratic transition and
Afghan-led efforts at internal reconciliation.
We should be under no illusions. Serious security
threats remain in Afghanistan, including attacks by
extremist elements against humanitarian aid workers
and other Afghan and international civilian personnel.
We deplore such attacks, which are wholly destructive
in purpose and clearly contrary to the well-being of
the Afghan people. We call upon all parties to join
in condemning those crimes, seeking accountability
for them and striving to prevent them. The citizens
of Afghanistan deserve to live in safety, with full
and unimpeded access to humanitarian assistance,
including food, shelter, health services and emergency
trauma care.
Over the past dozen years, Afghanistan has been
the scene of incredible turbulence, a drama touched by

14-26620

17/03/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

tragedy but held aloft by hope. The country now stands
on the threshold of a historic election, facing great
challenges and yet bolstered by the productive energy
of a population that is eager to build a more democratic
and prosperous future. The United Nations should be
proud of the role it has played in helping the Afghan
people to lay the groundwork for such a future, and we
should be determined to continue that vital effort in the
months and years to come.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are very grateful to Mr. Ján Kubiš
for his briefing on the situation in Afghanistan and
for presenting the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2014/163). We are also grateful for Mr. Tanin’s
presentation.
We support the efforts of the Afghan leadership
to continue moving the country on the path of peace,
stability, development and broad cooperation with
neighbours in the region. We pay tribute to efforts
by the Afghans themselves to try, in the face of
various challenges, to determine their future and take
responsibility for their development and security. We
hope that at this crucial turning point in the history
of the country the people and society will be able to
mobilize their efforts and come together to fulfil
constructive objectives in the interest of all, respecting
human rights, fairness and harmony.
The situation in Afghanistan has been worsening
and it has remained at the centre of the attention of the
international community, especially since the country
is nearing critical milestones, namely, presidential
elections and the withdrawal of the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF). Those factors will,
to a large extent, determine the dynamics for the
unfolding of the situation, not only in Afghanistan but
in the region as a whole.
In this crucial period, we need a comprehensive
analysis of the risks and threats that stand in
Afghanistan’s way. We cannot but note that the
report before us today does not mention many of the
challenges that the country faces, such as the Taliban
and Al-Qaida — which is not mentioned in the
report, as if Al-Qaida was not present in the country
at all — and other terrorist groups. Their aggressive
activity is a factor in the significant increase in number
of civilian casualties and deaths among Afghan
security forces. Armed opposition has strengthened in
various regions, particularly in areas previously under

S/PV.7139

the full control of the Government. The situation in the
south and east of the country is deteriorating. That is
confirmed by the armed attack on the Afghan National
Army base in Kunar province mentioned in the report,
the bold abduction by Taliban extremists of residents
in Kandahar and Nangarhar provinces for supporting
the Government and the increased number of deaths
among peaceful individuals in Helmand province.
Increasing terrorist activity in the north and north-east
is especially alarming, as the armed opposition there
has more than 10,000 fighters.
We cannot agree with the report’s assessment of the
Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan. It is not at all limited
to remote and mountainous regions. It has been active
outside of Afghanistan’s borders, as confirmed by the
killing of three Turkmen border guards near the border
between Afghanistan and Turkmenistan. Just three
years ago, the northern region of Afghanistan was calm.
We are highly concerned about the situation that
could develop in Central Asia after the withdrawal
of ISAF. We have seen increasing numbers of attacks
on foreigners, particularly United Nations staff. The
terrorist attack in January in Kabul that lead to the
deaths of 20 people, including the Russian representative
at the mission, confirmed that the Taliban believe they
can act with impunity. The latest incident — the killing
of a journalist in the capital on 11 March — is another
example.
Bearing that in mind, it is our belief that certain
people continue to convince themselves that the
situation is fine, especially given that the insurgents
have demonstrated their destructive potential in the
run-up to the elections.
The Russian Federation is closely monitoring
the electoral process. It is of serious concern that, on
10 March, an appeal was published on the Taliban
website, urging the citizens of Afghanistan to avoid
participating in the electoral process, because any such
participation would be considered as efforts to assist
the occupation forces.
A legitimate question therefore arises: To what
extent is the forced transfer of responsibility conducted
in the country, from the international military force
to the Afghan forces justified? And to what extent is
the artificial withdrawal timetable justified? To what
extent has the coalition fulfilled the Council’s mandate
in terms of stabilization and security and preparing
effective Afghan law enforcement and security forces?

14-2662019/33

S/PV.7139

The situation in Afghanistan

That will require NATO to provide an objective status
report to the Security Council at the end of the year.
It is our belief that, if Kabul agrees to NATO’s
further presence after 2014, it must be based on an
international legal framework in the form of a Security
Council resolution. After stabilization tasks have been
achieved, there will no further need for foreign military
contingents in Afghanistan. Efforts to address that
issue should focus on ensuring that Afghan citizens
and military personnel do not lose their lives as a result
of erroneous air strikes by ISAF. The most recent such
error took place in Logar province, killing five people
and injuring eight.
There is no doubt that opium production, which
has increased by 150 per cent, has contributed to
extremist activity. The number of drug addicts
has increased by 1 million, among which there are
300,000 children. The fight against illicit drug
manufacturing — which represents a threat to peace
and stability not only in Afghanistan, but at regional
and international levels — requires collective efforts. It
is not possible to pretend that is not a problem, simply
by indicating the lack of a specific mandate under ISAF.
Areas of cooperation must be defined among
NATO and the Collective Security Treaty Organization
(CSTO), aimed at illicit drug trafficking. The CSTO has
significant experience in combating drug trafficking,
and such efforts against that scourge would be more
effective in cooperation with NATO. Even a modest
reduction in drug trafficking activity would represent
a major achievement by the international community.
Russia fully supports the efforts of the Afghan
Government to support national reconciliation. Those
efforts should be headed by the Kabul Government
and based on three principles, that is, insurgents must
lay down their weapons, acknowledge Afghanistan’s
Constitution and completely renounce relations with
Al-Qaida and other terrorist organizations.
It is clear that, as foreign forces draw down from
Afghanistan and Afghan security forces gain strength,
the motivation of the armed opposition will weaken.
The history of the Qatari office that was temporarily
closed by the Taliban is a good example. Bearing that
in mind, it might be possible to weaken the Council’s
sanctions against the Taliban under certain conditions.
The Russian Federation considers it important
to strengthen regional cooperation in contributing

20/33

17/03/2014

to the development of Afghanistan as a peaceful,
economically developed State. The best platform for
that is the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, which
represents nearly all of the countries of the region,
including Afghanistan.
Similarly, we do not consider justified what has
been noted about the Istanbul Process and its high
marks. Its added value has not yet been confirmed and
the working group format it is following has not proved
very effective. Also, there has been a lack of interest on
the part of the States parties. In our view, that process
simply represents a platform for international dialogue
to generate innovative ideas.
The stabilization of Afghanistan will achieve
firm results only through the collective efforts of all
actors, which must be effectively coordinated in order
to maximize results. In that respect, the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan will make an
essential contribution. Its role, as the foreign military
contingents withdraw, will only increase, as resolution
2145 (2014), adopted today, confirms.
Russia is ready to continue to develop regional
cooperation in the interests of Afghanistan in those
areas that could provide real benefits to the country. We
are open to engaging in partnership with all interested
States in the implementation of projects of interest to
Afghanistan.
The Russian Federation continues to provide
humanitarian aid to Afghanistan. We anticipate
that coordinated regional efforts to implement the
commitments made by the international community
will contribute to the sustainable development of the
country and the well-being of its citizens, as well as
help to re-establish a peaceful Afghanistan that is free
of terrorism and drug-related crime.
In conclusion, I would like to congratulate our
Afghan colleagues in the light of the upcoming holiday
of Nowruz and to wish them a good year.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Luxembourg.
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Afghanistan, Mr. Ján Kubiš, for his
briefing and his work as the Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I also
thank the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Ambassador Zahir Tanin, for his statement.

14-26620

17/03/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

I align myself with the statement to be made during
the debate by the observer of the European Union.
At the outset, I would like to express my condolences
and sympathy to the family members of the victims of
the terrorist attack on 17 January in Kabul. I would
also dedicate special thoughts to the four members of
UNAMA who lost their lives during that cowardly and
senseless attack. They deserve more than our thanks,
more than our gratitude. They deserve our admiration
for having served in the cause of peace and the cause of
the United Nations.
The tribute I pay to them today is also addressed to
all of the staff members of UNAMA who are carrying
out outstanding work on the Council’s behalf to serve
the Organization and the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.
Violence and insecurity, uncertainty about the
future — the Afghan people face those issues each day.
The UNAMA report of 8 February on the human cost
of conflict in relation to civilians speaks volumes of
the sufferings endured by the population. In reading
the numbers of victims and the growing proportion of
women and children among them, we realize that one of
the major challenges still to be met is that of security, in
particular the security of civilians, beginning with the
security of voters and candidates in the presidential and
provincial elections to be held on 5 April.
As an election is meaningful only if all voters
are able to freely go to the polling stations and if the
candidates are able to conduct their campaigns without
risking their lives or being subject to threats, we urge
that no effort be spared to establish an adequate security
framework. We reiterate the importance we attach to
the framework’s being applied to everyone, including
specifically to women. Luxembourg believes that the
degree of women’s participation will be one of the
benchmarks against which we can measure the success
of the voting and the credibility of the results. The
Independent Election Commission and the Independent
Electoral Complaints Commission will also have a
central role to play guaranteeing that the elections are
peaceful, transparent, credible, inclusive and fair.
Although the path leading to the elections of
5 April is still fraught with pitfalls, the very fact that
those elections are taking place is in itself a remarkable
success. But as important as the elections may be, they
are only one step; they are not the end of a process. The
pacification and stabilization of the country will also

S/PV.7139

depend upon the progress that the new leaders will be
able to achieve in several key areas. We would like to
underscore at least three.
First is respect for human rights. No society can
rebuild itself if it allows impunity, injustice and the law
of the jungle to take root. That is why it is important
that the Afghan authorities allow the Afghanistan
Independent Human Rights Commission to effectively
play its rolе as a free and independent institution.
Therefore, in accordance with the commitments made
under the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework,
women’s rights must be genuinely and fully recognized,
and the law against violence against women must be
genuinely and fully implemented.
That is also why, as mentioned by the Special
Representative, we encourage the Afghan authorities
to redouble their efforts to implement the action plan
to halt the use and recruitment of children in the
Afghan National Security Forces, which they signed on
30 January 2011 with the United Nations. We believe,
moreover, that it would be desirable that the section of
the Secretary-General’s report dealing with the plight
of children in armed conflict contain information on all
the violations and abuses committed against children in
Afghanistan and on the state of the implementation of
the action plan.
The second key area for bringing peace and
stability to the country is the fight against poverty. Too
many Afghans still live below the poverty line. We do
not have the right to ignore that situation or to accept
it. It is intolerable on a human level;it is disastrous for
the country’s stability. It will be up to the newly elected
leaders to address the question of how to proceed to a
more equitable distribution of resources. But it will also
be up to the international community to accord all the
required attention to that aspect when designing its aid
programmes for the Afghan people for the post-2014
period.
In that context, I would like to mention that in
February the European Union and Afghanistan signed
an agreement that marks the completion of bilateral
negotiations for Afghanistan’s membership in the
World Trade Organization. That membership should
eventually make a sustainable contribution to the process
of stabilization, economic reform and sustainable
development begun by the Afghan authorities.
The third key area has to do with the lifting of the
uncertainty with regard to the international presence

14-2662021/33

S/PV.7139

The situation in Afghanistan

beginning on 1 January 2015, after the transitional
period. On several occasions, the international
community has reaffirmed its willingness to remain
engaged with the Afghan people. In return, it is crucial
to remove any uncertainty with regard to the framework
for future international missions, including support
missions for the Afghan security forces.
In conclusion, I welcome the adoption of resolution
2145 (2014) in the context of this debate, which renews
the mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan until 17 March 2015. I thank our Australian
colleagues, who led the negotiations on that important
text. In our view, after 2014 UNAMA will be called
upon to continue playing the important supporting
role that it has had so far. To do that, it is essential that
UNAMA have adequate means to maintain its presence
on the ground in Afghanistan’s provinces and among
the Afghan people.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Mukerji (India): At the outset, Madam President,
let me thank you for organizing today’s debate on the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). We thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ján Kubiš, and
Ambassador Tanin for their briefings.
While the text of my statement is being circulated, I
will, in the interests of time, make a shorter presentation.
Let me begin by paying tribute to the former first
Vice-President of Afghanistan, Marshal Mohammad
Qasim Fahim, who passed away on 9 March. His
contribution to fighting the forces of terrorism and
extremism and to the stabilization and reconstruction of
Afghanistan will always be remembered. Mohammed
Qasim Fahim was also a close friend of India and made
personal contributions to nurturing and strengthening
the India-Afghanistan strategic partnership. The
Vice-President of India led the Indian delegation to his
funeral.
I would also like to pay tribute to the four members
of the United Nations family who lost their lives on
17 January in the ghastly attack in a restaurant in Kabul.
We condemn that barbaric act, which was perpetrated
by the Taliban. On 13 March, a suicide bomber, whose
target was the Indian Consulate in Kandahar, was killed

22/33

17/03/2014

by Afghan security forces just outside the Consulate
building, preventing a major terrorist act.
The presidential election, which is scheduled for
5 April 2014, is the most important upcoming event
in the political transition of Afghanistan. We should
look for an election process that has credibility with
the Afghan people and culminates in the choice of an
Afghan President who is acceptable to all Afghans. We
note that numerous election rallies and meetings are
being organized across Afghanistan, and we applaud
the Afghan people’s confidence and their desire to
participate in free and fair elections.
On the security situation, we note with distress the
mention in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2014/163)
that provinces in the east and south of Afghanistan
faced intensified attacks from an array of groups,
including from Tehrik-e Taliban, Lashkar-e-Tayyiba,
and Lashkar-i-Jhangvi, in addition to the Afghan
Taliban. Our assessment is that intimidation in the
southern and eastern parts of the country is a threat to
smooth elections.
We want to stress the fact that terrorism, which
emanates from beyond Afghanistan’s borders, is the
main threat to Afghanistan’s security and stability.
It is that terrorism that promotes terrorist activities
against Afghan interests, as well as against friends of
Afghanistan, like India. It is unfortunate that terrorist
sanctuaries and safe havens and the financial and
tactical support structures for terrorism still exist.
It is necessary to demystify the notion that the
problem in Afghanistan is one of rivalry among
various ethnic or tribal groups. The real problem is that
Afghanistan continues to face terrorism, which seeks
to erode the efforts of Afghanistan and its friends to
reconstruct the socioeconomic fabric of the country. We
need to look at the sources of insecurity and violence
in Afghanistan. We stand firmly with Afghanistan in
confronting the threat and challenge posed by terrorism.
Turning to the reconciliation process, we believe that
it must remain Afghan led, Afghan owned and Afghan
controlled, while respecting the agreed red lines. We
do not endorse any effort to treat the Government of
Afghanistan on par with the Taliban. We have always
maintained that the success of economic transition in
Afghanistan is as crucial as the success of political
and security transitions. It is the view of my delegation
that the mandate of UNAMA should be to support
the political institutions of Afghanistan, besides

14-26620

17/03/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV.7139

mobilizing international focus on the reconstruction of
Afghanistan.

them of the sincere support of the Government and
people of India.

We believe that UNAMA should also harness
its strength in the humanitarian and developmental
work, where its ability to reach the remotest corner
of Afghanistan is well proven. UNAMA should
concentrate on capacity-building. In that regard, we
would like to assure the Council of India’s fullest
cooperation.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.

We note the important references in the resolution
adopted today by the Council (resolution 2145 (2014))
on UNAMA to the major processes that underpin the
attempt by the international community to support
Afghanistan. At the regional level, we would like to
draw the attention of the Council to the senior officials’
meeting under the Istanbul Process on Regional
Security and Cooperation for a Secure and Stable
Afghanistan held in New Delhi on 17 January and the
visit of the Minister of External Affairs of India to
Kandahar on 15 February to inaugurate, with President
Karzai, the Afghanistan National Agricultural Sciences
and Technology University.
Those recent events are part of India’s longestablished policy of, and commitment to, assisting the
people and Government of Afghanistan as they build
a peaceful, pluralistic, democratic and prosperous
Afghanistan. India does not have the luxury of an exit
strategy in Afghanistan, which shares a civilizational
linkage with India.
We do not share the negativity and pessimism
portrayed about the future of Afghanistan. Afghanistan
is going through political, security and economic
transitions at the same time. The uncertainties
associated with the transitions pose real challenges.
The progress that has been achieved by the people and
Government of Afghanistan in the past 12 years in
the social, political and economic spheres has taught
us that, with sustained support from the international
community, Afghanistan can successfully overcome
those challenges.
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate that, at this
critical juncture of transition and transformation, we
want to express our full support to the political, social
and economic transition taking place in Afghanistan.
We would like to convey, a few days before Nowruz,
our best wishes to the people of Afghanistan for the
upcoming electoral process and would like to assure

Mr. Cardi (Italy): I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2014/163), Special Representative Ján Kubiš for his
briefing and Ambassador Tanin for his statement.
I would also express Italy’s condolences to the
families of the victims of the terrorist attack on
17 January in Kabul.
Italy fully aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union, and I
would like to add a few remarks in my national capacity.
Italy wishes to express its satisfaction over the
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), which is a pillar
of the international civilian presence in Afghanistan
and a fundamental contribution to the development
and stabilization of the country. UNAMA has made a
remarkable contribution in accompanying Afghanistan
on its road to growth, human rights protection and
institutional strengthening. We greatly appreciate the
generous efforts of the women and men of UNAMA
to bring assistance to the Afghan people, under the
commendable leadership of the Secretary-General and
his Special Representative for Afghanistan.
Between now and the end of 2014, Afghanistan has
to meet a series of crucial appointments. The election
will mark the first time in the country’s history of a
turnover from one Head of State to another through
a democratic process, and the completion of the
transitional process will pave the way for the withdrawal
of the International Security Assistance Force and for
NATO mission Resolute Support.
It is vital that the electoral process, from start to
finish, be regular, leading to the proclamation of the
new Head of State. Acceptance of the result by the
defeated parties and public opinion will depend on the
perception that the electoral process has been legitimate,
credible, transparent and inclusive — consequently, so
will a peaceful and seamless political transition. To that
end, the United Nations should also dedicate its support
to continue aiding the country on its path to civil and
economic development.
The proper and orderly holding of the presidential
and provincial elections will have to contend firmly

14-2662023/33

S/PV.7139

The situation in Afghanistan

with the security factor. That is the responsibility of
the Afghan National Security Forces, which are making
constant progress in the difficult daily challenge
of controlling the territory. Unfortunately, terrorist
assassination attempts and attacks define everyday
life in Afghanistan — a circumstance that means we
cannot lower our guard and that the road to the final
stabilization of the country will require more time.
On the completion of the transition process, it is
of fundamental importance that Afghanistan and the
United States sign the bilateral security agreement in
the near term, since the delay is having a clear impact
on planning NATO’s future presence in Afghanistan.
Italy reaffirms its conviction that, until there is
reconciliation within Afghanistan, there will be no
prospects for stabilization, nor will any stabilization
last without the contribution of the other regional
stakeholders. Italy therefore confirms its support for
the peace process, recognizing the full ownership of
Afghanistan. In doing so we also voice our expectation
that there will be no backtracking in the area of
democratic gains and civil and gender rights, or yielding
to terrorism.
It is essential not to lower ambitions or to sacrifice
the quality and quantity of the benchmarks the Kabul
authorities are called on to respect. We therefore expect
our Afghan friends to honour the legacy of Tokyo and to
achieve certain and measurable results in areas such as
the democratic and electoral process, the fight against
corruption, administrative and economic governance
and human rights. That is another reason that Italy
so appreciates the important space that the resolution
just adopted (resolution 2145 (2014)) dedicates to those
aspects, in particular the protection of human rights.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I wish to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ján Kubiš for
his comprehensive briefing. I also thank Ambassador
Tanin of Afghanistan for his statement.
I would first like to express my deepest condolences
to the Government and people of Afghanistan
for the great loss of their first Vice-President,
Marshal Mohammad Qasim Fahim. His exceptional
contribution to the reconstruction of Afghanistan will
be remembered.

24/33

17/03/2014

I am particularly gratified to address the Security
Council on the situation in Afghanistan because I have
been personally involved in Japan’s efforts to help create
stability and development in that beautiful country
since the 1990s, and in particular since the Tokyo
Conference on Consolidation of Peace in Afghanistan,
held in January 2002.
Japan welcomes today’s adoption of resolution 2145
(2014) renewing the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for
another 12 months. In this time of uncertainty, the
continuous presence of UNAMA is crucial. I would
like also to emphasize the importance of ensuring
adequate resources for UNAMA to efficiently support
Afghanistan on its path towards peace and stability.
The year 2014 is one of historical significance for
the people of Afghanistan, as the withdrawal of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) will be
completed and the country will experience the election
of its second President. Today, I would like to touch
upon, first, the elections; secondly, the challenges that
must be addressed by the future Government; and,
finally, Japan’s commitment to Afghanistan.
First, on the elections, for the long-term stability
of Afghanistan, it is of the utmost importance that the
upcoming presidential and provincial council elections
lend strong legitimacy to the new Government through
a credible and inclusive election process. I reiterate the
importance of holding the elections without delay on
5 April, in accordance with the Afghan Constitution.
In that regard, I commend the tireless efforts of the
Government and the electoral management bodies
of Afghanistan to keep the technical preparations on
track. Japan has made financial contributions through
the United Nations Development Programme in order
to have a positive impact on the process. I call on all
eligible citizens of Afghanistan to participate in these
elections of crucial importance to deciding their own
future.
Secondly, I would like to touch upon what we
would like to see from Afghanistan, in particular
from the future Government that will take over the
responsibilities of President Karzai to lead the country
towards long-term stability. On that subject, I welcome
the participation of the presidential candidates at the
special Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board
meeting that was held on 29 January. Since all the
candidates have been active in the political life of

14-26620

17/03/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

Afghanistan since 2001, I am confident that they all
understand very well the spirit of partnership that exists
between the Afghan Government and the international
community. Even so, it was important for us to know
that the candidates recognize their responsibilities to
implement the commitments under the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework.
Ensuring economic stability is a matter of urgency
for the Government of Afghanistan. In order to achieve
that goal, the new Government will have to immediately
grapple with a variety of legislative and institutional
reforms necessary for increasing annual revenue,
reducing the rapidly expanding illicit economy and
developing industry. We look forward to seeing tangible
results before the ministerial meeting to be co-hosted
by Afghanistan and the United Kingdom.
Furthermore, recognizing that reconciliation is
the only way to achieve lasting peace in Afghanistan,
the future Government must continue to call on the
Taliban to join the peace process. Japan supports the
Afghan-led peace and reconciliation process. For the
sake of lasting peace and stability in Afghanistan,
continuous efforts by the country’s leadership and the
constructive engagement of neighbouring countries
are indispensable. The increased dialogue between
Afghanistan and neighbouring countries, including
Pakistan, is encouraging in that regard.
Concerning the security situation, in 2013 we
witnessed a sharp increase in insurgent attacks and
civilian casualties. A further deterioration in the
security situation will inevitably have a negative
impact not only on Afghanistan’s economic and social
activities, but also on the implementation of our
assistance. Security is also vital to encourage the full
participation of all eligible voters, especially female
voters, in the upcoming elections. One of the most
crucial responsibilities of the Afghan Government
is to continue building the capacity of the Afghan
National Security Forces and ensuring the necessary
security arrangements, in close cooperation with its
international partners.
Finally, let me say a few words on Japan’s
commitment to Afghanistan. Since January 2002,
when we hosted the International Conference on
Reconstruction Assistance to Afghanistan in Tokyo, we
have contributed more than $5 billion to Afghanistan
for its developments efforts. Japan’s contribution
covers a wide range of areas. For example, we have

S/PV.7139

provided 30 per cent of the total salary of the Afghan
National Police and have built or renovated more than
820 schools all over the country.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming Japan’s
commitment to stand by the Government and people of
Afghanistan in their endeavours for long-term stability.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting,
Head of the Delegation of the European Union.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union and its States members.
The candidate countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland and
Serbia; the countries of the Stabilization and Association
Process and potential candidates Albania and Bosnia
and Herzegovina; the European Free Trade Association
countries Liechtenstein and Norway, members of the
European Economic Area; as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.
I would first like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report on the situation in Afghanistan
and its implicaitons for international peace and security
(S/2014/163), as well as the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for his briefing in the Council
today.
The coming months and the upcoming elections
will be critical for Afghanistan, as the country needs
to safeguard the progress made over the past 12 years.
That will be the platform from which it can then move
towards the goal of self-sustainability. The United
Nations has played a critical role in the progress made,
and I would like to commend the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
personally for their continued support for the people of
Afghanistan. The challenges have also been outlined
in the statement by the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, for which I would like to thank him.
Afghanistan will continue to depend upon financial
assistance from the international community for some
time. With the transition to full Afghan control to
be completed by the end of this year and a reduced
international presence, the role of UNAMA will be
even more critical in ensuring the effective coordination
of donor assistance. UNAMA has a vital role to play
in enabling the Government of Afghanistan and the

14-2662025/33

S/PV.7139

The situation in Afghanistan

international community to work together to fulfil the
mutual commitments made at the Tokyo Conference on
Afghanistan in 2012.
The importance of strengthening and safeguarding
the gains made on human rights, women’s rights and the
rule of law for the Afghan people cannot be overstated.
While there have been real improvements in the lives of
Afghan women and children, due to improvements seen
in health and education, much more still needs to be
done, especially to implement the statutory protection
for women’s rights, in order to enable Afghan women
to play a more substantial role in Afghan society. The
European Union welcomes UNAMA’s work in that
regard, in fulfilment of its mandate, particularly in
promoting the rights of women and children.
The upcoming elections are the most immediate
priority in Afghanistan. The European Union condemns
the recent killings of journalists in Afghanistan.
Safety and security for the media is a crucial part of
the elections and, indeed, of democracy. The elections
offer the opportunity for the first democratic transfer
of power in Afghanistan’s history. The European
Union welcomes the spirit in which the campaign has
so far been conducted. Of course, much of the focus
has been on the presidential election, but it is worth
recalling that the provincial council elections are also
vitally important to embedding democracy across the
country. The European Union hopes that the successful
candidates will better reflect the Afghan population,
in particular that the number of women representatives
will increase.
Following the invitation issued by Afghan
authorities to the European Union to observe the 5 April
elections, I am pleased to confirm that the European
Union has already deployed an election assessment
team. The team of 15 international experts is being led
by Thijs Berman, a member of the European Parliament,
and is based in Kabul.
The elections are vitally important, but they are
also a further step on the longer journey of firmly
establishing democracy in Afghanistan. Next year,
there will be parliamentary elections, with further
elections to follow in subsequent years. Viable and
capable electoral institutions and infrastructure are a
prerequisite for holding credible, inclusive, transparent
and legitimate elections, now and in the future. In our
view, therefore, the UNAMA mandate should include a
clear commitment to continued political and technical

26/33

17/03/2014

support to elections in order to strengthen Afghan
leadership and ownership of the electoral processes and
to ensure that elections accurately reflect the will of the
Afghan people.
We would like to conclude by reiterating that
the international community should remain strongly
committed to progress in Afghanistan for the long
term. On our side, we will remain firmly focused on
supporting the people of Afghanistan to help them
achieve their aspirations. Our goal continues to be the
emergence of a fully self-reliant, peaceful, democratic
and prosperous society for the benefit of all Afghans.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Ružička (Slovakia): Thank you very much,
Madam President, for this opportunity to participate
in the debate of the Security Council on the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) .
Let me assure you of my delegation’s support for your
leadership in our deliberations.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive report (S/2014/163), and the
Special Representative for his briefing. I believe this
is an appropriate moment to express appreciation for
the work of His Excellency Mr. Zahir Tanin in his
relentless diplomatic efforts and wisdom in many areas
contributing to better understanding and stability in
Afghanistan.
Slovakia aligns itself with the statement just
delivered by the observer of the European Union. In
my national capacity, allow me to briefly make a few
comments on some important elements of the current
situation in Afghanistan with regard to the following
challenges.
Overall security remains the most important
precondition
for
continued
development
in
Afghanistan — political, economic and cultural. In
that regard, the Slovak Republic strongly condemns not
only the attack on a restaurant in Kabul on 17 January,
which took lives, including those of four members of
the United Nations family in Afghanistan, but also all
use of force and violence in any form against anyone.
Once again, I would like to express my condolences to
the families of all victims, as well as my appreciation
for the work of UNAMA’s staff.
I wish to reiterate the long-term commitment of the
Slovak Republic to providing assistance and training

14-26620

17/03/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

to the Afghan National Security Forces. I would also
like to encourage the Afghan forces to continue in their
transition at what the Secretary-General described
in his report as a greater operational tempo, despite
targeted attacks by anti-Government elements on
Afghan forces.
The prevention and management of security
challenges will be crucial, especially ahead of and
during Afghanistan’s national elections next month. In
that regard, we fully support the calls of the Special
Representative, Mr. Kubiš, on the Afghan authorities
and the independent electoral bodies to ensure that the
polls are credible, that any concerns are voiced prior
to the elections and that the level of transparency is as
high as possible.
We would like to express our appreciation for the
efforts of the Afghan authorities with regard to the
preparations for the upcoming elections, which remain
on track for the scheduled polling date of 5 April. We
hope that all candidates and election workers will
be able to perform their duties in the run-up to the
elections without being threatened by those who seek
to disrupt the firm will of the Afghan people to live
peacefully in their country and to choose their own
destiny and political leaders. The right of all Afghans
to enjoy freedom and basic human rights, privileges
and responsibilities should be protected and fought for.
We are pleased at the increasing participation of
women in the transition process. The Commission on
the Status of Women, which concluded its fifty-eighth
session a few days ago, was enriched by a number of
side events. Of those, I would like to note the event
organized by my colleague, Ambassador Jarmo
Viinanen of Finland, on 12 March.
On that occasion, we had the opportunity to
welcome a group of politically active Afghan women,
led by Afghan Deputy Minister for Women’s Affairs
Her Excellency Mrs. Fawzia Habibi. For those who cast
doubt on the progress achieved in Afghanistan, such a
workshop on security and the role of women, with the
active participation of prominent Afghan representatives
in New York, would have been unthinkable 13 years
ago. Let me also express my appreciation of the fact that
the Ministry of the Interior of Afghanistan continues
to take steps to better protect and to empower female
police and Ministry staff in fulfilment of its goal of
recruiting and training a total of 10,000 female officers.

S/PV.7139

The progress mentioned has, to a great extent, been
achieved with the assistance, performance and outreach
of UNAMA. We note and highly appreciate not only
internal activities assisting the Afghan authorities in the
transition but also the regional outreach of UNAMA. It
proves that the Mission pays the necessity attention to
promoting fruitful collaboration among all countries of
the region in facing threats that surpass their individual
capacities. That approach is important, especially in
fighting terrorism, cross-border trafficking and illegal
trade. The Slovak Republic therefore supports the
renewal of UNAMA’s mandate with today’s unanimous
vote.
Finally, I would like to congratulate the people of
Afghanistan on the upcoming Nowruz holiday.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Sahebzada Ahmed Khan (Pakistan): Allow
me begin by expressing my heartfelt condolences to
the people and the Government of Afghanistan on the
demise of Vice-President Mohammad Qasim Fahim.
His invaluable contribution to the peace, prosperity
and stability of Afghanistan will long be remembered.
Pakistan also condemns the 17 January terrorist
attack in Kabul, and we express our sympathies and
condolences.
We thank Special Representative Ján Kubiš
for his effective leadership of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and for
his comprehensive briefing this morning. His visit to
Pakistan last month provided an opportunity for a frank
exchange of views, which we truly appreciate.
Pakistan strongly feels that UNAMA is a stabilizing
factor in Afghanistan. Its continued role therefore remains
crucial. We also welcome the adoption of resolution
2145 (2014) this morning. We thank Ambassador Zahir
Tanin, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, for
sharing his perspective with us. We welcome the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2014/163), which provides
an overview of developments in the region, and thank
Mr. Ban Ki-moon for his positive evaluation of Pakistan
with regard to bilateral relations.
As we celebrate Nowruz and a new beginning, the
season of change is upon us in more than one way. In
a little under three weeks, Afghans will go to the polls
to exercise their democratic right. Timely, inclusive,
transparent and credible elections are critical to the

14-2662027/33

S/PV.7139

The situation in Afghanistan

continued stability of the country. We are encouraged
by the Secretary-General’s assessment that preparations
are going well. We hope that the remaining challenges
will also be addressed.
Pakistan, for its part, has no favourites. It will
cooperate and work with the popular choice of our
Afghan brothers and sisters. Others should also
exercise such neutrality. A regional consensus on
non-interference is therefore required. Let me also
reassure Afghanistan that Pakistan remains committed
to strengthening security along the border during the
electoral process.
Elections are only the first challenge this year.
Security and economic transformations also need to
be carefully managed. The post-2014 Afghanistan
remains critical to international and regional peace
and security. It should therefore never be abandoned.
An inclusive Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace and
reconciliation process is central to sustained stability.
It needs to be expedited and pursued with persistence
and perseverance. Our support for the process is
unwavering. Our work remains primarily an Afghanled process. We can at best encourage and facilitate
that.
Pakistan feels that terrorists and extremists should
not be allowed to influence relations, policies and
decisions. Securing the Pakistan-Afghanistan border
through consistent vigilance and effective management
is therefore a necessity, and the strengthening of
border controls a priority. The activation of the Joint
Commission on Border Management in early February
is a positive step. We hope that it will facilitate real-time
communication and improve security on the ground.
Increased opium production in Afghanistan and
the growing adverse impact of drugs on Afghans
themselves, as well as the link between drugs and
terrorism, are well established. The role of the
international community, led by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and UNAMA, remains
imperative to countering that threat.
Another issue of concern are the 3 million Afghan
refugees who are still in Pakistan. The economic
prospects outlined in the Secretary-General’s report
are not rosy. Without improving economic conditions,
sustainable repatriation and reintegration will be very
difficult. While we have extended the stay of refugees
until the end of the year, a comprehensive plan for their
return home needs to be drawn up.

28/33

17/03/2014

Frequent high-level exchanges and the growing
emphasis on bilateral trade, economic cooperation and
regional collaboration represent Prime Minister Nawaz
Sharif’s forward-looking vision of a peaceful and
prosperous neighbourhood. The Turkey-AfghanistanPakistan trilateral summit last month, the fullest
summit-level interaction between Pakistan and
Afghanistan in the past eight months, continued that
momentum. The meeting of the Afghanistan-Pakistan
Joint Economic Commission in February was another
important milestone in that regard. Coupled with
contacts in the security and intelligence fields, such
exchanges have created a real momentum, and we hope
to continue building on that impetus.
Our multidimensional relationship is not restricted
to official visits. People-to-people contacts are also
growing. Afghan students are studying in Pakistani
institutions, laying the foundation for a brighter,
collaborative future.
Let me conclude by quoting Prime Minister Nawaz
Sharif in Ankara. He said,
“Afghanistan today is at a defining moment in
its history. This is a time for all Afghans to come
together, make peace and rebuild their country.”
We are with them on that road.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Sweden.
Mr. Grunditz (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Nordic countries — Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Norway and my own country, Sweden. We
fully support the statement by the observer of European
Union but would like to add a few remarks.
We, too, would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive report (S/2014/163), and the
Special Representative for his briefing. I also thank
Ambassador Tanin for his statement.
The upcoming elections will, if successful, be
the first democratic and peaceful transfer of power
in Afghanistan’s history. Their importance for the
consolidation of Afghanistan’s democracy cannot
be overstated. We commend the Government for the
progress made in preparing for the elections and for
creating the space for a lively and meaningful debate
about Afghanistan’s future. The task now is to ensure
that the elections are credible, inclusive and transparent.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan

14-26620

17/03/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

(UNAMA) has an important support function, as it
does for the 2015 parliamentary elections as well.
Afghanistan has made real progress over the
past decade in areas such as education, health and
infrastructure. It is imperative that the momentum of
progress be sustained in order for Afghanistan to emerge
stronger and more self-reliant. The achievements made
so far need to be safeguarded. UNAMA has a vital
role to play in ensuring that the partnership between
Afghanistan and the international community under the
Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework is realized to
its full extent.
Only an inclusive political solution can secure
stability in the country. We fully back the continuation
of UNAMA’s good offices to support an Afghan-led
and Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation process.
A continuing political role for the United Nations
in Afghanistan, coupling political engagement and
effective donor coordination, will also be important
after 2014, not least for the development efforts
that remain ahead. We underline the importance of
a continued local and regional field presence and
adequate financing for the Mission.
UNAMA has an important role in promoting
Government engagement and donor coordination.
There is also a need for strengthened coordination
across United Nations agencies present in Afghanistan,
thereby promoting the concept of the United Nations
delivering as one. As more donors channel their funding
through United Nations financing mechanisms, that
role becomes increasingly vital.
For several of the Nordic countries, Afghanistan is
already their largest bilateral development cooperation
partner. The foundation for that is the strong domestic
political and popular support in the countries concerned.
Our Governments and national parliaments consider
human rights, in particular women’s rights, a core issue
when deciding on future financial and political support
to Afghanistan. It is important that the Afghan political
leadership show firm commitment in promoting
women’s rights, tackling corruption and safeguarding
the well-being of its people. Issues such as the full
implementation of the law on the elimination of violence
against women, continued efforts to increase safe and
secure access to quality education for women and girls,
and guarantees for their equal political participation in
decision-making will remain crucial.

S/PV.7139

Freedom of the media is particularly important
in the context of both the upcoming elections and
the building of a free, open and transparent society.
Progress has been achieved, but threats remain towards
the media. That was recently highlighted by the horrible
assassination of the Swedish journalist Nils Horner in
Kabul and by recent cases of violence against reporters
in Mazar-e-Sharif.
The humanitarian situation remains a cause for
concern, not least with regard to health and the increasing
numbers of displaced persons. All efforts must be
made to ensure humanitarian access. Further attacks
against humanitarian personnel are unacceptable. We
welcome efforts to improve humanitarian coordination
and the establishment of a common humanitarian fund.
We would like to encourage more donors to channel
funding through the United Nations pooled funds.
In conclusion, the Nordic countries acknowledge the
Afghan Government’s efforts to take its commitments
forward. We encourage the Government to continue
its demanding work and to push forward during the
upcoming elections. Benchmarks are not only factors in
building the confidence of the international community;
they are vital above all in building a more democratic,
prosperous and stable Afghanistan for all its citizens.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany, and I take
this opportunity to welcome the new Permanent
Representative of Germany.
Mr. Braun (Germany): To start, let me thank
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report (S/2014/163), and his Special Representative,
Mr. Ján Kubiš, for his briefing and for his availability
for other functions during his time in New York. I
also acknowledge Ambassador Tanin’s presence in the
Security Council today.
The German Government aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the observer of European Union
earlier in today’s debate.
In three weeks’ time, the Afghan people will
elect a new president and provincial councils. For
the first time in Afghanistan’s history, power will be
peacefully transferred to a new Administration. We
commend the great efforts Afghanistan has made
so far in the preparations for those elections. My
Government is confident that free, fair and transparent
elections will result in a legitimate outcome, thereby

14-2662029/33

S/PV.7139

The situation in Afghanistan

17/03/2014

further strengthening democracy in Afghanistan. We
encourage the Afghan people, particularly women,
to make full use of their constitutional rights and to
actively participate in the elections.

Under such difficult circumstances, the United Nations
continues to do great work in the service of the Afghan
people. Germany will continue to extend its support to
UNAMA in fulfilling its mandate.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) has played a crucial role in
support of preparations for the elections, contributing
to building the capacities of Afghan authorities. For that
reason, we see a continuing role for UNAMA in that
area, pursuant to the Mission’s mandate just extended
by the Council.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.

However, with our shared focus on the elections,
we must not forget that there are many other
challenges lying ahead in Afghanistan. Preserving and
consolidating gains in the protection and promotion of
human rights is of the utmost urgency. The Afghanistan
Independent Human Rights Commission remains a key
partner in that regard. It is also of great importance to
ensure the equal participation of all members of society,
in particular women, in the shaping of the country and
in its institution-building.
The security situation remains volatile. The
Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF) have
proven increasingly capable of responding to security
challenges, although at a high cost. Continued support
by the international community through the transition
period and beyond would further strengthen the ANSF’s
capacities to provide security for all Afghans. As
previously stated, Germany stands ready to contribute
its share to that joint effort. To that end, the timely
signing of the bilateral security agreement between
Afghanistan and the United States is a necessary
precondition and should not be delayed further.
At this critical juncture, Afghanistan needs to
see continuity in the work of the United Nations on
the ground. Supporting the Afghan Government’s
efforts to protect and promote human rights, increase
coordination and efficiency of international support
and implement its commitments under the Tokyo
Framework requires a strong United Nations Mission
with adequate resources and a presence throughout
the country. We therefore welcome the extension of
UNAMA’s mandate for another 12 months.
To conclude, I would like to express my sincere
gratitude and admiration for the work of the Special
Representative and his team in Afghanistan. We are
still mourning the death of four United Nations staff
who died on 17 January in a heinous attack in Kabul.

30/33

Mr. Eler (Turkey): I would like to begin my
statement by thanking Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Ján Kubiš for his comprehensive
briefing. I would also like to extend my condolences to
the Afghan people on the passing of First Vice-President
Mohammed Qasim Fahim, an exemplary Afghan leader
who was known for his conciliatory approach and
bridge-building capabilities.
Afghanistan stands at a crucial crossroads, with
key political, security and economic transformation
processes under way. The coming months, especially
after the 5 April presidential and provincial elections,
will have an enormous impact on the way in which the
next decade will unfold.
Resolution 2145 (2014), on the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), arrives
at a timely moment, when change and uncertainty
dominate the Afghanistan agenda. Maintaining
the comprehensive UNAMA mandate will provide
tangible assurance of the United Nations continued
assistance to the Afghan Government and people.
We believe that Afghanistan’s future should be based
on a conscious strategy drawing strength from local
ownership and seeking to pull together various efforts
into a meaningful whole. That understanding is fully
reflected in the resolution.
Despite significant improvements in health,
education, development, infrastructure and human
rights, Afghanistan will continue to need the support
of the international community for many years to come.
Security, accessibility and inclusiveness will be
the three grave challenges of the upcoming elections.
Following the elections, security threats are likely to
continue and even increase in the short run. Meanwhile,
good governance, aid transparency and combating
corruption will need to be prioritized, in line with
the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework, while
agreements on legal frameworks to define the nature of
the international community’s military assistance will
need to be drawn up. The tasks that the newly elected
Government will face are daunting in nature.

14-26620

17/03/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

At this vital juncture, the international community
should continue investing in positive scenarios for
the future of the country. In the short run, that entails
the successful conduct of the April elections and the
preservation of the current level of security. More
crucially, perceptions of a power vacuum that could
be filled by terrorist or organized crime groups must
be broken. International support to capacity-building
and good governance must continue. In addition, we
must continue to support responses to the humanitarian
challenges faced.
We fully support the human rights mandate of
UNAMA. Addressing matters involving grave human
rights violations, particularly violence against women
and girls, and the issue of civilian casualties should
be prioritized, in both the short- and the long-term.
Local ownership of human rights matters is essential to
ensuring durable solutions in that area.
As the fifty-eighth session of the Commission on
the Status of Women took place last week, I would like
to extend my great appreciation to the Afghan officials
and human rights defenders who face daily threats and
challenges in their work to enhance the human rights of
Afghan women and girls.
There is heightened awareness of Afghanistan’s
problems among its regional partners, as well as
increased ownership. The Istanbul Process maintains
a comprehensive regional approach on integrating
Afghanistan into the region and facing regional
challenges as a whole, and therefore reflects that spirit.
We look forward to the next Istanbul Process ministerial
meeting in China. We also continue to support all
trilateral, quadrilateral and multilateral initiatives
aimed at the well-being of the Afghan people. In that
context, the most recent trilateral dialogue among
Afghanistan, Pakistan and Turkey that took place on
12 and 13 February, in Ankara, has been useful and
successful.
In conclusion, I would like to voice our strong support
of the crucial role that the United Nations will continue
to play during and post transition. Our commitment to
the needs of the United Nations regarding Afghanistan
will serve as insurance in protecting the achievements
of the past 13 years on the ground.
I would particularly like to commend the valuable
efforts of the United Nations and of UNAMA, which
should be supported with sufficient means and
resources.

S/PV.7139

I would like to take this opportunity to extend my
heartfelt condolences to the families and colleagues of
all victims of the heinous terrorist attack in Kabul in
January, among which there were UNAMA personnel
who lost their lives working for peace and stability in
Afghanistan.
Turkey will remain in solidarity with the Afghan
people and will continue to contribute to a safe, secure
and prosperous Afghanistan, as we have done for many
decades.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran.
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to start by thanking Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Ján Kubiš for his briefing and
comprehensive report on the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and for
his analysis of the current situation in Afghanistan.
I also thank Ambassador Tanin for his informative
statement. I express my thanks to the Secretary-General
for the report contained in document S/2014/163. I
would like briefly to touch upon a few points regarding
the prevailing situation in Afghanistan.
First, this year Afghanistan is approaching a critical
moment in its history. The upcoming elections, the
security and political issues associated with the transfer
of power and the end of the presence of the international
forces will all culminate during the coming months.
We hope that the combined efforts of the Afghan
Government and the United Nations will lead the
process to improved durability and the strengthening
of peace, stability and security in Afghanistan and the
region.
Secondly, as a neighbouring country of Afghanistan,
we share a critical interest in Afghanistan’s security and
long-term stability and its socioeconomic development.
Afghanistan’s continuing engagements with its
neighbours and regional partners in the areas of trade,
economic exchange and development projects must be
supported and strengthened. Such economic ties work
to cement stability in Afghanistan and in the region.
In that regard, our continuing bilateral cooperation
is particularly focused on security matters, counternarcotics efforts, development projects and economic
cooperation aimed at infrastructure areas involving
roads, railroads, energy, mining and minerals and
agriculture, among others.

14-2662031/33

S/PV.7139

The situation in Afghanistan

Thirdly, as the drawdown of the international
military forces is on this year’s agenda, there are some
security concerns involved. As indicated in the report
of the Secretary-General, the United Nations recorded
20,093 security incidents in Afghanistan in 2013 — a
14 per cent increase in casualties inflicted upon Afghan
civilians and a reversal of the decline recorded in
2012. A portion of those were caused by the military
operations of the international forces in Afghanistan.
Attacks on civilians under any pretext and by whomever
is condemnable and must be halted.
Fourthly, regarding the return of refugees, we
look forward to the full implementation of the relevant
agreements between the Government of Afghanistan
and the United Nations of 31 March 2013, aimed at
setting up a team to seek joint solutions and integrated
approaches to refugees. We urge the international
community to strengthen and expedite efforts to
create the conditions conducive for the sustainable
repatriation of refugees and their full rehabilitation and
reintegration into their homeland.
Fifthly, with respect to the counter-narcotics efforts,
we are concerned about the possible increase in opium
poppy cultivation, particularly in the north and northeast areas of Afghanistan. We welcome the initiative
taken by the Afghan Minister of Counter Narcotics to
organize a Good Neighbourly Relations Declaration
conference in Kabul on 28 and 29 January, with the
participation of ministers or heads of counter-narcotics
institutions from China, Iran, Pakistan, Tajikistan,
Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan. We hope that, with the
strong support and commitment of international donors,
Afghan authorities and the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, the menace of drug cultivation and
drug trafficking, a main source of income for extremist
and terrorist groups, will be curtailed to a great extent.
Sixthly, we support UNAMA, as well as United
Nations agencies, in fulfilling their mission to provide
assistance to the peace, stability and reconstruction of
Afghanistan through a robust regional engagement on
issues such as border security, immigration, the return
of refugees and drug control measures. The role of
UNAMA should be further strengthened in the light
of the developments expected in Afghanistan this year.
The future role of the United Nations in Afghanistan
is going to grow and become more multifaceted, and
sometimes much more complicated. We therefore regret
the recent decision of the General Assembly to reduce its
2013 budget for UNAMA by $4.9 million. As indicated

32/33

17/03/2014

during recent visits of Mr. Kubiš to Tehran, we are, as
always, ready to support UNAMA and steadfast in our
support for the Mission and its activities.
I would like to join other speakers who congratulated
Afghanistan and the Afghan people on the occasion
of Nowruz, the day that has been recognized by the
General Assembly as the International Day of Nowruz
since 2009. I wish Afghanistan a New Year filled with
peace and prosperity.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Grant (Canada) (spoke in French): Allow me to
express my appreciation for the opportunity to address
the Security Council.
This year, Afghanistan will witness a number of
significant milestones — ones that will involve Afghans
taking on a greater responsibility for the future direction
of their country, as well as ones that will address the
vital needs of democratization, security and peace.
On 5 April, Afghan citizens will exercise their right
to elect the next Afghan President and the members
of provincial councils. That historic day will mark
Afghanistan’s first democratic transition of power
from one presidential leader to another. Over the past
year, Afghanistan put into place a robust legislative
framework, national institutions and local machinery to
conduct credible, constitutional and inclusive elections.
We welcome the efforts of the Afghan National Security
Forces (ANSF) and the Ministry of the Interior, who have
identified and addressed numerous security challenges
to help ensure that all Afghans are able to participate
in the elections. We are especially interested to see
the success of measures that facilitate the enhanced
participation of women. Canada is encouraged by the
number of women voters registered thus far, and further
calls on all Afghan citizens, Government officials, civil
society organizations and the international community
to increase their efforts to ensure the meaningful
participation of women in all aspects of the electoral
process leading to the elections of 5 April.
(spoke in English)
Since 2011, the Government of Afghanistan, with
the assistance of the international community, has
built a strong and capable Afghan National Security
Forces that now leads security operations throughout
the country. By 31 December 2014, those forces will
have full responsibility for the security of Afghanistan,

14-26620

17/03/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

as the International Security Assistance Force mission
draws to an end. We can expect that the growing
capability of those forces will be tested in the coming
months by a determined insurgency. Nevertheless,
with each passing day, Afghans are increasing their
confidence in their security forces. Those outside of
the political process should come to recognize that
their future, their safety and security, and the future
of Afghanistan, lies within a peace and reconciliation
process. Canada is proud of the contribution we have
made — and continue to make — in strengthening the
ANSF. We call upon the Government of Afghanistan
to sign without delay the requisite Afghanistan-United
States bilateral security agreement and conclude the
NATO-Afghanistan status-of-forces agreement to allow
the international community to continue its military
assistance to Afghanistan.
While Canada’s military mission has ended,
Canadian support to Afghanistan has not. Indeed,
Canada has committed $227 million in development
assistance for 2014 to 2017, to maintain the hard-fought
gains for women and girls through support for improved
health, education, humanitarian assistance and human
rights. In addition, Canada remains committed to the
safety and security of Afghanistan through continued
support to sustain the Afghan National Security Forces
with $330 million between 2015 and 2017.
Afghans themselves know that much remains to be
done to improve the protection of human rights in their
country. We note that the Government of Afghanistan
recently released its report on the implementation of the
elimination of violence against women law. Although
that report satisfies one of the obligations under the
Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework, it also
illustrates the startling reality that violence against
women remains pervasive throughout Afghanistan.
Canada has made enhancing human rights protections
and empowering Afghan women and girls the focus
of its development assistance for 2014 to 2017 and the
priority in our relations with Afghanistan. We call upon
the Government of Afghanistan to fully implement the
elimination of violence against women law, and make
every effort to guarantee the participation of women in
all facets of Afghan life, be it in the security, political,
economic or cultural domains. Canada stresses that all
Afghan laws must ensure strong protections for women

S/PV.7139

and girls, as guaranteed by the Afghan Constitution and
in line with Afghanistan’s international commitments
to protect human rights, particularly protecting Afghan
women and girls from sexual and domestic violence
and child early and forced marriage. Afghanistan’s full
potential cannot, and will not, be achieved without the
full participation of all of its citizens.
Afghans also want an end to Government
corruption. We see the vibrant youth and civil society
movements in Afghanistan — over half of the population
is under 25 years old — and we can see their appetite
for change, for jobs, for an end to corruption and for a
chance to compete in the regional and global economy.
The Afghan Government must do more to combat
corruption by becoming more accountable to its people
and to international donors. Canada encourages the
Government of Afghanistan to meet the benchmarks
set out by the International Monetary Fund and to
pass new laws to address the corruption that is eroding
the public’s trust at all levels of Government. If the
international community is to continue its special level
of engagement with Afghanistan, it will also need to be
confident that tangible results are being achieved in the
fight against Government corruption. Action on that
front will also help generate the investor interest needed
to grow and sustain the Afghan economy. Passing a
minerals law that is in line with international standards
would send a clear signal to the world’s investors that
Afghanistan is genuinely open for business.
In conclusion, Canada remains committed to helping
Afghanistan become a more peaceful and prosperous
country in the heart of Asia, one that is able to benefit
from the vast economic opportunities available. In that
vein, we emphasize that networks of terrorists deployed
from neighbouring States must be held accountable,
as must their supporters. Reconciliation that fails to
enshrine the indispensable rights of women, advance a
constitutional democracy or tackle endemic corruption
is not reconciliation. The road to peace is fraught with
perils and pitfalls, but it is increasingly one on which
Afghans will lead the charge.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

14-2662033/33
