15

Resolutions adopted on reports of the First Committee

Recognizing that every possible effort should be
made to restore the children to their homes, in a humanitarian spirit detached from political or ideological
considerations,
Expressing its full appreciation of the efforts made
by the International Committee of the Red Cross and
the League of Red Cross Societies and by the Secretary-General to implement General Assembly resolutions 193 C (III) and 288 B (IV),
1. Requests the Secretary-General and the International Committee of the Red Cross and the League
of Red Cross Societies to continue their efforts in
accordance with the aforementioned resolutions ;
2. Urges all States harbouring the Greek children to
make all the necessary arrangements, in co-operation
with the Secretary-General and the international Red
Cross organizations, for the early return of the Greek
children to their parents and, whenever necessary, to
allow the international Red Cross organizations free
access to their territories for this purpose;
3. Establishes a Standing Committee, to be composed
of the representatives of Peru, the Philippines and
Sweden, to act in consultation with the SecretaryGeneral, and to consult with the representatives of the
States concerned, with a view to the early repatriation
of the children ;
4. Requests the International Committee of the Red
Cross and the League of Red Cross Societies to cooperate with the Standing Committee;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report from
time to time to Member States on the progress made
in the implementation of the present resolution, and
requests the international Red Cross organizations and
the Secretary-General to submit reports to the General Assembly at its sixth session.
313th plenary meeting,
1 December 1950.
383 (V). Threats lo the political independence
and territorial integrity of China and to
the peace of the Far East, resulting from
Soviet violations of the Sino-Soviet Treaty
of Friendship and Alliance of 14 August
1945 and from Soviet violations of the
Charter of the United Nations
A

Decides to instruct the Interim Committee to continue inquiry on this question, in order to obtain more
information and facts having a direct bearing upon the
case if such findings are obtainable, and to report to
the General Assembly at its next regular session. The
records 14 of the discussion of the First Committee on
the case shall be made available to the Interim
Committee.
314th plenary meeting,
1 December 1950.

B
The General Assembly
Decides to draw the attention of all States to the
necessity of complying faithfully with the recommendation contained in General Assembly resolution 291
(IV), the object of which is to promote the stability
of international relations in the Far East, and which
recommends specific principles for that purpose, including, inter alia, the principle of the scrupulous observance of the treaties in force when the resolution
was adopted, the purpose of which was to secure the
independence and territorial integrity of China.
314th plenary meeting,
1 December 1950.
384 (V). Intervention of the Central People's
Government of the People's Republic of
China in Korea
The General Assembly,
l "iewing with grave concern the situation in the Far
East,

,1nxious that immediate steps should be taken to
prevent the conflict in Korea spreading to other areas
and to put an end to the fighting in Korea itself, and
that further steps should thet, be taken for a peaceful
settlement of existing issues in accordance with the
Purposes and Principles of the United Nations,

Requests the President of the General Assembly to
constitute a group of three persons, including himself,
to determine the basis on which a satisfactory cease-fire
in Korea can be arranged and to make recommendations
to the General Assembly as soon as possible.

The General Assembly,
Noting that the Interim Committee, to which the
Assembly, during its fourth session, referred 13 the
complaint concerning "Threats to the political independence and territorial integrity of China and to the
peace of the Far East, resulting from Soviet violations
of the Sino-Soviet Treaty of Friendship and Alliance
of 14 August 1945 and from Soviet violations of the
Charter of the United Nations", has not yet submitted
recommendations thereon,

11

See resolution 292 (IV).

324th plenary meeting,
14 December 1950.

*

*

*

The President of the General Assembly, at the 325th
plenary meeting on 14 December 1950, announced the
constitution of a group consisting of the following persons: Mr. L B. Pearson (Canada), Sir Beneqal Rau
(India) and Mr. N. Entezam (Iran).
·

14 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Session, First Committee, 400th-404th meetings inclusive.
