UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1998/410
19 May 1998
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 20 APRIL 1998 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

As members of the Security Council are aware, my Special Adviser on Cyprus,
Mr. Diego Cordovez, visited Nicosia from 17 to 22 March 1998 for consultations
with the leaders of the two Cypriot communities on the resumption of his efforts
under my good offices mandate. Mr. Cordovez has since reported to me on the
results of his talks. He has also briefed the members of the Security Council.
I regret that during my Special Adviser’s visit to Cyprus it was not
possible to find a common basis on which to resume the negotiations. While both
interlocutors emphasized their continued belief that a peaceful solution to the
Cyprus problem should be pursued through the United Nations, they strongly
disagreed on the parameters that should govern the process.
Mr. Clerides reconfirmed his readiness to resume discussions in the longestablished framework. He maintained, at the same time, that that framework had
been mandated by the Security Council and should not be changed. According to
Mr. Clerides, it provided the appropriate forum for discussing and solving all
problems relating to a peaceful settlement of the Cyprus conflict.
Mr. Denktash rejected the validity of the intercommunal framework, based on
developments in connection with the accession of Cyprus to the European Union.
He set out his views during his meetings with Mr. Cordovez in Cyprus and
elaborated on them in a meeting with me, at his request, in Geneva on 28 March.
In view of the implications of Mr. Denktash’s new position, I would like to
share with the members of the Security Council, in the following paragraphs, in
extenso, the views of Mr. Denktash as he presented them to me in our meeting.
Mr. Denktash first stated that he firmly believed that the United Nations
offered the best venue through which the Cyprus question could be most
successfully handled. He was of the view that any resolution in Cyprus must be
based on existing realities and the equal status of the two peoples. The time
had come to recognize the fact that the Greek Cypriot administration did not
have the legal or moral right to determine the future of the whole island and of
the Turkish Cypriot people. It was thus necessary, for the success of our
efforts, to adopt a new approach to the Cyprus question which would reflect
those facts.

98-13901 (E)

190598

/...

S/1998/410
English
Page 2

Mr. Denktash said that the lack of political parity and symmetry between
the two sides in Cyprus was preventing progress. He wished to share with me,
candidly, his assessment that the role of the United Nations in Cyprus, both in
peacekeeping and in my good offices mission, had so far, unfortunately, helped
and consolidated that political disparity and asymmetry. He believed that the
new approach he was advocating would greatly facilitate the United Nations
efforts for a lasting settlement.
According to Mr. Denktash, the intervention of the European Union
instigated by Greece and the Greek Cypriot side had reached a climax at the
Luxembourg Summit held in December 1997, and introduced elements which
diametrically contradicted the parameters of the United Nations process, thus
further complicating the already complex Cyprus conflict. Furthermore, the
establishment of a unified military front between Greece and the Greek Cypriot
administration, including the opening of the Paphos airbase and the prospective
deployment of sophisticated S-300 missiles, within the context of the so-called
Joint Military Doctrine, promised nothing but further crisis.
In shaping our future, Mr. Denktash said, the basic requirement was
realism. In view of the prevailing realities, in order to coexist peacefully in
the island and promote trust and cooperation between the two peoples, the two
States should work out an arrangement which would enable them to resolve, in the
first instance, the following three major issues:
-

Settlement of reciprocal property claims;

-

Security;

-

Delineation of borders.

Mr. Denktash stated, in this context, that he had come to the conclusion
that the acknowledgement of the existence of two fully functioning democratic
States in the island, each with its own people, territory and effective
Government, would open the way to the resolution of these three issues and the
development of a new and cooperative relationship for the achievement of a final
settlement. Furthermore, the inhuman embargoes imposed upon the Turkish Cypriot
people should be removed.
Mr. Denktash also stressed that the current system of guarantees must
continue and that the final settlement must maintain the internal balance
between the two peoples of the island and the external balance between Turkey
and Greece in the Eastern Mediterranean. He was confident that the new platform
would create a new environment in which the two sides could work towards a
common future based on cooperation, mutual trust and respect. The primary aim
should, therefore, be the immediate achievement of a working relationship
between the two States so that peace, stability and mutual trust could be
secured and the danger of a new conflict averted. He referred to his letter of
5 March 1998 to Mr. Clerides, in which he had stated the foregoing and had also
invited him to make together, in good faith, a new beginning on the basis of
those realities.

/...

S/1998/410
English
Page 3

Mr. Denktash said it was his firm belief that all concerned would have to
adapt and realign their current positions to help the process forward. In this
connection, he hoped that I would agree that it was necessary to consider
adjusting the role of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP)
and the good offices mission to the realities pertaining to Cyprus, especially
after the interventions of Greece and the European Union which had completely
destroyed the political parity and symmetry needed for a solution of the
conflict. This would enable us to make progress on the right track.
Mr. Denktash concluded by confirming that he was ready to work with me for
a Cyprus settlement and a peaceful future on the basis of these realities.
Following Mr. Denktash’s full and frank account of his position, I urged
him to agree to resume talks within the framework of my good offices mission. I
pointed out that the talks between the two leaders were the only framework
within which the two communities in Cyprus were treated on the basis of full
political equality. I told him that I intended to ask Mr. Cordovez to continue
to explore with the parties ways of establishing fair and effective modalities
for the continuation of the talks.
Both Mr. Clerides and Mr. Denktash requested that I inform the Security
Council about their positions and the consequent status of the Cyprus efforts.
I would therefore appreciate it if you could bring the contents of the present
letter to the attention of the members of the Security Council. I shall look
forward to any guidance the Council may wish to provide in support of my good
offices mission.

(Signed)

-----

Kofi A. ANNAN
