S/2021/836

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 September 2021
Original: English

Implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Region
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2556
(2020), in which the Council requested me to report to it every six months on the
implementation of the commitments under the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region and its linkages
with the broader security situation in the region. 1 It provides an overview of peace
and security developments in the Great Lakes region since the issuance of the
previous report (S/2021/306) and covers the period from 16 March to 15 September
2021.

II. Major developments
A.

Spread and implications of the coronavirus disease pandemic
2.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic continued to adversely affect
the Great Lakes region. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), the
signatory countries of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework had reported
a total of 3,702,375 confirmed cases and 103,465 fatalities as at 14 September. In
July, the United Republic of Tanzania resumed reporting of COVID -19 cases in the
country, which had been suspended since May 2020. Several co untries experienced
another wave of the pandemic, leading to renewed containment measures, including
partial lockdowns, although borders were mostly kept open. Meanwhile, vaccine
shortages, among other factors, continued to limit the administration of vacc ines in
the region. As at 14 September, WHO reported that a total of 27,032,479 vaccine

__________________
1

21-13661 (E)

In this context, the region refers to the 13 signatory countries of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework, namely, Angola, Burundi, the Central African Republic, the Congo, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kenya, Rwanda, South Africa, South Sudan, the Sudan,
Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia. In addition, the following fou r
intergovernmental organizations act as witnesses/guarantors of the Framework: the African
Union, the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the Southern African
Development Community and the United Nations.

081021

*2113661*

S/2021/836

doses had been administered in 12 of the 13 signatory countries, amounting to an
estimated 6 per cent of the total population in the region.
3.
The socioeconomic impact of the pandemic remained a cause for concern. While
the economies of the signatory States of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework were expected to rebound in 2021, per capita incomes are, according to
the International Monetary Fund (IMF), 2 unlikely to return to pre-pandemic levels
before 2025. The slow roll-out of vaccinations in many countries, which is partly
attributable to high costs, could further undermine economic growth, with IMF
estimating that broad coverage is not expected before the end of 2023. In addition,
the number of people living in extreme poverty is expected to increase in a context of
rising food prices, high unemployment rates and mounting debt.

B.

Security situation
4.
While some areas of the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo witnessed a
renewed surge in attacks by armed groups, the security situation along common
borders in the region remained relatively stable, with four cross-border incidents,
compared with three during the previous reporting period.
5.
On 24 May, Rwanda stated that the Rwanda Defence Force had intercepted
elements of the Burundian armed group Forces nationales de libération (FNL), which
had allegedly come from the Mabayi commune in Burundi. Two FNL elements were
reportedly killed by the Rwandan Defence Force. In a statement released on 25 May,
Burundi denied the presence on its territory of any armed groups hostile to Rwanda.
6.
On 12 June, the Rwandan Defence Force arrested a Ugandan soldier for
allegedly trespassing on Rwandan territory, before releasing him to the Ugandan
authorities the following day. On 14 June, Uganda sent a protest note claiming that
the incident had occurred on Ugandan soil. There has been no public response from
the Rwandan authorities to date.
7.
On 16 July, clashes between the Uganda People’s Defence Forces and suspected
elements of the Congolese armed group Coopérative pour le développement du Congo
reportedly occurred in Zombo District, Uganda, near the border with the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. According to the Ugandan authorities, seven people were
killed, including five attackers and a soldier of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces.
8.
During the night of 6 September, Congolese and Burundian naval forces
reportedly clashed on Lake Tanganyika, resulting in the deaths of two Congolese
soldiers and the capture of another by Burundian forces. According to the
spokesperson of the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (FARDC),
the Burundian naval forces had mistaken their Congolese counterparts fo r criminals.
9.
On 31 July, Rwanda handed over to Burundi 19 members of the Burundian
armed group Résistance pour un État de droit au Burundi (RED Tabara) who had been
intercepted by the Rwandan Defence Force as they illegally crossed the border into
Rwanda on 29 September 2020. On 6 August, Burundi handed over to Rwanda seven
Rwandan citizens who had been found to be illegally trading goods on Burundian
territory.
10. In the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, the security situation
deteriorated as a result of armed group activity. In Ituri and North Kivu Provinces,
the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) intensified their attacks on civilians and
FARDC. Between 15 March and 1 September, alleged ADF elements reportedly killed

__________________
2

2/17

See International Monetary Fund, Regional economic outlook: sub-Saharan Africa – navigating
a long pandemic (Washington, D.C., 2021).
21-13661

S/2021/836

273 civilians and abducted an estimated 249 civilians in 57 attacks in Ituri Province,
including in Mambasa Territory, where the group had not been active since March
2020. During the same period, in North Kivu Province, 76 attacks attributed to ADF
resulted in more than 264 fatalities, including 27 FARDC soldiers and a peacekeeper
deployed as part of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). A concerning development has
been the attacks allegedly carried out by ADF elements against leaders of the Muslim
community, such as the assassination of an imam in Beni town and of another imam
in Mavivi town, Beni Territory, on 1 May and 18 May, respectively. On 28 June, three
improvised explosive devices reportedly placed by ADF exploded in Beni, with the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo describing one incident as a
suicide attack.
11. The Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR) reportedly
maintained their presence in parts of Rutshuru Territory, North Ki vu Province, where
they continued to launch attacks against civilians.
12. On 3 May, the President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Félix Antoine
Tshilombo Tshisekedi, announced a state of siege in Ituri and North Kivu Provinces,
which took effect on 6 May and has subsequently been renewed eight times during
the reporting period.
13. In South Kivu, the Burundian armed group RED Tabara remained active and
reportedly continued to cooperate with the Congolese Mai-Mai Ilunga, Mai-Mai
René, Mai-Mai Yakutumba and Twirwaneho militias, which have been involved in
abductions and kidnappings for ransom. On 15 July, RED Tabara released a
communiqué denying any alliances with the aforementioned local armed groups or
any involvement in attacks on FARDC.

C.

Political developments
14. Despite the continued constraints imposed by the COVID -19 pandemic, during
the reporting period there was an increase in high-level regional diplomacy and efforts
to strengthen bilateral relations. This led to a series of bilateral cooperation
agreements being signed and a number of bilateral commissions and other similar
mechanisms being established or revitalized.
15. Building on the momentum witnessed during the previous reporting period, the
Governments of Burundi and Rwanda took further steps to norma lize their bilateral
relations. On 1 July, the Prime Minister of Rwanda, Édouard Ngirente, participated
in a ceremony in Burundi to celebrate the country’s 59 years of independence.
Speaking on behalf of the President of Rwanda, Paul Kagame, Mr. Ngirente
confirmed his country’s readiness “to build on the solid foundations of [its] historical
and cultural ties” with Burundi. In turn, the President of Burundi, Evariste
Ndayishimiye, noted that the presence of the high -level Rwandan delegation at the
ceremony sent a strong signal that the two countries were opening a new chapter in
their bilateral relations. The participation of Rwanda in the fourth meeting of the
heads of the intelligence and security services, held on 6 July in Bujumbura, Burundi,
and the handover by Rwanda to Burundi of members of the RED Tabara armed group
were additional indicators of the progress made towards a rapprochement between the
two countries.
16. The Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda also demonstrated their
continued commitment to strengthening bilateral relations. Following the eruption of
the Mount Nyiragongo volcano near Goma, Democratic Republic of the Congo, on
22 May, Rwanda opened its borders to Congolese citizens evacuating from their
homes, and, on 28 May, Mr. Kagame called for urgent global support to deal with the

21-13661

3/17

S/2021/836

humanitarian crisis. On 25 and 26 June, Mr. Tshisekedi and Mr. Kagame visited the
border towns of Rubavu, Rwanda, and Goma, highlighting joint efforts to reduce
insecurity and strengthen economic ties.
17. On 16 June, the President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
President of Uganda, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, met at their common border on the
margins of the opening of the cross-border Mpondwe bridge and the launch of a
construction project to build three major roads linking the two countries, which are
part of a comprehensive infrastructure programme between them.
18. Following an exchange of confidence-building messages between the Presidents
of Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, including through the conduit
of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region, the
President of Burundi undertook a State visit to Kinshasa, from 12 to 14 July, during
which bilateral agreements on political and diplomatic consultations, and on peace
and security, were signed.
19. Relations between Rwanda and South Africa also improved following a meeting
between the President of Rwanda and the President of South Africa, Matamela Cyril
Ramaphosa, on 18 May in Paris. That meeting was followed, on 4 June, by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Rwanda, Vincent Biruta, paying a
visit to Pretoria, where he met his counterpart, the Minister for International Relations
and Cooperation of South Africa, Naledi Pandor. In a joint statement, the two ministers
agreed a road map in support of the normalization of their bilateral relations and the
establishment of a joint mechanism – to be led by them – to guide and manage the
process. The mechanism held its first meeting on 6 and 7 July in Kigali.
20. No progress was registered with regard to the quadripartite process for the
normalization of relations between Rwanda and Uganda, which is being facilitated by
Angola and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as no formal meeting has been
held since June 2020. Nevertheless, Rwanda and Uganda have reiterated their
commitment to improving their relations.
21. The Democratic Republic of the Congo maintained its efforts to nurture good
relations with other countries in the region. In addition to the engagements with
Burundi and Rwanda, the President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Mr. Tshisekedi, received the President of Kenya, Uhuru Kenyatta, in Kinshasa from
20 to 22 April. As a result of the visit, four framework agreements on strengthening
bilateral cooperation between the two countries were signed. On 24 April,
Mr. Tshisekedi discussed bilateral and regional issues of mutual interest with his
counterpart, the President of Zambia, Edgar Lungu, during the latter’s official visit to
Kinshasa.
22. In Burundi, the Government continued to implement its priorities, including
measures to improve governance and fight corruption, and stepped up its diplomatic
outreach, contributing to an improvement in the countr y’s relations with its
neighbours and international partners. From 11 to 14 May, Mr. Ndayishimiye
travelled to Uganda, where he met with Mr. Museveni. The two Heads of State
committed to the implementation of existing arrangements and agreed that their Joi nt
Commission for Cooperation and Joint Business Forum should convene within six
months. Mr. Ndayishimiye also undertook a State visit to Kenya, from 31 May to
1 June, where he met with his counterpart, Mr. Kenyatta. They signed several
cooperation agreements and decided to revitalize their Joint Permanent Commission
for Cooperation.
23. On 27 April, the Peace and Security Council of the African Union decided to
remove Burundi from its agenda, citing significant progress in the political and
security situation in the country. The Council further decided that the deployment of
4/17

21-13661

S/2021/836

African Union human rights observers and military experts in Burundi would be
concluded by 31 May. On 31 May, the Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary General for Burundi was officially closed. On 21 June, the European Union
announced its decision to lift the budgetary and financial restrictions it had previously
imposed on the Government of Burundi pursuant to article 96 of the Partnership
Agreement between the members of the African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of
States of the one part, and the European Community and its Member States of the
other part.
24. Following her inauguration on 19 March, the President of the United Republic
of Tanzania, Samia Suluhu Hassan, signalled her resolve to reinvigorate her country’s
role in the region by embarking upon a series of State visits to Burundi, Kenya,
Rwanda and Uganda, which resulted in the signing of several bilateral cooperation
agreements.
25. The region also witnessed several presidential elections during the reporting
period. In the Congo, elections held on 21 March resulted in the re -election of the
incumbent, Denis Sassou Nguesso, who was sworn in for a fifth term on 16 April. On
15 May, shortly after his inauguration, Mr. Sassou Nguesso travelled to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to discuss bilateral relations and the regional
political and security situation with Mr. Tshisekedi. In the Central African Republic,
Faustin Archange Touadera was sworn in for a second term on 30 March, following
his victory in the presidential election of 27 December 2020. In Uganda,
Mr. Museveni was sworn in for a sixth term on 12 May, following his victory in the
election held on 14 January 2021. In Zambia, Hakainde Hichilema, the leader o f the
United Party for National Development, won the presidential election held on
12 August and was sworn in on 24 August.
26. On 20 August, the Court of Appeal of Kenya upheld a High Court decision of
13 May ruling that the Constitution of Kenya amendment bill of 2020 was
unconstitutional. The proposed amendment had been the outcome of the Building
Bridges Initiative aimed at improving governance and preventing a repeat of the
post-electoral violence witnessed in 2017.
27. An encouraging trend in the region was the appointment of several women to
senior leadership positions, including Malangu Kabedi-Mbuyi as the Governor of the
central bank of the Democratic Republic of the Congo; Martha Koome as the Chief
Justice of Kenya; Jemma Nunu Kumba as the Speaker of Parliament of South Sudan;
Jessica Rose Epel Alupo as Vice-President of Uganda; Robinah Nabbanja as Prime
Minister of Uganda; and, in the United Republic of Tanzania, Liberata Mulamula as
Minister for Foreign Affairs and East African Cooperation and St ergomena Lawrence
Tax as Minister of Defence.

D.

Humanitarian situation
28. Forced displacement and an overall dire humanitarian situation continued to
affect the Great Lakes region. According to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), about 15 million people remain displaced in
the region. As at 15 August, over 962,000 Congolese refugees were being hosted in
20 African countries, a 2 per cent increase on figures from July 2021. Uganda
continued to host the majority of Congolese refugees (433,062), followed by Burundi
(81,050), the United Republic of Tanzania (78,634), Rwanda (77,561) and South
Africa (57,595). The Democratic Republic of the Congo hosted over 519,000 refugees
and asylum seekers, notably from Burundi, the Central African Republic, Rwanda and
South Sudan.

21-13661

5/17

S/2021/836

29. Some 5.26 million people remained internally displaced in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo owing to insecurity and violence, with 1.53 million having
been forced to flee and almost 430,000 having returned to their homes since the
beginning of 2021. In Ituri Province, 220,000 people have been internally displaced
since April, while more than 5,000 Congolese have reportedly crossed into Uganda
as a result of insecurity. In May, the eruption of the Mount Nyiragongo volcano
temporarily displaced an estimated 232,344 people, including about 30,000 people
who were temporarily evacuated to Rwanda.
30. Refugees continued to return to Burundi, reducing the number of Burundian
refugees in the region to 327,006 as at 31 August. This figure includes 131,799
Burundian refugees in the United Republic of Tanzania, 51,039 in Uganda, 47,943 in
Rwanda, and 42,725 in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. On 19 May, during
the twenty-second meeting of the Tripartite Commission for the Voluntary
Repatriation of Burundian Refugees, held in Bujumbura, Burundi, the continued
voluntary repatriation of Burundian refugees who wished to return to their country of
origin was reaffirmed. Participants noted that, while some refuge es might opt to return
now, others should continue to benefit from international protection in the United
Republic of Tanzania. They furthermore decided to jointly develop a road map to
promote refugee returns.
31. Between April and August, 7,229 Burundian refugees were returned from
Rwanda, with the support of UNHCR, bringing the total number of returns from
Rwanda to 29,874 since the two countries reached an agreement in August 2020 .
32. During the reporting period, there were a number of cases of the re foulement of
asylum seekers and refugees in the region. According to UNHCR, between January
and August, at least 10,338 Mozambican asylum seekers fleeing insecurity in northern
Mozambique were denied asylum and refouled by the United Republic of Tanzania.
33. On 3 May, the Minister for Public Health, Hygiene and Prevention of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Jean-Jacques Mbungani Mbanda, declared the
end of the resurgence of the Ebola virus disease in the country, less than three months
after the first new case had been reported in North Kivu Province, on 7 February
2021. Eleven cases and six deaths were recorded.
34. According to the results of the latest Integrated Food Security Phase
Classification analysis published in March 2021, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has the highest estimated number of people facing food insecurity in the world,
with 27.3 million people facing extreme levels of food insecurity – or worse –
between February and July 2021. Moreover, the prevalence of glob al acute
malnutrition stood at 6.5 per cent and that of chronic malnutrition at 42 per cent. Some
4.4 million Congolese are expected to be acutely malnourished in 2021.

E.

Human rights and rule of law
35. Human rights violations and violations of international humanitarian law
continued to occur in the region, especially in areas affected by armed conflict where
accountability remained low.
36. In eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, grave human rights violations
continued to be reported, including a sizeable number in Ituri and North Kivu
Provinces. Between March and August, 64 per cent of all documented violations were
committed by armed groups and other non-State actors, particularly in Ituri and North
Kivu Provinces. ADF and Nyatura were among the main perpetrators, with
329 violations attributed to the former and 316 to the latter. Among foreign armed
groups, FDLR combatants were also responsible for 66 violations during the reporting

6/17

21-13661

S/2021/836

period. State agents were responsible for the remaining 36 per cent of reported
violations. Sexual and gender-based violence continued to be used as a weapon of
war, with 178 cases of conflict-related sexual violence reported as at 31 August.
Armed groups were responsible for 76 per cent and State agents for 24 p er cent of the
reported cases.
37. In Burundi, on 16 June, the National Communication Council lifted a
suspension on the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) and the online media
outlet Ikiriho, whose operations had been banned since March 2019 and Octo ber
2018, respectively. Furthermore, on 21 June, the Ntahangwa Court of Appeal in
Bujumbura reduced the term of imprisonment of human rights defender Germain
Rukuki, who had been arrested in 2017 on charges including rebellion and
undermining State security, from 32 years to 1 year.
38. In Kenya, on 8 June, standard operating procedures for the investigation and
prosecution of human rights violations committed by police officers were adopted by
the competent authorities as part of efforts to strengthen huma n rights compliance,
including during electoral cycles.
39. The Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda appeared before the
International Court of Justice during public hearings, held from 20 to 30 April, on the
question of reparations in the case concerning Armed Activities on the Territory of the
Congo (Democratic Republic of the Congo v. Uganda), which relates to the period
between 1998 and 2003. The Court is currently reviewing the arguments presented
during the proceedings and will deliver its ruling on a date still to be determined.

III. Implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework
A.

Commitments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
40. On 12 April, the Prime Minister of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Jean Michel Sama Lukonde Kyenge, formed a new Government, supported by a coalition
of political forces collectively known as the Union sacrée de la nation, which was
endorsed by the National Assembly on 26 April. The Government’s programme of
action for the period 2021 to 2023, which is estimated to cost around $12 billion
annually, covers the stabilization of the eastern provinces, the re-establishment of
State authority, the promotion of good governance, the furtherance of the
decentralization process, the improvement of infrastructure and basic social services,
the establishment of good relations with neighbouring States, and the review and
reinvigoration of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework.
41. On 7 April, the National Assembly established a special commission of inquiry
on insecurity in the east of the country. On 5 July, the President signed a decree
establishing the Disarmament, Demobilization, Community Recovery and
Stabilization Programme, which merges the previous National Programme for
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration and the National Stabilization and
Reconstruction Programme for Areas Emerging from Armed Conflict. On 7 August,
the President appointed Tommy Tambwe Ushindi as National Coordinator of the
Disarmament, Demobilization, Community Recovery and Stabilization Programme.
Steps were also taken to strengthen security and defence cooperation with other
signatory states of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, including
through the creation, on 12 May, of a joint operations coordination centre with
Uganda in Beni, North Kivu Province, to share intelligence and coordinate actions
against ADF, and the signing, on 13 July, of a memorandum of understanding on peace
and security with Burundi.

21-13661

7/17

S/2021/836

B.

Commitments of the region
42. The region witnessed an accelerating momentum in high-level diplomatic
initiatives to strengthen cooperation. Efforts also continued to be made to strengthen
security cooperation, resulting in the establishment by Burundi, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania of a
Contact and Coordination Group. The Group has been tasked with coordinating the
implementation of non-military measures to complement ongoing military operations
against negative forces in the region. Senior military representatives of several
countries also met bilaterally to enhance cooperation on border control and the
sharing of information and intelligence.
43. Countries in the region also strengthened economic cooperation, including with
regard to the management of natural resources. On 20 March, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Uganda signed a memorandum of understanding on
fisheries management in Lake Albert and Lake Edward. On 21 April, during his visit
to Kinshasa, the President of Kenya signed agreements with the President of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo on economic cooperation and maritime freight
management. During her visit to Kenya on 4 and 5 May, the President of the United
Republic of Tanzania met with the President of Kenya and agreed measures to remove
barriers and facilitate the flow of trade and people between the two countries. In June,
the Heads of State of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda agreed joint
measures to protect and promote investment, prevent double taxation and tax evasion,
and cooperate on gold mining, as well as to strengthen joint mechanisms to prevent
and respond to natural disasters.
44. Cross-border infrastructure development was another priority for several
signatory countries. On 11 April, the President of the United Republic of Tanzania
and the President of Uganda signed agreements regarding the construction of the East
African Crude Oil Pipeline. On 27 May, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Uganda approved the joint construction of three strategic roads linking Ugandan
border posts with urban centres in North Kivu Province. An agreement was also
concluded between Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the Congo to develop
the railway linking Gitega, Bujumbura, Uvira and Kindu.
45. Regional and subregional organizations continued to support cooperation
efforts, including with regard to electoral and dialogue processes, joint responses to
crises, economic cooperation, natural resources and the rule of law. At the 1005th
meeting of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union, held on 21 June,
progress in the Great Lakes region was welcomed and the persisting challenges
related to security, natural disasters and the COVID-19 pandemic were
acknowledged. The Council also underlined the need to fully implement the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework.
46. In its capacity as Chair of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region (ICGLR), Angola convened, on 20 April and 16 September respectively, the
second and third mini-summits on the revitalization of the Political Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. At the second summit, it
was decided to establish a working group, co-chaired by the Minister for External
Relations of Angola and the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Rwanda, to implement, in collaboration with the Central African
authorities, the recommendations put forward by the President of Angola, João
Manuel Gonçalves Lourenço, following consultations with armed groups and the
Government of the Central African Republic. During the third summit, the Heads of
State approved a joint road map seeking, among other aspects, the continuation of
consultations with the leaders of armed groups and a renunciation of violence, a

8/17

21-13661

S/2021/836

ceasefire declaration by the Government of the Central African Republic, and the
launch of the activities of the working group created during the second summit.
Furthermore, the ICGLR Executive Secretariat stepped up its political support to
member States through a series of diplomatic visits to Angola, Burundi, the Congo,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kenya and Uganda, and through the
deployment of electoral observation missions to the Congo and Zambia.
47. At the forty-first summit of the Southern African Development Community
(SADC), held on 17 and 18 August in Lilongwe, Elias Mpedi Magosi of Botswana
was sworn in as Executive Secretary of the organization. The President of Malawi,
Lazarus McCarthy Chakwera, was elected as Chairperson and the President of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo as the incoming Chairperson. The President of
South Africa became the Chairperson of the Organ on Politics, Defence and Security
Cooperation. In a separate development, experts from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Zambia met in Pweto, Democratic Republic of the Congo, on 20 August
to update the demarcation of parts of their common border, as agreed with an SADC
facilitation team in 2020.
48. Efforts were made to implement the decisions of the high-level meeting of
ministers in charge of refugees of the member States of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region, held in 2019 in Kampala. On 28 June, ICGLR, together
with UNHCR, established a working group and launched a study in preparation for
the development of a strategy on durable solutions for displaced populations in the
region. Furthermore, the Regional Committee of ICGLR on the Prevention and
Punishment of Genocide, War Crimes, Crimes against Humanity and all forms of
Discrimination adopted, during a meeting held on 18 May, a regional action plan on
the fight against impunity, prevention of genocide and other mass atrocities, which
envisages, inter alia, the development of an ICGLR manual of princip les and
guidelines for truth and reconciliation commissions.
49. With regard to the COVID-19 pandemic, regional response and recovery
frameworks continued to be implemented, as a complement to measures adopted at
the national level. Key interventions included trade facilitation to ensure the smooth
and uninterrupted movement of goods and services, support for access to medical
supplies, advocacy for resource mobilization and equitable access to vaccines, and
support for the implementation of logistical and administrative prerequisites for
vaccine roll-outs. Bilaterally, Kenya and the United Republic of Tanzania agreed to
establish a joint mechanism to tackle cross-border challenges linked to the COVID-19
pandemic. In addition, several countries began to build domestic capacity for the
production of COVID-19 vaccines.
50. On 31 May, the twenty-ninth meeting of the Technical Support Committee of
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, which was held virtually, focused
on the formulation of an action plan to implement the United Nations Strategy for
Peace Consolidation, Conflict Prevention and Conflict Resolution in the Great Lakes
Region (hereinafter, the regional strategy). Meanwhile, consultations continued
among the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda and the guarantors of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework with regard to the holding of the tenth
high-level meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism, set to be hosted by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

C.

International commitments
51. On 27 April, during its fourth meeting, the Management Board of the Great
Lakes Regional Strategic Framework, co-Chaired by the Special Envoy for the Great
Lakes Region and the Director of the United Nations Development Programme

21-13661

9/17

S/2021/836

Regional Bureau for Africa, acknowledged the regional strategy as the new guiding
framework and, in this regard, handed its responsibilities to the Senior Policy Group
established as part of the implementation of the regional strategy. Meeting
participants stressed the need to build on the lessons learned from the Regional
Strategic Framework during the implementation of the regional strategy.
52. During a workshop on the development of the action plan to implement the
regional strategy, held on 9 and 10 June in Kinshasa (see para. 55), international
partners reiterated their commitment to supporting the countries of the region and the
Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes in the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Fra mework and the priorities
identified in the regional strategy.
53. On 26 July, during a meeting on the Great Lakes region, the Peacebuilding
Commission welcomed the action plan to implement the regional strategy and
reiterated its support for the region’s efforts to build lasting stability and prosperity.
Members of the Commission emphasized the role expected to be played by the
Contact and Coordination Group in the implementation of non-military measures,
including disarmament, demobilization and reintegr ation, and the importance of
promoting inclusiveness through cross-border, community-based initiatives.

IV. Implementation of the United Nations Strategy for Peace
Consolidation, Conflict Prevention and Conflict Resolution
in the Great Lakes Region
54. My Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region continued to lead efforts to
implement the United Nations Strategy for Peace Consolidation, Conflict Prevention
and Conflict Resolution in the Great Lakes Region (S/2020/1168), most notably
through the establishment of the Senior Policy Group – the steering body responsible
for providing overarching political guidance on the implementation of the regional
strategy – and the development of an action plan for the period 2021 to 2023.
55. During its inaugural meeting, on 20 May, members of the Senior Policy Group
endorsed a road map for the formulation of the action plan. After a series of prior
consultations with different stakeholders, a workshop was held on 9 and 10 June in
Kinshasa (see para. 51), organized by my Special Envoy, with support from
MONUSCO and facilitated by the think tank Conflict Prevention and Peace Forum.
The workshop was attended, in person or virtually, by representatives of signatory
countries and guarantor institutions of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework, international partners, civil society organizations and United Nations
entities at Headquarters and in the region. Based on the outcome of prior consultations
and the workshop, the Office of the Special Envoy for the Great Lakes, together with
other United Nations entities, finalized the draft action plan, which was subsequently
examined and adopted by the Senior Policy Group on 8 July.
56. The action plan is designed to be a tool for accountability, resource mobilization,
programming, coordination, and monitoring and evaluation. It builds on five
interlinked clusters, namely: (a) promoting dialogue and strengthening trust;
(b) reducing the threat posed by armed groups; (c) promoting sustainable and
transparent management of natural resources and trade and investment; (d) finding
durable solutions to forced displacement; and (e) promoting regional preparedness
for public health crises. The inclusion, participation and empowerment of women and
youth, as well as the promotion and protection of human rights and the fight against
impunity are cross-cutting issues to be considered under all five clusters.

10/17

21-13661

S/2021/836

57. Implementation of the action plan, which began on 15 July, will be carried out
in a phased manner with an initial focus, until 31 December, on the most pressing
initiatives, including ongoing initiatives and projects. This will be followed by the
implementation, in 2022 and 2023, of other key activities identified during the
consultations. Funding needs and a further breakdown of the initiatives for 2022 and
2023 will be formulated by the Implementation Support Mechanism – the technical
arm of the Senior Policy Group – as part of the development of a comprehensive
resource mobilization strategy, in the last quarter of 2021.

A.

Promoting dialogue and strengthening trust
58. My Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region continued his efforts to support
dialogue processes and build confidence among the leaders of the region through
virtual and in-person consultations. During the reporting period, he consulted with
senior officials from Angola, Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Rwanda, the Sudan, Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania, both in person and
virtually, on recent political and security developments in the region, progress in the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework and the
development of the action plan for the regional strategy.
59. As part of his good offices mandate, the Special Envoy offered his conti nued
support for the ongoing dialogue and rapprochement between Burundi and Rwanda,
Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and Rwanda and Uganda,
including through discreet shuttle diplomacy, with the aim of promoting good
neighbourly relations. In his engagements with the leaders of the region, he
encouraged dialogue between the parties on ways to reduce tensions, and sought
solutions to unblock persisting differences. In his introductory audiences with the
President of the United Republic Tanzania, Ms. Hassan, on 5 May, and with the Prime
Minister of the Sudan, Abdalla Hamdok, on 2 September, my Special Envoy
advocated their continued participation in all mechanisms and processes in the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Frame work.
60. My Special Envoy also continued to advocate pursuing multilateral cooperation
at the regional level to complement and bolster ongoing bilateral efforts to strengthen
military operations against foreign armed groups operating in the eastern part o f the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In this regard, he highlighted the tenth high -level
meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism, set to be hosted by the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, as an opportunity for strategic dialogue among the leaders of
the region on this and related issues.

B.

Reducing the threat posed by armed groups
61. The operationalization of the Contact and Coordination Group during a
workshop held from 3 to 6 May in Goma, Democratic Republic of the Congo, with
the support of the Office of the Special Envoy, marked a milestone in efforts to
reinforce non-military cooperation against negative forces in the region. The
workshop brought together the statutory expert members of the Group from Burundi,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Uganda and the United Republic of
Tanzania, as well as delegates from Angola, the Central African Republic and Kenya
as observers. The Group agreed an action plan covering the period from 2021 to 2023
that centres on the disarmament and repatriation of negative forces; the disruption of
their supply of weapons, combatants and funding; the strengthening of national
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes; and the strengthening of

21-13661

11/17

S/2021/836

cross-border economic cooperation, with a view to promoting income-generating
opportunities, particularly for young people.
62. The action plan of the Contact and Coordination Group was endorsed by the
chiefs of the intelligence and security services of Burundi, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Rwanda, Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania during their
fourth meeting, held on 6 July in Bujumbura and facilitated by the Office of the
Special Envoy, the African Union Liaison Office in Bujumbura and ICGLR.
Participants further agreed on the deployment of an operational cell, comprising
security experts from the five participating countries, to coordinate and support the
implementation of the action plan, with a focus on engagement with foreign armed
groups. The operational cell will also ensure close liaison with other stakeholders,
including the national disarmament, demobilization and reintegration commissions.

C.

Promoting sustainable and transparent management of natural
resources and trade and investment
63. My Special Envoy intensified his advocacy for a holistic approach aimed at
addressing the illicit exploitation of and trade in natural resources. In addition to
bilateral engagements, on 30 July the Special Envoy briefed the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) during informal
consultations on the illicit trade in gold, tin, tantalum and tungsten in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and internationally. The consultations provided a pla tform to
review the latest trends with regard to the smuggling of strategic minerals and the
steps under way to tackle the issue.
64. A key step towards ensuring a holistic approach to natural resources
management was the high-level workshop convened by the Office of the Special
Envoy, ICGLR and the Government of the Sudan, held from 31 August to 2 September
in Khartoum. Workshop participants agreed a set of strategic recommendations aimed
at curbing the illicit exploitation and trade in natural resources, including by
contributing to improved national ownership, promoting the effective implementation
of the ICGLR Regional Initiative against the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources
and ensuring the full involvement of all stakeholders along the value ch ain.
65. As part of efforts to help improve the business climate and support responsible
investments, the Office of the Special Envoy, together with ICGLR and the
International Institute for Sustainable Development, held a high -level workshop on
international investment agreements and sustainable development in the Great Lakes
region on 23 and 24 June. Participants agreed on recommendations addressed to
ICGLR member States aimed at enhancing coherence on international investment
agreements and developing a unified regional approach to ongoing negotiations on
the African Continental Free Trade Area investment protocols.

D.

Finding durable solutions to forced displacement
66. The Office of the Special Envoy continued to support regional efforts to prevent
forced displacement and promote voluntary returns of refugees, including by
participating in the working group established by ICGLR and UNHCR to prepare a
comprehensive strategy on durable solutions. On 30 April, the Special Envoy met
with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in Nairobi to discuss
displacement trends in the region and the importance of interlinking political and
humanitarian efforts in addressing this challenge.

12/17

21-13661

S/2021/836

E.

Promoting regional preparedness for public health crises
67. In a context of increased socioeconomic instability due to the COVID -19
pandemic and the attendant potential risks to efforts to achieve lasting stability, the
Special Envoy continued to advocate broader access by countries of the region to
COVID-19 vaccines and the financial resources needed to launch an effective post pandemic economic recovery, including during a visit he undertook to Brussels to
meet with European Union officials on 19 and 20 July. The Office of the Special
Envoy further supported ICGLR in following up on the ICGLR meeting of health
ministers, held on 10 July 2020, during which the ministers had agreed on the
establishment of a ministerial coordination committee, supported by a network of
health experts, to share best practices in tackling the pandemic. This platform aims to
promote political advocacy and other initiatives to ensure increased and equal access
to vaccines for people in the region.

F.

Advancing the inclusion, participation and empowerment of
women and youth
68. In an effort to further accelerate the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda in the region, the Special Envoy convened, together with the
Special Envoy of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission on Women,
Peace and Security, Bineta Diop, the thirteenth meeting of the Advisory Board for
Women, Peace and Security in the Great Lakes Region, on 5 May. The virtual meeting
resulted in the endorsement of a set of initiatives that focus on the root causes and
drivers of conflict and their impact on women, as well as on knowledge -sharing and
capacity-building for women’s participation in peacebuilding, mediation and cross border economic activities.
69. In collaboration with the ICGLR Regional Civil Society Forum and the
Mwalimu Nyerere Foundation, the Special Envoy carried out consultations on 19 May
with regional civil society organizations and representatives of academia to discuss
priority actions linked to the regional strategy. Participating civil society
organizations agreed to contribute to the monitoring and evaluation of the strategy’s
action plan, through the development of a biennial gender barometer to measure
efforts by ICGLR member States of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region to promote gender equality and combat gender-based violence.
70. On 28 May, the Office of the Special Envoy, in collaboration with ICGLR, held
a meeting with women representatives from South Kivu Province and the
non-governmental organization Interpeace to reflect on the role of women in
community peacebuilding and conflict prevention. Noting the past contributions of
women in North Kivu Province to raising awareness among armed groups of
demobilization processes, participants stressed, among other issues, the need to
mobilize and develop mechanisms to further involve women in peacebuilding efforts
in South Kivu Province.
71. The Office of the Special Envoy, in conjunction with the Network of African
Women in Conflict Prevention and Mediation (FemWise-Africa) and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, ran a training workshop in Kigali, from 6 to
10 September, for members of FemWise-Africa from Burundi, the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, South Sudan, the Sudan,
Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania. The training aimed to strengthen
members’ conflict analysis, negotiation and mediation skills and enable them to better
contribute to dialogue processes at the local level – in response to the threats posed
by armed groups – and in high-level preventive diplomacy and mediation. It also

21-13661

13/17

S/2021/836

included an interactive session with members of the African Ombudsmen and
Mediators Association from the Great Lakes region, notably those from Burundi,
Kenya, Rwanda, South Africa, the United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia.
72. The Office of the Special Envoy continued to advocate a greater role for youth
in conflict prevention, peace consolidation and peacebuilding efforts . As a result of
this engagement, the Contact and Coordination Group on non-military measures
adopted a youth- and community-focused prevention approach, which not only
envisages direct engagement with and through communities, but also provides for
targeted activities aimed at promoting economic opportunities for youth in conflict affected border areas. Preparations are also under way, in cooperation with other
United Nations entities, to implement capacity-building initiatives for youth leaders
and groups with a view to further empowering them as messengers and builders of
peace and prosperity.

G.

Promotion and protection of human rights and the fight
against impunity
73. In line with the action plan to implement the regional strategy and the Secretary General’s call to action for human rights, the Special Envoy continued his advocacy
for the protection of fundamental freedoms and rights, including in the context of
political and electoral processes and COVID-19 prevention and recovery efforts.
74. My Special Envoy also continued to promote the rule of law and regional
judicial cooperation as part of efforts to further the implementation of the Nairobi
Declaration on Justice and Good Governance, adopted in 2019. In this context, on
3 and 4 June, the Office of the Special Envoy, together with ICGLR and the
International Institute for Justice and the Rule of Law, facilitated the sixth meeting of
the Great Lakes Judicial Cooperation Network, under the leadership of its incoming
Chair, Angola. The Judicial Cooperation Network agreed a set of recommendations
for harmonizing of procedures concerning mutual legal assistance in criminal matters,
ahead of Great Lakes Regional Ministerial Conference on Enhancing Judicial
Cooperation, planned for November 2021.

V. Partnerships with regional organizations and mechanisms,
international partners and United Nations entities
A.

Regional organizations and mechanisms
75. My Special Envoy continued his efforts to strengthen cooperation between his
Office and regional and subregional organizations. On 30 April and 6 July, my Special
Envoy and the Executive Secretary of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region discussed ways to enhance cooperation between the United Nations and the
ICGLR Executive Secretariat, including with regard to a joint workshop on natural
resources being held in Khartoum at the end of August. They agreed to hold a joint
planning meeting before the end of 2021.

B.

International partners
76. My Special Envoy continued his consultations with international partners on
regional developments and the implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework and the action plan of the regional strategy, notab ly through
bilateral meetings with members of the Security Council and other partners. He also

14/17

21-13661

S/2021/836

consulted with representatives of the diplomatic community during his missions in
the region, including to Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwan da.
From 19 to 24 July, he held consultations in Belgium and France with representatives
of the Belgian and French Governments and the European Union. He also continued
to advocate concerted international support for ongoing and planned initiatives through
engagements with the International Contact Group for the Great Lakes Region.

C.

Other United Nations entities
77. In the context of the Senior Policy Group established to steer the implementation
of the regional strategy, my Special Envoy collaborated with the Heads of
MONUSCO, the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) and
the United Nations Office to the African Union to ensure coherence in the delivery of
United Nations support for political processes in the region. In this context, between
April and September, my Special Envoy paid several visits to Kinshasa, during which
time he and my Special Representative for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Head of MONUSCO discussed ways to enhance cooperation between the two
missions.
78. My Special Envoy participated in the fifty-first ministerial meeting of the
United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa, which was facilitated by UNOCA and held from 24 to 28 May in Bujumbura.
From 23 to 25 June, the Office of the Special Envoy participated in a workshop,
jointly organized by UNOCA and the Economic Community of Central African
States, on the prevention and resolution of conflicts related to pastoralism and cross border transhumance in Central Africa. The Office of the Special Envoy also
contributed to a workshop on climate security in Central Africa held by
videoconference on 29 July.
79. On 7 July, my Special Envoy and my Special Representative to the African
Union discussed the electoral process in Zambia. On 16 July, he discussed with the
Director and Deputy to the Under-Secretary-General of the Office of CounterTerrorism ways to enhance joint analysis and programming to help prevent violent
extremism in the Great Lakes region. He also consulted with the Resident
Coordinators in Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kenya, Rwanda, the
Sudan and Uganda to discuss regional dynamics and opportunities for enhanced
cooperation.

VI. Observations
80. I applaud the commitment demonstrated by the signatory countries of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework to continue strengthening and improving their
relations. In particular, I am encouraged by the steps taken by the Governments of
Burundi and Rwanda to normalize their relations. I also take note of the status of the
quadripartite process for the normalization of relations between Rwanda and Uga nda
and urge the two countries to revive the process. Good neighbourliness and strong
bonds between the leaders of the region are essential to achieve our shared vision of
a peaceful, stable and prosperous Great Lakes region. In this regard, I encourage th e
early convening of the tenth high-level meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism
as a platform for high-level political dialogue on these and related issues. The United
Nations, through my Special Envoy, remains committed to supporting this endeavour.
81. I welcome the actions taken by the signatory countries to enhance regional
security cooperation, particularly through the launch of the Contact and Coordination
Group, which constitutes a critical step towards a comprehensive response to the
21-13661

15/17

S/2021/836

threat posed by armed groups. It is now urgent to implement the Group’s action plan,
notably by establishing its operational cell without delay. I call upon the participating
countries to honour their commitments promptly and urge partners to scale up their
support for the initiatives to be undertaken by the Contact and Coordination Group.
My Special Envoy will continue to support this process in close collaboration with
representatives of the other three guarantor institutions of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework.
82. These efforts are particularly important in the context of the alarming security
and human rights situation in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, where
armed groups continue to prey on civilians. I reiterate my call upon the lea ders of the
region to redouble their efforts to ensure that the perpetrators of these crimes,
including conflict-related sexual and gender-based violence, are held accountable.
83. I remain concerned about continued human rights violations in the region. T he
protection of human rights and the promotion of inclusive, credible and peaceful
political processes that give voice to all citizens under the rule of law remain
paramount for stability and development. The Nairobi Declaration on Justice and
Good Governance charts a concrete path forward and should be implemented as
quickly as possible. I also urge all political stakeholders to refrain from hate speech
and incitement to violence, and encourage relevant authorities to strengthen inclusive
democratic processes.
84. I commend the leaders of the region for strengthening bilateral and multilateral
economic cooperation, including through the signing of agreements on cross -border
energy and infrastructure projects. These initiatives are vital for economic
development and regional trade and can contribute to creating livelihoods, reducing
inequalities among border communities and delivering prosperity and hope to people
in the region.
85. The holding of the high-level workshop on natural resources in Khartoum,
which provided an important opportunity for dialogue involving all stakeholders on
ways to advance the transparent and sustainable management of natural resources, is
a welcome development. I encourage the swift implementation of the priority actions
identified during the workshop to curb the illegal exploitation and trade in natural
resources, a long-standing driver of instability in the region.
86. I welcome the progress made in the region towards the equitable representation
of women in political leadership positions. I urge all stakeholders to remove all
barriers to the active and meaningful participation of women, girls and youth in
peacebuilding and political processes.
87. The current environment in the region is propitious for closer collaboration
between governments and partners in the search for durable solutions for refugees
and internally displaced persons. Efforts to pursue a comprehensive approach that
effectively translates the development-humanitarian-peace nexus into action are
needed now more than ever. I remain concerned about the multiple incidents of
refoulement that have been reported in the region, and I encourage all concerned
Governments to respect and uphold the right to seek asylum, in line with international
refugee law.
88. I welcome the launch of vaccination campaigns in several countries to help curb
the COVID-19 pandemic, which has had an adverse impact on economic development
and has exacerbated economic and social inequalities. In this regard, I reiterate my
call for equitable, inclusive and transparent access to vaccines so as to enable societies
to emerge from the crisis with greater resilience.
89. This is a pivotal moment in the history of the Great Lakes region. The leaders
and the people of the region have demonstrated their readiness to work together and
16/17

21-13661

S/2021/836

have taken concrete steps to improve their relations and strengthen regional
cooperation. Through the adoption of the action plan to implement the regional
strategy, the United Nations has defined how it will support the re gion in its
endeavours over the next three years. Now is the time for international partners to
provide decisive support to existing and planned regional initiatives, in the context of
the implementation of the action plan.
90. I wish to thank my Special Envoy for his steadfast commitment to supporting
the signatory countries in the implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework and for his leadership in the implementation of the regional strategy.

21-13661

17/17
