Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

United Nations Coundl for Namibia to participate in
an appropriate capacity whenever such rights and interests are involved;
18. Decides, having regard to paragraph 2 above, to
defray the expenses of a representative of the So1;1th
West Africa People's Organization when ac~ompanym?:
such missions a~ the United N:itions Council for Namibia may determine and whenever c_alled for cons~ltation by the Council, and to auth<?nze th~ Co~ncil to
utilize the financial resources aval'lable, mcludmg the
United Nations Fund for Namibia, to enable it to give
assistance to the Namibian people when, in the. opinion
of the Council, such assistance would be reqmred;
l 9. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue to provide the necess_ary assista!l~e
and facilities to the United Nations Council for Nam1b1a
and to the United Nations Commissioner for Namibia
for the discharge of their respective duties and functions;
(b) To report to the General Assembly at its twentyninth session on the implementation of the present
resolution;

II
1. Requests all specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system and the
member States thereof to take such necessary steps as
will enable the United Nations Council for Namibia,
as the legal authority for Namibia, to participa~e fully
on behalf of Namibia in the work of those agencies and
organizations;
2. Requests all specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations ~ystem, in ~o.nsultation with the United Nations CounCJ,l for Namibia, to
render within their respective spheres of competence,
all po~siblc assistance to the people of Namibia and
their liberation movement;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in close co-operation with the United Nations Council for Namibia,
to review the full and speedy implementation of the
present resolution and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its twenty-ninth session;

III
1. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the United Nations Council for Namibia, to take
concrete measures through all the media at his disposal
to intensify the dissemination of information on the
question of Namibia and, inter alia:
(a) To issue a further series of United Nations commemorative postage stamps on Namibia in order to
emphasize the direct respo~s(bility of the Un\ted
Nations with regard to Narn1b1a through the Umted
Nations Council for Namibia and the legitimate struggle being waged by the people of Namibia for selfdetermination and independence;
(b) To continue to issue the Namibia Bulletin;
(c) To continue to explore additional measures for
wider di5Semination of information concerning the question of Namibia and the activities of the Council;
2. Invites all States, specialized agencies and United
Nations uodies conccrns.:d, as ·,.vell as intergovernmental
and non-govemmentaJ organizations h,n;ing an interest
in the field of decolonization, to CLH,perate closely with
the United Nations Council for Namibii, and the Secretary-General in the dis~emination of information on
Namibia and, among other things, to consider taking

95

steps to encourage the organization of seminars on the
question;
3. Decides to observe 26 August each year as Namibia Day and requests the United Nations Council for
Namibia to prepare a programme for such a commemoration.
2198th plenary meeting
12 December 1973

3112 (XXVIII). United Nations Fund for Namibia
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 Oc~ober
1966, by which the United Nations deci~e~ to term mate
the Mandate of South Africa over Namibia and assume
direct responsibility for the Territory until its independence and resolution 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967, by
which it established the United Nations Council for
Namibia,
Reaffirming its determination to continue to discharge
that responsibility in regard to the Territory,
Mindful that, by assuming direct responsibility . for
Namibia, •the United Nations incurred a solemn obligation to assist the people of the Territory morally and
materially,
Recalling further its resolutions 2679 (XXV) of
9 December 1970, 2872 (XXVI) of 20 December 1~71
and 3030 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972 concemmg
the United Nations Fund for Namibia, established on
the basis of the report of the Secretary-Genera.I to the
General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session, 16
Recognizing that South Africa's continued illegal
occupation of Namibia at present prevents the ~nited
Nations from furnishing needed, large-scale assistance
within the Territory,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
on the operation of the United Nations Fund for Namibia during 1973, 17
Having examined also the sections of the report of
the United Nations Council for Namibia relating to the
Fund,1~
1. Expresses its appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General on the operation of the United
Nations Fund for Namibia during 1973;
2. Decides to allocate to the Fund the sum of
$100,000 from the regular budget of the United Nations
for 1974;
3. Authorizes the Secretary-General and the United
Nations Council for Namibia to continue to appeal to
Governments for voluntary contributions t0 the Fund;
4. Invites Governments to appeal once more to their
national organizations and institutions for voluntary
contributions to the Fund;
5. Urges the Secretary-General, in co-operation with
the United Nations Council for Namibia, to begin the
implementation of the long-term measures and studi_es
outlined in his report to the General Assembly at its
twentv-sixth session;
6. · Appoints the United Nations Council for Namibia
as trustee of the Fund and authorizes the Council to
prepare guiddines for its orientation rn consultation
with the Secret:iry-Gcnernl;
10 A/8473.
11 A/9225 and Corr.!.

1s See O/ficit.l Records of the General Assembly, Twentyeighth Session, Supplement No. 24 (A/9024).

9(,

(;pneral Assembl_v-Twenl~·-eighth Session

7. Invites all Member States to formulate their views
on the orientation of the Fund and either transmit them
to or present them before the United Nations Council
for Namibia;
8. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system to render all
necessary assistance to the Secretary-General in carrying out the tasks assigned to him under the present
resolution;
9. Decides, pending the entry into full operation of
the comprehensive programme, that Namibians shall
continue to be eligible for assistance through the United
Nations Educational and Training Programme for
Southern Africa and the United Nations Trust Fund
for South Africa;
10. Requests the Secretary-General and the United
Nations Council for Namibia to report to the General
Assembly at its twenty-ninth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
2198th plenary meeting
12 December 1973

3113 (XXVIII). Question of Territories under
Portuguese administration

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Territories under
Portuguese domination,
Having examined ,the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 19 including in particular the views expressed by
the representatives of the national liberation movements
of the Territories concerned who participated as observers in the relevant proceedings of the Special Committee,20
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
concerning the present item, 21
Having heard the statements of the representatives of
the Frente Nacional para a Libertac;ao de Angola and
the Frente de Libertac;ao de Mo,;:ambique, who participated in an observer capacity in the Fourth Committee's
consideration of the item22 in accordance with the decision taken by the Gencr:.1! Assembly at its 2139th
plenary meeting, on 3 October 1973, 23
Recalling i:ts resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 ( XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration, as well as all other resolutions relating to the question of Territories under
Portuguese domination adopted by the General Assembly, the Security C'.ouncil and the Special Committee,
Recalling, in particular, the provisions of it'i resolution 2918 (XXVII) of 14 November 1972, and of
Security Council resolution 322 ( 1972) of 22 Novem19 lbfd., Supplement No. 23 (A/9023/Rev.1), chaps. I, IVVI and IX.
20 A/AC.109/PV.915 and Corr.I, 917, 920, 921 and 929.
21 A/9132 and Add.I and 2.
22 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-eighth
Session, Fourth Committee, 2028th and 2055th meetings.
23 See "Other decisions", p. 111.

ber 1972 in which the Government of Portugal was
called upon, inter alia, to enter into negotiations with
the parties concerned, with a view to achieving a solution to the armed confrontation that exists in the African Territories under its domination and permitting the
peoples of those Territories to exercise freely their right
to self-determination and independence, and deeply
deploring the refusal of that Government to comply
with those provisions,
Taking into consideration the programme of action
adopted by the International Conference of Experts
for the Support of Victims of Colonialism and Apartheirf in Southern Africa, held at Oslo from 9 to 14 April
1973/4
Bearing in mind the Declaration on Territories under
Portuguese Domination, adopted by the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the Organization of
African Unity at its tenth ordinary session, held at
Addis Ababa from 27 to 29 May 1973,
Condemning the continued collaboration of Portugal,
South Africa and the illegal racist minority regime in
Southern Rhodesia, designed to perpetuate colonialist
and racialist domination in the region. and the persistent intervention against the peoples of the Territories
concerned by police and armed forces, as well as by
mercenaries from South Africa and Southern Rhodesia,
Condemning the repeated acts of aggression committed by the armed forces of Portugal against independent African States, which constitute a violation of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of those States
and seriously disturb international peace and security
in the African continent, as reaffirmed in Security Council resolution 312 ( 1972) of 4 February 1972,
Condemning any attempt by Portugal to place any
of the facilities in the Territories under its domination
at the disposal of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization or any of its members on a bilateral basis for military purposes,
Strongly deploring the policies of those States, particularly some of the military allies of Portugal, which,
in defiance of repeated requests addressed to them by
the United Nations, continue to provide Portugal with
military and other assistance both within the context of
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and bilaterally,
without which Portugal could not pursue its policies of
colonial domination and oppression of the peoples of
Angola and Mozambique,
Deepl;• disturbed by the intensified activities of those
foreign economic, financial and other interests which,
contrary to the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly, are a~sisting Portugal in its colonial wars
and obstructing the realization by the peoples of the
Territories under Portuguese domination of their legitimate aspirations for freedom and independence,
Noting with appreciation the concrete programmes
of assistance being extended to the national liberation
movements of those Territories by a number of Governments, as well as those initiated by organizations
within the United Nations system and several non-governmental organizations,
Noting with satisfaction the progress towards national
independence and freedom being made by the national
liberation movements in those Territories, both through
their struggle and through reconstruction programmes,
particularly in the liberated areas of Angola and Mozam bique,
24 A/9061, annex, sect. IV.
