General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

154

gramme for that country in time for the matter to be
considered by the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth
session.

84th plenary meeting
5 December 1980
35/97.

Assistance to the Comoros' 97

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on assistance to the
Comoros, particularly resolution 3 I /42 of 1 December
1976, in which it urgently appealed to the international
community to assist the Comoros in an effective and
continuous manner so as to enable it to face successfully the critical situation resulting from the economic
difficulties experienced by that newly independent country,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
of 11 September 1980, 204 to which was annexed the
report of the review mission which he sent to the
Comoros,
Taking note of the special problems confronting the
Comoros as a developing island country and as one of
the least developed among the developing countries,
Noting the priority which the Government of the
Comoros has assigned to the questions of infrastructure, transport and telecommunications,
Noting further the grave budget and balance-ofpayments problems facing the Comoros,
Recalling its resolution 34/127 of 14 December 1979,
in which it noted the appeal of the Economic and Social
Council to the international community to respond
generously and to continue to assist the Comoros in
carrying out its short-term and long-term development
programme,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for the steps he has taken to mobilize assistance for the Comoros;
2. Notes with satisfaction the response by various
Member States and organizations to its appeal and that
of the Secretary-General for assistance to finance, in
whole or in part, a number of projects identified in the
annex to the report of the Secretary-General of
3 November 1977; 205
3. Notes with concern, however, that the assistance
thus far provided falls short of the country's urgent requirements and that a substantial amount of assistance
is still urgently required to carry out the projects identified in the annex to the report of the Secretary-General
of 3 November 1977;
4. Reiterates its appeal to Member States, regional
and interregional organizations and other intergovernmental bodies to provide effective and continuous financial, material and technical assistance to the Comoros to
help it overcome its financial and economic difficulties,
in t)articular its budgetary and balance-of-payments
deficits;
5. Urges Member States to give special consideration to the inclusion of the Comoros in their bilateral
and multilateral programmes of development assistance and, in cases where assistance programmes for the
Comoros are already in force, to expand them, wherever
possible;
0
' A/35/39'4.
,o, A/32/208 and Add. I and 2.

'

6. Also urges the international community to take
fully into account, in providing assistance, the priority
which the Comoros gives to projects in the fields of infrastructure, transport and telecommunications;
1. Invites the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the
World Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations, the World Bank and the International Fund for Agricultural Development to bring to
the attention of their governing bodies, for their consideration, the special needs of the Comoros, and to report
the decisions of those bodies to the Secretary-General by
15 August 1981;
8. Appeals to the international community to contribute to the special account which was established
at United Nations Headquarters by the SecretaryGeneral, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 32/92 of 13 December 1977, for the purpose of
facilitating the channelling of contributions to the
Comoros;
9. Requests the appropriate organizations and
programmes of the United Nations system to increase
their current programmes of assistance to the Comoros,
to co-operate closely with the Secretary-General in organizing an effective international programme of assistance and to report periodically to him on the steps they
have taken and the resources they have made available
to assist that country;
10. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical and material assistance to the Comoros;
(b) To keep the situation in the Comoros under constant review, to maintain close contact with Member
States, regional and other intergovernmental organizations, the specialized agencies and international financial institutions concerned and to apprise the Economic
and Social Council, at its second regular session of 1981,
of the current status of the special economic assistance
programme for the Comoros;
(c) To arrange for a review of the economic situation of the Comoros and the progress made in organizing and implementing the special economic assistance
progra.mme for that country in time for the matter to be
considered by the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth
session.

84th plenary meeting
5 December 1980

35/98.

Assistance to Botswana'"'

The General Assembly,
Recalling Security Council resolutions 403 ( 1977) of
14 January 1977 and 406 (1977) of 25 May 1977, concerning the complaint by the Government of Botswana
regarding acts of aggression committed against its territory by the illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 460 ( 1979)
of 21 December 1979, in which all Member States and
specialized agencies were called upon to provide urgent
:1ssistance to Zimbabwe and the front-line States,
Recalling General Assembly resolutions 32/97 of
13 December I977, 33 / I 30 of 19 Decem her 1978 and

V.

- ---

34/125 of 14 December 1979, in which the Assembly,
inter alia, recognized the special economic hardship confronting Botswana as a result of diverting funds from
current and planned development projects to effective
arrangements for security against attacks and threats
by Southern Rhodesia, and endorsed the assessments
and recommendations contained in the notes by the
Secretary-General dated 28 March 1977 206 and 26 October 1977 207 and in his reports of 7 July 1978 208 and 28
August 1979, 209
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
of 19 June 1980, 210 to which was annexed the report of
the mission which he sent to Botswana in response to
General Assembly resolution 34 / 125,
Noting with satisfaction that the war in Zimbabwe has
now stopped,
Noting the need of the Government of Botswana to
rehabilitate and develop effective road, rail and air communications, both internally and with the rest of the
world, in view of the uncertain political situation in the
region, Botswana's vulnerability as a land-locked country and its dependence on the externally controlled railway systems for the transport of its principal exports
and imports,
Noting also the urgent need to complete speedily
the projects that have been identified in the annex to
the report of the Secretary-General on assistance to
Botswana,
Expressing deep concern at the critical food shortage
currently being experienced as a result of a continuing
drought and at the serious adverse effects of the accelerating outbreaks of foot-and-mouth disease in
Botswana,
I. Endorses fully the revised programme of assistance contained in the annex to the report of the
Secretary-General and calls the attention of the international community to the outstanding needs for assistance identified therein;
2. Notes that, while the response from some Member States and international organizations to the appeals of the Secretary-General has been encouraging,
there is urgent need to maintain the flow of contributions to carry out the remainder of the emergency programme, the implementation of parts of which remains
a critical necessity;
3. Draws the attention of States and international
and intergovernmental organizations particularly to the
projects in the field of transport and communications, as
well as to the priority requirements to rehabilitate the
border areas most adversely affected by the war and to
deal with the drought situation in accordance with the
recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General;
4. Reiterates its appeal to all States and intergovernmental organizations to provide generous assistance to enable Botswana to carry out the remainder
of its planned development projects, as well as those
made necessary by the current political and economic
situation;
5. Appeals to all Member States, regional and interregional organizations and other intergovernmental
20

Official Records of the Security Council. Thirty-second Year, Supplement for January, February and March 1977, document S/12307.
0
' ' Ibid., Supplement for October, November and December 1977,
document S/ 12421.
'°" A/33/166 and Corr.I.
"" A/34/419-S/13506.
21
" A/35/162-S/l 3870.
•

155

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee
-·

-- ----

-

bodies to provide financial, material and technical assistance to Botswana to enable it to carry out its planned
development programme without interruption;
6. Appeals also to the international community to
provide, on an urgent basis, additional food aid to
Botswana to enable it to meet its current emergency
food needs;
7. Urges Member States and organizations which
are already implementing or are negotiating assistance
programmes for Botswana to expand them, wherever
possible;
8. Invites the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the
World Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations, the World Bank and the International Fund for Agricultural Development to bring to
the attention of their governing bodies, for their consideration, the assistance they are rendering to Botswana,
for which the General Assembly has requested the
Secretary-General to implement a special economic assistance programme, and to report on the results of that
assistance and their decisions to the Secretary-General
in time for consideration by the Assembly at its thirtysixth session;
9. Appeals to the international community to
contribute to the special account established by the
Secretary-General for the purpose of facilitating the
channelling of contributions to Botswana;
I0. Requests the appropriate specialized agencies
and other organizations of the United Nations system to
co-operate closely with the Secretary-General for the
purpose of facilitating the channelling of contributions
to Botswana;
11. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical and material assistance to Botswana;
(b) To keep the situation in Botswana under constant review, to maintain close contact with Member
States, regional and other intergovernmental organizations, the specialized agencies and international financial institutions concerned and to apprise the Economic
and Social Council, at its second regular session of I 981,
of the current status of the special economic assistance
programme for Botswana;
(c) To arrange for a review of the economic situation of Botswana and the progress made in organizing
and implementing the special economic assistance programme for that country in time for the matter to be
considered by the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth
session.

84th plenary meeting
5 December 1980
35/99.

Assistance to Mozambique 211

The General Assembly,
Recalling the decision of the Government of Mozambique to implement mandatory sanctions against the
illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia in accordance with
Security Council resolution 253 ( 1968) of 29 May 1968,
'

11

See also sect. X. B.3, decision 35/423.
