S/PV.8224

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8224th meeting

Thursday, 5 April 2018, 3.10 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Meza-Cuadra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Peru)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Radomski
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Ms. Pierce
Ms. Eckels-Currie

Agenda
Letter dated 13 March 2018 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2018/218)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-09638 (E)
*1809638*

S/PV.8224

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 13 March 2018 from the Chargé
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2018/218)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): On 14 March, the Security Council held an
open meeting (see S/PV.8203) on a letter from the Prime
Minister of Great Britain, Theresa May (S/2018/218,
annex). It accused Russia, in monstrous and completely
unfounded terms, of using chemical weapons on British
territory. The representatives of the United Kingdom
then promised to brief the Council regularly on the
course of the investigation. But there have been no
briefings. Well, never mind. We will brief the Council
ourselves, in detail.
It is a month today since the Russian citizens Sergei
Skripal and his daughter Yulia Skripal were found
unconscious in the city of Salisbury. If a chemical
weapon was indeed used, that constitutes a threat to
non-proliferation, and that is a matter that merits the
Security Council’s consideration, not to mention the
fact that we have something to say about it and some
questions for our British colleagues.
So, what do we know about the crime and its
victims? In 2006, Sergei Skripal was convicted of
spying for Britain. He has been living there since
being amnestied, in 2010, while retaining his Russian
citizenship. From time to time he has been visited by
his daughter Yulia, also a Russian national. According
to the United Kingdom’s version of the story, Russia
had not forgiven him for his treachery and decided to
liquidate him, although he clearly presented no threat
of any kind to Russia. We have a number of questions
about that.
First, taking a cynical approach, why wait eight
years and then do this two weeks before the presidential
2/16

05/04/2018

elections and just a few months before the start of
the World Cup? Why was he even allowed out of the
country? Why get rid of him in such a strange and public
way that was so dangerous to both the perpetrators and
bystanders? Anyone familiar with detective stories such
as the popular television show Midsomer Murders, now
in its twentieth season, knows there are hundreds of
relatively uncomplicated ways to cleverly do someone
in. And yet apparently whoever attacked Sergei
Skripal and his daughter chose an intensely poisonous
chemical substance — in other words, the riskiest and
most dangerous method possible. Nor did they even
manage to finish the job. Everyone who was affected
is apparently still alive, and Yulia, thank heaven, is
rapidly recovering.
This murky business raises a great many questions,
and the further into it we go, the more there are. From
the very beginning, the British, represented by such
well-known experts in chemistry as Prime Minister
Theresa May and Foreign Minister Boris Johnson, stated
unequivocally that the Skripal incident involved the use
of some kind of toxic substance known as novichok and
that it was highly likely that the substance originated
in Russia. If this super-powerful substance had been
released in Skripal’s house or on the doorknob — and that
appears to be the direction of the investigation — how
could Sergei and Yulia have remained in a normal state
for several hours afterwards, while Detective Sergeant
Nick Bailey, the first person to come to their aid, lost
consciousness right away? How could they all have
survived this at all? The only possible explanation is
that they all received an antidote almost immediately.
In the experts’ unanimous opinions, in order to do that,
a sample of an identical substance, not just a similar
one, would have had to be somewhere to hand.
The British research centre at Porton Down,
known for its work on chemical weapons, is a few
kilometres from the site of the attempt. We have quite
a few questions about its activities too. But alas, on
Tuesday, Gary Aitkenhead, the chief executive of the
laboratory at Porton Down, stated that his laboratory
had established that it was “a military-grade nerve
agent [but] we have not verified the precise source”.
He also said that the Skripals had not received any
antidotes. He assumed that the British Government,
unlike him, might have some additional information.
To give Mr. Aitkenhead his due, he did not sacrifice his
professional reputation in the service of the conjectures
of the British authorities. However, he also affirmed
18-09638

05/04/2018

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

that nothing like this would ever leave the four walls
of his facility. The question is, what does he mean by
“this”? What could not leave his laboratory’s walls? And
does the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) know about it? Whatever the answer,
as far as we are concerned, all of this means that the
main argument of the British — that the substance was
undoubtedly of Russian origin, which is the basis for
the entire body of the so-called evidence that Russia’s
involvement was highly likely — has disintegrated. But
Mr. Aitkenhead’s statement only makes the case we are
considering more mysterious.
Once again, we want to explain to all and sundry
that “novichok” is not a Russian copyright, despite its
seemingly clearly Russian name. It was invented in the
West for a line of chemical warfare agents that were
developed in many countries, including the United
States and Great Britain, something that will come as
no surprise to experts and scientists in the field. Boris
Johnson, in answer to a direct question from a Deutsche
Welle correspondent, confirmed, also directly, that
Britain has a sample of it at Porton Down. Yesterday, a
tweet saying that the substance was definitely produced
in Russia, which has already resulted in recriminations
and false rumours, was deleted from the British Foreign
office’s website. But like Chip ’n’ Dale, the British
intelligence services hastened to the aid of Boris
Johnson and the Foreign Office, reporting yesterday,
via the newspaper The Times, that with the help of
scientific analysis and investigation they had succeeded
in establishing the probable source of the toxic
substance’s origins only a few days after the chemical
attack in Salisbury. They stated that the Cabinet knew
on 7 March that the toxin had very likely been produced
in Russia. The British intelligence services believe that
they have located a secret Russian laboratory where
the nerve agent was produced. But wait. There is more.
The article says that the British intelligence services’
sources cannot confirm the laboratory’s location
absolutely unequivocally, although their degree of
certainty about it is very high. They also believe that
the Russians conducted tests to determine whether a
novichok could be used for political killings. And there
is more. Yesterday the Daily Mail also suddenly revealed
that British intelligence had top-secret information
from certain sources to the effect that before the attack
in Salisbury, Russia had been testing a novichok nerve
agent on everyday objects such as door handles. I do not
even know what to say about this. It is a sort of theatre
of the absurd. Could they not have come up with a more

S/PV. 8224

realistic fake story? Although we all know the price of
British intelligence information, thanks to Tony Blair.
We have told our British colleagues that they are playing
with fire and that they will be sorry, because it is one
thing to make totally unfounded accusations but quite
another to move the conversation to a professional level,
which requires clear answers to substantive questions,
not diplomacy by megaphone.
I do not think that Britain’s investigative
authorities will thank their Government for its hasty
and unequivocal conclusions. Needless to say, their
politicians had not considered this. They had no idea
that their sensational statements might boomerang
back at them. They went all in on that convenient
and timely anti-Russian canard — Russian chemical
attacks — without realizing that once the dust had
settled they would have to answer for their words.
Meanwhile, London has begun poisoning our relations
with foreign countries. In a sign of solidarity, 150
Russian diplomats have been expelled from a number of
States that are allies of the United Kingdom. We know
that all over the world its Ambassadors are twisting
sovereign States’ arms and forcing them to follow their
bad example, unleashing a wave that reached as far
as New York. In an unprecedented move, its allies in
the United States have expelled 60 Russian diplomats,
including 12 staff members of the Permanent Mission
of Russia to the United Nations, without offering any
proof or consulting with us as provided for in the
Headquarters Agreement, and thereby acting with
blatant disregard for their obligations as a host country
of the United Nations.
Incidentally, this is sadly not the first time that the
United States has failed to live up to its obligations.
It has seized Russian diplomatic property, including
property belonging to Russia here at the Permanent
Mission in New York, established a 25-mile-radius
travel restriction for our diplomats and refused to
renew or issue United States visas. We urge the United
States to take a responsible attitude to its duties as host
country, return everything that it has taken from us
illegally and refrain from such actions in future.
We are witnessing shocking events. At our previous
meeting on 14 March I discussed this new approach to
the legal system — unproven accusations made simply
on the basis of suspicion. But there is something else
that is no less astonishing. When I look at these British
politicians’ debates, interviews and statements, I am
dumbfounded. O tempora! O mores! What has happened

18-096383/16

S/PV.8224

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

to good old England? Is it a lack of professionalism,
or a debased political culture? Or is it an entirely new
political culture? I do not know. I suggest that those
present draw their own conclusions.
The British authorities have been trying to ridicule
Russia over the 30 or so versions of these events that
have been suggested. Notice that these are not versions
from the Russian authorities but the opinions of
experts and journalists. Yes, there are a lot of versions
because the lack of facts and evidence, but everyone
in Russia wants to get to the bottom of this murky
story. The British authorities, however, have very few
versions — just one, in fact, which they are passing
off as a final verdict. And yet they cannot identify
the source of the poisoning. Is it Skripal’s house? His
doorknob? Flowers? Buckwheat? Laurel leaves? We
have to admit that those citizens and experts, both
British and otherwise, who are capable of thought
have also come up with various different versions, and
a great many questions to which there have been no
answers. Here are just a few of them.
Where were the Skripals for four hours with
their phones switched off? How were the samples
taken? Who can confirm their reliability? Why were
relatives not asked for their assent to the taking of
blood samples? How was the antidote to an unknown
chemical substance obtained so quickly, and was it
given to the Skripals? What was Skripal doing? Who
were his connections? Where did he travel to? Who did
he spend time with? Did they meet with anyone that
day or the day before? Where is the data from video
surveillance cameras? How do the rushed accusations
dovetail with the statements from Scotland Yard that
the investigation would take weeks or even months of
work? Why is Russia not being given consular access
to Russian citizens who may have been the victims of a
terrorist act committed on British territory? The British
authorities decided, thoughtlessly, that they could get
away with their unproven insinuations. Believe me,
friends, this story and its investigation are not over.
They have not even begun.
On 12 March, we sent the Foreign Office a note
requesting access to the data in the investigation,
including samples of the chemical substance that the
British investigation referred to, so that our experts
could examine it as part of a joint investigation. We
were thereby complying with the second paragraph of
article IX of the Chemical Weapons Convention, which
provides that States parties should settle through the
4/16

05/04/2018

exchange of information and bilateral consultations
any matter that could cause doubt about compliance
with the Convention. Based on the article’s provisions,
Russia would have been ready to respond to a request
from Great Britain within 10 days. Instead of all of
that, London issued an absurd, 24-hour ultimatum,
which, needless to say, we rejected, since no one, under
any circumstances, is permitted to take that tone with
Russia. In the ultimatum, which Foreign Secretary
Boris Johnson delivered to Russia’s Ambassador in
London in person,
(spoke in English)
“The Foreign Secretary made clear ... that there
are only two possible scenarios. Either the Russian
State has attempted murder on British soil using a
chemical weapon or Russia has lost control of its
stockpile of nerve agents. The Foreign Secretary
asked the Russian Ambassador to explain which of
the two possibilities was true and to account for
how this Russian-produced nerve agent could have
been deployed in Salisbury.”
(spoke in Russian)
We were given 24 hours. That was the sum total
of the questions the British asked us. There were no
others. They look even more ridiculous given the
current situation and the additional information and
statements that have since emerged.
On 14 March, Mrs. May sent Mr. Ahmet Üzümcü,
Director-General of the OPCW, a request for an
independent analysis of the results of the British
investigation of the incident in Salisbury. However, our
British colleagues are forgetting that when they act in
the framework of the OPCW, which we believe is the
only correct way to proceed, they have obligations as
well as rights, including towards us, as a full member
of the OPCW. We reminded them unambiguously about
that during the extraordinary meeting of the OPCW
Executive Council that was convened yesterday at
our request. We proposed a draft decision on a joint
investigation. It was blocked by the United Kingdom
and its allies, which they hastened to call a victory,
despite the fact that the combined total of those voting
in favour and abstaining exceeded the number of those
voting against. This is understandable. Why would
Britain need a joint investigation when it had already
established who was guilty before the investigation
began? After all, such an investigation might ruin their
carefully crafted version based on such powerfully
18-09638

05/04/2018

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

S/PV. 8224

worded arguments as “highly likely”, “overwhelmingly
likely”, “highly plausible”, “there is almost no doubt”,
“there is no other plausible explanation”, “Russia was
almost certainly to blame”, “high likelihood of Russian
responsibility” and “Russia is the likely perpetrator”.

English proverb in the novel that says you cannot make
a horse from a hundred rabbits. Incidentally, I would
advise Mr. Johnson to read Dostoevsky’s other novels,
or at least get to know their names. I am not going to
recite them myself.

Boris Johnson continues to try to persuade everyone
that Britain supposedly sent Russia a list of questions to
which it has so far received no answers. The complete
opposite is true. As I have said, we never received any
list of questions. I would now like to ask the British to
list those questions, if there are any. Just do not claim
that accusations in the form of an ultimatum and a
demand that we admit guilt for the deed are questions.

As a reasoned proof of the evidence for Russia’s
guilt, the British Ambassador to Moscow gave his
colleagues a slide show of six pages, including the
title page. These are comic strips passing themselves
off as evidence. Once again they say nothing but
“highly likely”. One must assume that this is the same
incontrovertible document that Mrs. May showed to her
European Union colleagues, many of whom — to be fair,
not all — accepted it as reliable evidence of Russia’s
guilt. Look at this travesty. We will circulate it. Using
these six little squares as the basis for an argument is an
insult to intelligence. How can one respect people who
are convinced by this kind of thing? This thing. And do
those who are doing the convincing not understand that
they are being zombified, that they are participants in a
collective psychosis?

We, on the other hand, have a lot of questions, for
London, the OPCW and France, which — based on
what provisions of the Chemical Weapons Convention
is unclear — has suddenly rushed to help the British
confirm the results of its so-called fast-track
investigation. When we asked about this, the French
informed us that Britain had given them detailed
information about the investigation. As long as London
refuses to provide us with this information, maybe
Paris could share it with us? Today we circulated a
memorandum for members’ perusal. We will also
circulate some comments by an official representative
of Russia’s Foreign Ministry with some fascinating
information that I think the Council will find very
interesting. We will also send the text of this statement
to Council members, with a translation.
The intellectual level of the basis for the
accusations and the quest to discover Russia’s motives
is pitiful. Boris Johnson, who constantly claims to
be a Russophile, has made the absurd and amoral
suggestion — and “absurd” is the kindest way of putting
it — that Moscow needed an incident like this in order
to unite the people before the elections. Just as amoral
is his comparison of Russia’s holding of the World Cup
football championship with the 1936 Olympic Games
in Berlin, in which, incidentally, a British delegation
participated, including with high-level officials, unlike
the Soviet Union.
Boris Johnson has alluded to Dostoevsky’s novel
Crime and Punishment, in which he claims that the
whole plot turns on whether the criminal will confess
or be caught. It is not really about that at all. It is
not a detective story, as the British Foreign Minister
clearly thinks, but rather a deeply philosophical work
of literature. By the way, we have already cited the

Boris Johnson’s revelation about the so-called dead
cat on the table as simply a manoeuvre for diverting
attention from other problems — and anyone who
does not know what I am talking about can read his
interview — is the clearest possible example of the
no-holds-barred propaganda war that Britain is waging
against Russia. By the way, on the subject of dead
cats, according to Sergei Skripal’s niece Viktoria, his
household in Salisbury — supposedly contaminated by
the poison — included two cats and two guinea pigs.
Where are they now? What about the animals? Why
has no one said anything about them? After all, their
condition is also important evidence.
We are living in an era of the collective blurring
of intellectual reason. I do not know what psychotropic
substances are being used to turn the public into zombies,
except for one — the media. It is a terrible weapon of our
times. It is easy to use the media to manipulate human
minds, and we can see that the Western media is very
good at that. However, no intellectually sophisticated
schemes are necessary. It is enough, in signalling to a
basic instinct, to regularly and purposefully repeat the
same unproven lie, gradually drilling it into people’s
consciousness and eventually presenting it as truth.
It is Dr. Goebbels’s method — repeat a lie a thousand
times and it becomes the truth. We will seek answers
to the questions we have posed. And if the answers are
not provided, if there is no response, we will regard

18-096385/16

S/PV.8224

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

that as an admission of the slander that has been made
against us with no thought for the consequences. We
will seek full cooperation on the Skripal case, and if
that is refused, we will consider it an attempt to cover
up the truth.
Everything that has happened leads us to believe
what has basically been clear from the very beginning.
This is a coordinated campaign, carefully prepared
ahead of time. It is not accidental. The main goal is
clear — discrediting and even delegitimizing Russia;
accusing it of using terrible, inhumane weapons;
concealing stockpiles in violation of the Chemical
Weapons Convention; calling into question our role in
resolving not just the situation in Syria, for instance,
but anywhere at all; and calling into question the
very principle of Russia’s political legitimacy, while
discrediting our position on the Syrian chemical issue.
Basically, killing two birds with one stone.
Since the British authorities, without a moment’s
pause, have the audacity to say that it is “highly
likely” that Russia was responsible for the incident in
Salisbury, we also suggest that it is “highly likely” that
the intelligence services of certain countries are behind
this massive provocation. Russia, which has absolutely
nothing to do with the poisoning of the Skripals, is more
interested than anyone in establishing the truth. We
will work to find out the truth based on the provisions
of the Chemical Weapons Convention. If the British
continue to operate based on suspicions passed off as
evidence, if they continue to rely on assumptions based
on conjecture rather than facts, they will confirm our
much more than highly likely hypothesis that all this
murky business, or rather fiction, is a gross provocation.
He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.
We can see that the only way to obtain an objective
picture is by strictly adhering to the mechanisms of
the Chemical Weapons Convention and collaborating
on the investigation. We are also waiting for answers
to our obvious questions from the British criminal
investigation. We demand consular access to
Yulia Skripal.
To sum up, this is what is going on. There has
been no confirmation that the substance originated
in Russia. We have already stated that we were not
involved. But the demands that we admit our guilt are
still being made. The British refuse to cooperate with
us, on the pretext that victims cannot cooperate with
criminals. I beg their pardon. Their categorization
6/16

05/04/2018

of us as criminals, without facts, evidence, a trial
or an investigation is null and void. Meanwhile, a
crime — possibly a terrorist act — has been committed
on British soil against Russian citizens. And it is they
who are the victims. That is why we are entitled to
demand cooperation and the British are obliged to
provide it. By the way, it was funny that at yesterday’s
meeting of the OPCW Executive Council, some of the
United Kingdom’s allies called on us to cooperate with
the British. Evidently there had not been enough time to
brief them on the correct way to proceed.
We have prepared a very simple draft press
statement by the Security Council. It will be a truthtelling litmus test for the United Kingdom and its allies.
If they bury it, as they did the last time, or turn its
meaning on its head, it will be yet another confirmation
and proof of their unscrupulous game.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): We did not seek
this meeting, but we take requests from the Council
for meetings very seriously. I am pleased to be able to
update the Council on some developments, but I am also
pleased to be able to provide the intellectual clarity that
our Russian colleague has called for. In my statement,
I will stick to the facts. Following Sergei and Yulia
Skripal’s poisoning in Salisbury on 4 March, the United
Kingdom has launched one of the most comprehensive
and complex investigations ever conducted of the use
of a chemical weapon. It involves more than 250 police
detectives, who are supported by a range of specialist
experts and partners. They are trawling through more
than 5,000 hours of closed-circuit television footage.
They are examining more than 1,300 seized exhibits
and interviewing more than 500 witnesses.
In the United Kingdom, the police are independent
of the Government, but if there are more details that
we can share with the Council as the investigation
proceeds, we will be very happy to do so. We all know
why that investigation is under way. It is because a
military-grade nerve agent was used in an attempt
to kill civilians on British soil. It was carried out
recklessly and without regard for public safety. It was
a weapon of mass destruction. A British police officer
was in critical condition alongside the Skripals, and
ordinary members of the public, going about their daily
business, were put at risk.
I am glad not only to be able to inform the Council
that Yulia Skripal is able to communicate and is getting
better, but also to clarify what the Russian Ambassador
18-09638

05/04/2018

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

said about consular access. We have received a request
from the Russian Consulate that we have conveyed to
Yulia Skripal, and we are awaiting her response. That
is an obligation under international law that the British
Government takes very seriously, but there is also the
question of Ms. Skripal’s own wishes, which have to be
taken into account.
The Russian Ambassador had several points to
make about the United Kingdom’s demands of Russia.
As he outlined, on 12 March we asked the Russian
Government a very clear question. Russia refused
to respond and said that it considered the request
null and void. It was indeed true that we asked for
a response within 24 hours to the question of how a
Russian-developed military-grade nerve agent came to
be used on the streets of Salisbury and if it meant that
Russia had lost control of its chemical-weapons stocks.
We stated that Russia should declare its Novichok
programme to the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). We gave 24 hours
because it is a weapon of mass destruction. It was no
ordinary poisoning and no ordinary attack. In our
view, the circumstances justified that tight deadline.
Notwithstanding, the Russians stated that the request
was null and void. They did not request more time.
They did not come to us and say that they wanted to
look into it with us. They rejected the very premise of
the request.
As the Russian Ambassador stated, we have said
that it is highly likely that Russia carried out the
assassination attempt. The British Government came
to that conclusion because of positive identification
by experts at Porton Down that the specific chemical
used is a type of Novichok nerve agent. Porton Down
is an accredited laboratory under and conforms to the
Chemical Weapons Convention. It is allowed to conduct
protective research.
The second reason that helped us come to our
conclusion was the knowledge that Russia has produced
that nerve agent within the past 10 years and remains
capable of doing so. As the Prime Minister made clear
in the British Parliament, we know that the Russian
State has investigated ways of assassination through the
use of nerve agents. The third reason is Russia’s record
of conducting State-sponsored assassinations. I do not
want to detain the Council by going through a long list
but I can provide examples if anyone would like to hear
them. We also made our own assessment that Russia
views defectors as suitable targets for assassination

S/PV. 8224

and, indeed, there are public statements from Russian
leaders to that effect.
I would like to say a word about the use of the
phrase “highly likely”. We use it because under the
British system, only a court can finally determine
culpability. Therefore, the use of the phrase “highly
likely” is a reflection of our judicial process and should
not be construed as casting any doubt whatsoever on
the likelihood of Russia being responsible.
I would also like to take this opportunity to address
the Russian Ambassador’s comment about Porton
Down contradicting Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson.
There was no contradiction. The Foreign Secretary
was making clear that Porton Down was sure that
the nerve agent was a Novichok — a point that it has
subsequently reinforced. In the same interview, based
on that information, additional intelligence and, as I
said, the lack of an alternative explanation from the
Russians, he goes on to make clear why we have reached
the conclusion we have. What the Foreign Secretary
said then and what Porton Down has said recently is
fully consistent with what we have said throughout. In
contrast, we have had innumerable theories from the
Russians. I think we have counted some 24 in all. On
21 March, for example, the Russian Foreign Ministry
stated that it believed terrorists were to blame. On
14 March, Mr. Lavrov said that the British response was
aimed at distracting from Brexit. The use of chemical
weapons on any country’s territory is far too serious for
those theories to hold water.
The Chemical Weapons Convention, which came
into force 21 years ago, is clear in article VII that
States should adopt legislation criminalizing activity
prohibited under the Convention. That is why the
United Kingdom is conducting a full investigation
into the incident, including under our own Chemical
Weapons Act. Because of it, in addition to the United
Kingdom’s criminal investigation, we have invited the
OPCW — the relevant international body — to assist
in verifying our analysis on the basis of article VIII
of the Chemical Weapons Convention. It mandates the
Technical Secretariat to provide technical assistance
and technical evaluation to States parties.
Everything we have done has been consistent with
the Chemical Weapons Convention and, if I may say so,
I will not take any lectures on morality or review our
responsibilities under such international conventions
from a country that, as the Council debated yesterday

18-096387/16

S/PV.8224

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

(see S/PV.8221), has done so much to block the proper
investigation of the use of chemical weapons in Syria.
The United Kingdom’s track record on that issue speaks
for itself.
On 21 March, the OPCW deployed a team to
the United Kingdom to visit the locations where
the victims were exposed to a toxic chemical. The
Director-General briefed the OPCW Executive Council
yesterday on its actions. OPCW expert staff collected
environmental samples from the scene and biomedical
samples from the victims. The OPCW has verified the
chain of custody. The samples have been sent to several
designated laboratories for testing. The analysis from
those laboratories will now be returned to the OPCW
and they will produce a report. Contrary to Russian
claims, the United Kingdom looks forward to sharing
its findings once we have received that report.
Yesterday, Russia put forward a draft resolution at
the Executive Council, proposing a joint investigation.
There are several ways to view that investigation. I
think the metaphor that I find most apt is that of an
arsonist turned firefighter but, in this particular
instance, the arsonist wishes to investigate his own fire.
Having failed to obtain a joint investigation, the draft
resolution received only 6 out of 41 votes in favour
and, without waiting for the outcome of OPCW testing,
Russia has reverted to a familiar path of undermining
the international institution involved.
There is no construction we can place on
Mr. Lavrov’s remarks today other than that Russia will
accept the results of the OPCW Salisbury poisoning
investigation only if Russian experts participate in it.
I am sorry but that does not make it an independent
investigation. If Russia insists on having its own
experts, it seeks to move away from the Chemical
Weapons Convention’s stipulation and it sets a test that
no independent investigation could credibly tolerate.
Regrettably, it is part of a wider pattern of irresponsible
Russian behaviour. Russia discredited the work of the
OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigation Mechanism
on the use of chemical weapons in Syria. Members of
the Council will be familiar with a pattern of aggression
over the years in Georgia and Crimea. Flight MH-17 was
shot down and there was a bungled attempt at a coup
in Montenegro. Each time, such acts are accompanied
by distortion and disinformation — the same sort of
distortion and disinformation we saw yesterday in The
Hague, in the Russian press conferences and in the
Security Council today.
8/16

05/04/2018

While we ourselves would not have called today’s
meeting, we hope to be able to brief the Council further
once we have received the report from the OPCW. We
believe that it is right that the Security Council remain
seized of the flagrant use of chemical weapons. It is
such use that threatens international peace and security.
The threats to the Chemical Weapons Convention from
attacks in Syria, Malaysia and now the United Kingdom
pose a very serious challenge to the non-proliferation
regime that the Council and others have carefully
constructed in response to the terrible events of the past.
There is one country among us — Russia — that
plays fast and loose with our collective security and
the international institutions that protect us. It it is
that reason that leads people to accuse Russia and take
steps against it. It is not out of lack of friendship for
the Russian people or lack of respect for Russia as
a country. My own Foreign Secretary visited in the hope
of establishing a more productive relationship with
Foreign Minister Lavrov. But we cannot ignore what
has happened in Salisbury. We cannot ignore Russia’s
turning a blind eye to the use of chemical weapons
in Syria and in Salisbury, and we cannot ignore the
way that Russia seeks to undermine the international
institutions that have kept us safe since the end of the
Second World War.
We believe that the actions of the United Kingdom
stand up to any scrutiny. We have acted in accordance
with the Chemical Weapons Convention throughout
and, through the body charged for these purposes, the
OPCW, we are happy to come to the Council at any
time. We would be very willing to hold an open briefing
at our mission here in New York if there are members
of the United Nations who still have questions. We have
nothing to hide, but I do fear that Russia might have
something to fear.
Ms. Eckels-Currie (United States): Yesterday,
the Council met on the tragic anniversary of the use
of sarin gas in Khan Shaykhun, Syria (see S/PV.8221).
Ambassador Haley urged us to use the meeting as
the start of a renewed partnership and a renewed
commitment to addressing chemical weapons. That is
because, as she said, no one wants to live in a world
where chemical weapons are used. We were reminded
of the human toll of the devastation caused by chemical
attacks and of the fact that we came together over many
decades to build an international consensus banning
these despicable weapons of war.
18-09638

05/04/2018

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

Sadly, today’s meeting is not about any of that.
Instead, it is yet another attempt by Russia to use the
Security Council for political gains. It is an attempt
to cast doubt on the attack in Salisbury, using phrases
like “collective psychosis” and “propaganda war”, and
likening the media to a psychotropic substance that is
used to manipulate the public. Russia also likened the
response of any country that challenges the narrative
of Russia to Nazi propaganda and Joseph Goebbels.
This is not a tactic that is appropriate for this body.
Let us remember the facts about what happened.
We are discussing the egregious use of a militarygrade nerve agent against two civilians in the United
Kingdom — an attack that exposed hundreds of people,
innocent bystanders and first responders to the effects
of this agent. The fact that a permanent member of the
Security Council was involved is especially appalling.
As the United States has made clear before, our
support for the United Kingdom is unwavering, and we
continue to stand in absolute solidarity with our British
colleagues. We have stated previously, and do so again
today, our firm belief that Russia is responsible for
this chemical weapons attack on United Kingdom soil.
Either Russia deliberately used this military-grade
weapon or failed to declare and secure its stocks of
this nerve agent. We strongly support the independent
analysis of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) that is under way, as well
as the criminal investigation of the United Kingdom
into the use of chemical weapons on its sovereign
territory, and believe those responsible for the attack
must be held accountable.
The international community has rightly come
together to express its outrage and take action. The
United States, the United Kingdom, NATO and 27
other countries have expelled, all together, over 150
Russian intelligence officers. That is a testament to the
grave concern that we and our partners share for the
attempts of Russia to undermine international peace
and security.
Meanwhile, Russia puts forward a series of
conspiracy theories in an attempt to shift blame, with
wild claims that the United Kingdom or the United
States might be responsible. This disinformation and
projection coming from our Russian colleagues is
preposterous. Member States should not be fooled or
led astray by these absurd efforts to dissemble from the
facts. Russia is known to have developed military-grade
nerve agents of the type used in the Salisbury attack.

S/PV. 8224

Russia has a well-documented record of conducting
State-sponsored assassinations, including previously
in the United Kingdom. High-ranking Russian officials
have themselves made clear in public statements that
defectors and so-called traitors are legitimate targets
for assassination.
Yesterday, Russia tried to get the OPCW to adopt
a decision that would have undermined its ongoing
independent investigation into the Salisbury attack
and that would have helped Russia to disguise its
culpability. The members of the OPCW Executive
Council overwhelmingly rejected Russia’s proposal.
Now Russia wants to try again at the Security Council.
But the truth of Russia’s involvement in the Salisbury
attack remains, and the international community
should remain united behind this truth. Once again,
as Ambassador Haley said, if we do not change course
now on chemical weapons, we will be fast approaching
a new and far more dangerous reality for all of us.
We must hold those who have used chemical weapons
accountable and rebuild the global consensus that these
weapons must never be used under any circumstances.
As the Security Council, that is the goal we should be
working to achieve, rather than using this Chamber to
undermine the truth.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Our position on the use
of chemical weapons is well known, and we had an
opportunity to reiterate that position yesterday (see
S.PV.8221), one year after the chemical attack in Khan
Shaykhun, Syria. It is absolutely important to underline
again and again that the use of chemicals as weapons is
unacceptable and constitutes a serious violation under
international law.
However, 20 years after the entry into force of the
Chemical Weapons Convention, we are seeing that this
international regime is increasingly being undermined.
We believe that it is in the best interests of all of us to
do everything possible to maintain the use of chemical
weapons as a taboo and to preserve the integrity of the
regime for the sake of global peace and stability.
With regard to the Skripal case, we have been
following the developments closely. We reiterate our
sympathy and solidarity with the victims, as well as with
the people and Government of the United Kingdom.
The rationale for this is self-evident. The crime was
committed on British soil. As we said last time, we
hope that the necessary independent investigation
will be conducted and also vetted, including through

18-096389/16

S/PV.8224

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

consultation and the exchange of information on
the basis of the relevant provisions of the Chemical
Weapons Convention, with a view to bringing those
responsible to justice.
In this case as well, accountability is critical. We
understand that the case has now been brought to the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), which is the appropriate international body
to deal with the issue. There are indeed a number of
issues surrounding the Salisbury incident that need
to be clarified, and we note that upon the request of
the Government of the United Kingdom, a technical
mission of the OPCW was deployed recently and took
samples from the individuals who were exposed to
toxic chemicals. We note the updates by the DirectorGeneral of the OPCW yesterday at the special session of
the Executive Council at The Hague. We hope that the
report of the OPCW will eventually clarify those issues.
In the meantime, it is necessary that all the relevant
parties cooperate with the OPCW and make every
possible effort to resolve the issue in the spirit of the
Chemical Weapons Convention, which clearly outlines
what needs to happen in such cases. The lack of trust
and the further deterioration of relations among major
Powers on this issue will not help but further undermine
the rules-based international order. It is very clear that
we can address some of these difficult issues only if
there is the necessary cooperation among us all and if
we abide by the rules that we have set for ourselves in
all transparency and fidelity to the truth.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): We are
meeting today at the request of a member of the Security
Council to discuss the 13 March letter (S/2018/218,
annex) written by the British Prime Minister, which
concerns a topic that we already met to discuss last
month (see S/PV.8203). This meeting comes on the
heels of a special meeting of the Executive Council
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) held yesterday in The Hague on the
same subject, at which Russia’s attempt to have a draft
decision adopted was overwhelmingly rejected. That
meeting was held even before the OPCW had issued
its findings concerning the incident at hand, thereby
showing that yesterday’s initiative, like today’s, was
a diversionary tactic in an attempt to sow confusion.
It is therefore more important than ever to maintain a
technical and objective approach to the issue.
10/16

05/04/2018

Let us return to the facts. They are shocking, they
are serious and they are unacceptable. On 4 March in
Salisbury, a military-grade chemical agent, identified
as belonging to a class of such agents known as
Novichoks, was deployed in a public setting, targeting
a former Russian intelligence officer and his daughter
and contaminating a British police officer and civilians
in the area. That was the first verified use of a chemical
weapon in Europe since the end of the Second World
War. It has been 100 years since the use of militarygrade gas wrought destruction on European soil, during
the Great War. France has stated at the highest levels
of Government its full support for, and its unwavering
solidarity with, the Government and the people of the
United Kingdom. We renew them today.
While the Defence Science and Technology
Laboratory at Porton Down has confirmed that the
gas used belongs to the Novichok class and the United
Kingdom continues to pursue its investigation in full
compliance with the Chemical Weapons Convention,
I would like to reiterate France’s full confidence in
the work carried out by British investigators. France
stands ready to make its expertise available to the
United Kingdom, should it so desire. I also welcome
the decision of the Director-General of the OPCW in
responding positively to the British request to dispatch
an assistance mission to the United Kingdom. The
ongoing investigation must be completed independently
and without interference. Given the information that the
United Kingdom has communicated thus far, we share
its assessment that there is no other plausible explanation
for the attack than one involving Russia’s responsibility.
Although Russia advocates for cooperation, France
was surprised by the Russian refusal to answer the
United Kingdom’s entirely legitimate questions. We
call on Russia to shed light on matters of accountability
with regard to the unacceptable Salisbury attack and
notify the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons of any programmes that might not have been
declared to the OPCW.
The ban on the use of chemical weapons is at the
heart of the non-proliferation regime, which underpins
our system of collective security. In that context, the
full-scale re-emergence of those barbaric weapons in
the Middle East, Asia and now in Europe cannot be
tolerated. The taboo that we collectively established on
the use of chemical weapons has been broken, including
in Salisbury. That is an indication of how urgently we
must reaffirm and consolidate the absolute prohibition
18-09638

05/04/2018

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

of chemical weapons. The normalization of the use of
chemical weapons would signify a victory for barbarity
over civilization and an unspeakable regression of
the international order. That is why we cannot resign
ourselves to such a fate, especially since — let us make
no mistake — the normalization of the use of chemical
weapons would create fertile ground for chemical
terrorism, which we all fear, and, indeed, for which we
would all pay the price.
France therefore will never tolerate allowing those
who develop or use toxic agents to enjoy impunity.
We recall our full support for existing institutions,
in particular the OPCW. France will maintain its full
commitment to supporting such institutions’ activities
with every resource at its disposal. That is the goal of
the International Partnership against Impunity for the
Use of Chemical Weapons, which we launched last
January. The gravity of what is at stake requires us to
act. The use of chemical weapons by whomever and
regardless of the circumstances runs equally contrary
to our universal conscience and the most basic norms
of international law.
Again, let us make no mistake: the use of chemical
weapons poses a threat that could potentially ring the
death knell of the very sustainability of the international
regime on the non-proliferation of chemical weapons,
which today is the most elaborate and successful of all
international non-proliferation regimes. Allowing it to
crumble without reacting would translate into accepting
the weakening of the entire international regime on the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, which
we built laboriously together over the past decades
and which is the keystone of the international security
architecture. We are therefore in need of Russia’s
sincere and resolved commitment. Russia must be part
of the solution, not the problem. Russia, which was one
of the pioneers of the international non-proliferation
regime, should be one of its pillars.
Because the threat is existential for us all, combating
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction must
be more than ever at the heart of the priorities of the
Security Council. If there is one area in which the
Council has the moral and political responsibility to
come together to act, this is it. If there is one area where
the Council’s credibility is at stake, and where there is
no place for tactical one-upmanship, this is it.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): Since
last month, China has very closely followed the Skripal

S/PV. 8224

affair in Salisbury. The spokesperson of the Chinese
Foreign Ministry has repeatedly stated our position on
the issue. China has also stated its principled positions
at the Security Council and at the Executive Council
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW). China notes that, at the just-held
fifty-seventh meeting of the OPCW Executive Council
the parties could not reach consensus on a joint
investigation concerning this case. We also note that
the parties concerned have so far failed to reach an
outcome that is acceptable to all.
China firmly opposes the use of chemical weapons
by any country, organization or person in any
circumstance. Any party or actor using chemical
weapons must be brought to justice. China believes
that such issues should be dealt with in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Chemical Weapons
Convention and within the framework of the OPCW.
China believes that it is urgent to discover the truth as
soon as possible, carry out a comprehensive, impartial
and objective investigation and draw conclusions based
on hard evidence that will pass the litmus test of facts
and history. China urges the countries concerned to
carry out consultations, cooperate, avoid politicization
and measures that might further exacerbate tensions
and properly address the issue through dialogue, while
adhering to the principles of equality and mutual respect.
At a time when the international community faces
a plethora of challenges, all parties should abandon
the Cold War mentality and group confrontation,
work together to safeguard world peace, stability and
tranquillity and jointly devote all efforts to building
a new type of international relations based on mutual
respect, equality, justice and win-win cooperation.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Having heard the
statements of the representatives of the United Kingdom
and the Russian Federation, we also would like to share
our observations on this issue.
Kazakhstan has a well-deserved international
reputation as an unequivocal opponent of all kinds
of weapons of mass destruction, including chemical
weapons and poisonous substances. We categorically
condemn any use of weapons of mass destruction as
immoral, inhuman and contrary to the principles
of humanity.
We express our deep concern about the tragic
incident involving the possible use of a weaponsgrade chemical agent on the territory of the United

18-0963811/16

S/PV.8224

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

Kingdom. We look forward to the publication of all
concrete facts and evidence confirming the use of any
kind of weapons-grade chemical agent as well as the
involvement of individuals, non-State actors or States.
We count on a comprehensive, transparent and
impartial investigation of the incident in accordance
with the existing norms of international law, in particular
on the basis of the provisions of the Convention on
the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their
Destruction, and expect the international community to
be provided with the conclusions and evidence.
We express our hope for the normalization of
relations and the restoration of trust between the
leading States, the preservation of the integrity of
the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons and joint efforts to counter common threats
to security, as well as the renunciation of the so-called
bloc mentality. We call on all interested States to unite
and to resolve all issues resulting from the incident in
the United Kingdom in accordance with the norms of
international law, in line with the spirit and principles
of the Astana Commemorative Declaration of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Sweden has
been clear in condemning in the strongest terms the
attempted murder of individuals on United Kingdom
soil using a nerve agent. We stand fully behind the
common European Union (EU) position on that matter.
We share the assessment of the United Kingdom that
it is highly likely that Russia is responsible and that
there is no other plausible alternative explanation. We
reiterate our strong solidarity with the United Kingdom,
our close friend and EU partner, and our support for its
ongoing investigation.
With regard to the chemical weapons use, as we
have heard today, the United Kingdom is conducting its
own independent police investigation. It is cooperating
with the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW). That is in full conformity with the
Chemical Weapons Convention. The United Kingdom
has acted in the correct manner under the Convention.
We underline the importance of respect for that process,
in which the United Kingdom is cooperating with the
OPCW, the independent international organization
charged with overseeing the chemical-weapons ban.
We look forward to being kept informed about the
investigation, including the upcoming report regarding
12/16

05/04/2018

the sample analysis by the OPCW. We call on Russia
to answer the questions posed by the United Kingdom.
Finally, let me once again underline Sweden’s
principled position on chemical weapons. Those
abhorrent weapons are clearly prohibited under
international law. All use of chemical weapons must
be properly investigated and accountability must
be ensured. We need to be vigilant in our efforts to
ensure that the integrity of the chemical weapons ban
is respected.
Mr. Radomski (Poland): Poland expresses its
grave concern over the use of a nerve agant in an
attempt to murder Mr. Sergei Skripal and his daughter,
Ms. Yulia Skripal, on 4 March in Salisbury, United
Kingdom. That reckless act also endangered the lives
of innocent civilians.
In that regard, the Polish position was clearly
expressed by the highest Polish authorities in the days
following the attack in Salisbury. Poland undertook
diplomatic steps to express its full solidarity with the
British people and Government and condemned that
unprecedented attack on the territory of the United
Kingdom. We also aligned ourselves with the joint
statements of the European Union that were made
in The Hague during the most recent regular session
of the Executive Council of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and at its
meeting yesterday.
Poland has always stood at the forefront of the
efforts of the international community to contain the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. The
incident in Salisbury is yet another example of the
violation of international law and of the provisions
of the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC). We
remain strongly convinced that those responsible for
the use of chemcial weapons must be identified and
punished. Any such act cannot be left unanswered,
since it undermines not only the basic sense of justice
but also leads to the erosion of the non-proliferation
and disarmament regime. As a result, it undermines
the security of us all. We have full confidence in the
investigation of the United Kingdom and we commend
the transparency and continued information-sharing of
the British Government in that regard.
At the same time, we welcome the ongoing
cooperation between the United Kingdom and the
OPCW in full compliance with the CWC. We look
forward to a further discussion on the matter once the
18-09638

05/04/2018

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

results of the ongoing independent investigation by the
team of experts of the OPCW are known.
We would like to recall that, on 22 March, the
European Council unanimously agreed with the
assessment of the United Kingdom — that it is highly
likely that the Russian Federation is responsible for
the attack in Salisbury and that there is no credible
alternative explanation.
As we have already stated on other occasions, we
support the decision of the United Kingdom to call on
Russia to address the legitimate questions raised by the
British Government and the international community
and to provide an immediate, full and complete
disclosure of its Novichok programme to the OPCW.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We have
listened carefully to the detailed statements made by
the representatives of the Russian Federation and the
United Kingdom on the incident that took place in
Salisbury on Sunday, 4 March. It is truly regrettable
that the Security Council has held meetings on two
consecutive days to discuss the use of weapons of mass
destruction in two different countries (see S/PV.8221).
The State of Kuwait is deeply concerned about the
challenges facing the non-proliferation regime in our
world today. We very much regret the attack perpetrated
against Mr. Sergei Skripal and his daughter, Yulia,
in the British city of Salisbury. The State of Kuwait
stands with the United Kingdom and supports all the
procedures and measures it has undertaken as part of
the investigation into that case. We welcome the appeal
to the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) to participate in the investigation
as an impartial and independent international body
specialized in that area in order to reveal the details of
the incident. At the same time, we would like to express
our sympathy and condolences to the victims. We wish
Mr. Skripal and his daughter and those who were injured
from the police and the public a speedy recovery.
The State of Kuwait holds a principled and
firm position condemning and prohibiting the use,
production, acquisition, stockpiling or retention of
chemical weapons, as well as their direct or indirect
transfer, in line with article I of the Chemical Weapons
Convention. The State of Kuwait has been party to the
Convention since 1997. We said the same during the
urgent meeting convened by the Security Council on
14 March to discuss this issue (see S/PV 8203). The State
of Kuwait believes in the importance of complying with

S/PV. 8224

international law and norms, and in the importance
of maintaining international peace and security in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
Kuwait urges all the relevant parties to cooperate in the
ongoing investigations in this case through the OPCW,
in accordance with the articles and provisions of the
Chemical Weapons Convention.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State
of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): As we stated at the
previous meeting on this topic (see S/PV.8203), Bolivia
categorically rejects the use of chemical agents as
weapons as an unjustifiable and criminal act because
it is considered a serious crime against international
law, peace and security. We express our concern about
the challenges facing the non-proliferation regime.
We reiterate the need for an independent, transparent,
objective, impartial and depoliticized investigation, in
accordance with the existing rules of international law,
in particular within the framework of the Chemical
Weapons Convention, to clarify the events of 4 March.
We believe that cooperation between the relevant
parties is essential for progress to be made, through the
relevant diplomatic channels, in resolving this issue and,
above all, in strengthening the non-proliferation regime.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): On 14 March, when we met in this Chamber at
the request of our colleagues from the United Kingdom
on the same issue of the chemical attack in Salisbury,
United Kingdom (S/PV.8203), the first thing we did was
to condemn the perpetration of that attack and to stand
in solidarity with the victims and their families and
with the Government of the United Kingdom. Today we
begin our statement by reiterating the same message
of condemnation.
Equatorial Guinea is closely following developments
in relation to the incident involving the use of a
chemical agent in Salisbury and hopes that the ongoing
investigations will fully clarify the incident and that
they will be comprehensive, fair and independent and
in accordance with relevant international standards and
procedures. The conclusions must be made public, and
those responsible must be brought to justice.
Equatorial Guinea reiterates the hope that the
relevant parties, the United Kingdom and the Russian
Federation, aware of their great responsibility as
permanent members of the Security Council, will set a
credible example for the international community of the
peaceful settlement of disputes. It is important that at a

18-0963813/16

S/PV.8224

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

historic and crucial time like this, when the relevance
of the international structures for harmonizing
coexistence — which both parties have worked so
hard to establish and preserve — is constantly being
questioned, London and Moscow use their longstanding maturity and international political experience
to manage this new crisis in a moderate, suitable and
reasoned manner through direct contacts and in close
collaboration with the international legal instruments
and entities established for this purpose, such as the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
We hope that this diplomatic crisis, which has escalated,
can also be defused.
Equatorial Guinea opposes the development,
production, stockpiling, transfer and use of chemical
weapons, as these activities contravene the Chemical
Weapons Convention and the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, and we advocate
for their total and complete prohibition and destruction.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): The Kingdom
of the Netherlands supports the statement made by the
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom. I
wish to make three points.
First, the chemical-weapon attack in Salisbury
is unacceptable. Secondly, we fully support the
investigation led by the United Kingdom. Thirdly, we
call on the Russian Federation to fully cooperate with
this ongoing criminal investigation.
As to my first point, on the unacceptability of the
attack, during the previous meeting on this matter, on
14 March (see S/PV.8203), I expressed our shock at the
reckless attack with a military-grade nerve agent on
British soil. The Kingdom of the Netherlands strongly
condemned that attack, in the Security Council and on
many other occasions. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
stands in full solidarity with United Kingdom.
As to my second point, on our support for the
investigation, we underline that the perpetrators of
this heinous act must face justice. The authorities
of the United Kingdom are working, together with
the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW), to achieve that end. At the meeting
of the Executive Council of the OPCW in The Hague
yesterday, Director-General Üzümcü confirmed
that the United Kingdom had followed the correct
procedure in this regard. We reiterate that we do not
see any legitimate reason why anyone should try to
delay, sidetrack, second-guess or discredit the criminal
14/16

05/04/2018

investigation being carried out by the United Kingdom
authorities. We fully support the investigation led by
the United Kingdom with the assistance of the OPCW.
As to my third point, on the need for Russian
cooperation, on 22 March, the European Council
condemned the attack in Salisbury in the strongest
possible terms. It agreed with the assessment of the
Government of the United Kingdom that it is highly
likely that the Russian Federation is responsible for
the attack and that there is no plausible alternative
explanation. We therefore call on the Russian Federation
to fully cooperate with the ongoing investigation and to
provide full disclosure of its novichok programme to
the OPCW.
In conclusion, any use of chemical weapons
constitutes an unacceptable threat to international
law, peace and security. I reiterate our call for full
accountability for this horrific crime.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its principled position
that all use of chemical weapons, in whatever form, in
times of peace or in times of war, should be condemned.
It stresses that it is imperative to shed full light on the use
of chemical nerve agents in Salisbury, in collaboration
with the relevant bodies, in particular the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). In
that regard, my country urges all States to provide all
necessary information to the OPCW with a view to
assigning responsibility for the 4 March incident.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.
Peru remains deeply concerned about the incident
involving the use of a nerve agent in public spaces,
which has seriously endangered the lives of at least
three people in the United Kingdom. We wish to express
our solidarity with the victims and with the population
potentially exposed to the chemical agent in question.
Peru condemns all use of chemical weapons. We
believe that such a practice constitutes, per se, a threat
to international peace and security and a violation of
the related non-proliferation regimes.
Accordingly, we reaffirm the importance of
investigating the incident through the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and
through the mechanisms and procedures established
under the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of
18-09638

05/04/2018

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction. In that
regard, we believe that the results of the analyses
carried out by the mission deployed by the OPCW at the
request of the British Government should be known.
In line with the principle of the peaceful settlement of
disputes, we urge the parties concerned to cooperate
fully with the investigations, with a view to determining
the responsibilities and sanctions that may result from
the case.

S/PV. 8224

In conclusion, there is really nothing new under the
sun. Once upon a time in Britain there lived a wonderful
children’s author — and not just for children — who
was both a mathematician and a writer and who wrote
a marvellous book entitled Alice’s Adventures in
Wonderland. Here it is. I would like to read to the
Council a short excerpt from the book about the trial of
the Knave of Hearts. It is very short.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

“‘There’s more evidence to come yet, please
your Majesty,’ said the White Rabbit, jumping up in
a great hurry; ‘this paper has just been picked up.’”

The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked to make a further statement.

Perhaps I should read the rest in English.

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Unfortunately, we heard nothing new from
some of our colleagues, who continue unabashedly
and unblinkingly to affirm Russia’s guilt and demand
that we shed light on the incident. We too would very
much like to see the truth emerge, and we hope that
the further we go, the more green shoots of truth will
find their way towards the light. I would like to thank
my Dutch colleague for his persistent proposal that we
cooperate with the British, but I will most likely not do
that, because the meaning attached to this proposal for
cooperation is nothing like what we understand by it.
We are essentially being called on to respond to one
question, which is “Admit that you did it.” We answer,
“We did not do it.” To that, they say, “That is not enough.
How did you do it?” We say, “Give us proof.” They say,
“No, but admit it anyway. It will be better that way.” Can
it really be that no one here understands that this is all
a sort of theatre of the absurd? We have said repeatedly
that the United Kingdom has not been following the
Chemical Weapons Convention’s procedures, and the
Council can read about that in the memorandum that
we have circulated.
I would like to note that today the Ambassador of
the United Kingdom expressed her readiness to share
information on the course of the investigation with
Member States. We eagerly await that. We also hope that
the information provided to us will be based on materials
that are more convincing than the ones I showed the
Council today. By the way, we found the explanation by
the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom
of the reasons and legal niceties for the use of the
expression “highly likely” as an instrument of British
justice — or in the context of British justice — very
diverting. We will take it into consideration.

(spoke in English)
“‘What’s in it?’ said the Queen.
“‘I haven’t opened it yet,’ said the White Rabbit,
‘but it seems to be a letter, written by the prisoner
to — to somebody.’
“‘It must have been that,’ said the King,
‘unless it was written to nobody, which isn’t usual,
you know.’
“‘Who is it directed to?’ said one of the jurymen.
“‘It isn’t directed at all,’ said the White Rabbit;
‘in fact, there’s nothing written on the outside.’...
“‘Are they in the prisoner’s handwriting?’
asked another of the jurymen.
“‘No, they’re not,’ said the White Rabbit, ‘and
that’s the queerest thing about it.’ (The jury all
looked puzzled.)
“‘He must have imitated somebody else’s hand,’
said the King. (The jury all brightened up again.)
“‘Please your Majesty,’ said the Knave, ‘I didn’t
write it, and they can’t prove I did: there’s no name
signed at the end.’
“‘If you didn’t sign it,’ said the King, ‘that only
makes the matter worse. You must have meant some
mischief, or else you’d have signed your name like
an honest man.’
“There was a general clapping of hands at this:
it was the first really clever thing the King had said
that day ...
“‘That’s the most important piece of evidence
we’ve heard yet,’ said the King, rubbing his hands ...

18-0963815/16

S/PV.8224

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

“‘Let the jury consider their verdict,’ the King
said, for about the twentieth time that day.
“‘No, no!’ said the
first — verdict afterwards.’”

Queen.

‘Sentence

(spoke in Russian)
Does that remind you of anything, Mr. President?
But if Council members think this has to do only with
fairytales from a previous century — which are very
relevant ones, incidentally — I would like to show them
one more thing, an article from today’s Independent,
entitled “Whether we can prove Moscow’s involvement
in the Skripal case or not is irrelevant”. Here is one
brief quote from it.
(spoke in English)
“The Russians’ response to all of this is to
say “prove it”, as if in a court of law. Even on a
legal test such as being beyond reasonable doubt

16/16

05/04/2018

or on the balance of probabilities, the Russians are
plainly culpable.”
I rest my case.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The representative
of the United Kingdom has asked to make a
further statement.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I will not detain my
colleagues for very long. There is another very good
quote from Lewis Carroll in Through the Looking
Glass, and What Alice Found There: “Why, sometimes
I’ve believed as many as six impossible things before
breakfast.” I think that is the quote that suits my Russian
colleague best. I just wanted to say that we are of course
committed to keeping the Council updated. We will
share with the Council, at the Council’s request, as
much information as we can, as and when we have it,
and in accordance with developments.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

18-09638
