S/2019/855

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
4 November 2019
Original: English

Letter dated 31 October 2019 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit herewith a note verbale dated 15 October 2019
from the Permanent Mission of France to the United Nations, enclosing a report on
the activities carried out by the French armed forces in the Central African Republic
in support of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic, from 1 February to 15 October 2019.
I would be grateful if you could bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

19-19069 (E)

071119

*1919069*

261119

S/2019/855

Annex
[Original: French]
The Permanent Mission of France to the United Nations presents its
compliments to the Office of the Secretary-General of the United Nations Secretariat
and has the honour to transmit the following information.
Pursuant to paragraphs 69 and 71 of Security Council resolution 2448 (2018),
adopted on 13 December 2018, please find attached the report on the actions carried
out by French forces in support of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) from 1 February
to 15 October 2019 (see enclosure).
The Permanent Mission of France to the United Nations would be grateful if the
Secretary-General could bring this report to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.

2/4

19-19069

S/2019/855

Enclosure
Report on the operational support provided by French forces to
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic from 1 February to
15 October 2019
France contributes eight military staff officers to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central Africa Republic
(MINUSCA), including the Chief of Staff, Brigadier General Franck Chatelus, and
one non-commissioned officer. It also contributes seven gendarmes to the United
Nations police, including Major General Pascal Champion, Head of the United
Nations police.
The operational support provided by the French forces to MINUSCA is
indicated below.
Conduct of operations
Under Security Council resolution 2448 (2018) of 13 December 2018, French
fighter jets stationed in N’Djamena can provide ad hoc air support to MINUSCA.
On 2 March 2019, two Rafale fighter jets equipped with the new generation of
reconnaissance pod undertook an intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance
mission from N’Djamena.
On 13 September 2019, the Mirage 2000D fighter jets based in N’Djamena
conducted a show of force mission to Bamingui, and a show of presence mission to
Birao at the request of MINUSCA. Alongside these operational missions, fighter jets
conducted joint close air support training with the joint tactical air contr oller of the
Portuguese contingent to ensure that the two units are capable of working together.
Operational military partnership
The aim is to share good practices and provide mentoring to the specialists of
the Gabonese battalion of MINUSCA. On 29 August, the commanding officer of the
Gabonese battalion of MINUSCA came to meet with the commander of the French
operational support detachment at the M’Poko camp in order to obtain the assistance
of France in diagnosing the malfunctions occurring with three of the five armoured
forward area vehicles transferred by France in January 2018. It was agreed that Gabon
forces would repatriate the three armoured forward area vehicles to Bangui in early
October. In liaison with the Defence Attaché, a technical training detachment of the
French operational support detachment will be sent to perform the necessary
diagnostics and teach the Gabonese specialists how this should be carried out. The
latter will order the spare parts from France via Libreville. Once the parts have been
delivered to Bangui, another technical training detachment of the French operational
support detachment will train mechanics from the Gabonese battalion how to carry
out the repairs.
Prior to their training, soldiers from the Gabonese battalion will receive training
from French forces in Gabon. This training will total nine weeks per year.
French military air traffic controllers are permanently stationed in the control
tower during air traffic activity. They work with air traffic controllers of the Central
African Republic to supervise runway security prior to any air traffic activity, with
the assistance of a Rwandan battalion from MINUSCA. The latter work to keep the
runway clear of local residents and to ensure the safe movement of aircraft.

19-19069

3/4

S/2019/855

Aeronautical engineering
Two members of the 25th Air Engineer Regiment are present at all times in
Bouar and five additional technicians are scheduled to perform a technical validation
of the Bouar runway in early October. While the runway is important for successfully
deploying the operational training detachments of French forces in Gabon, it is also
useful for the European Union Training Mission in the Central African Republic and
for MINUSCA. MINUSCA will begin the runway construction work by the end of
this year, which will provide for a clear improvement in the capacity for medical
evacuation.
Logistics
The French operational support detachment, through the J10 joint coordination
centre for transport, transit and movement (CCITTM), is permanently responsible for
processing the cargo of the Gabonese battalion of MINUSCA and for receiving
personnel in transit from that contingent, owing to the fact that the aircraft of French
forces in Gabon regularly service the Libreville-Bangui M’Poko route. The next
rotation for the Gabonese battalion is scheduled for December 2019. Since
1 February, the French operational support detachment has contributed to the
unloading of 87 tons for MINUSCA and to the processing of three flights, including
a medical repatriation with passengers.
A training session, conducted by a detachment of French forces in Gabon for
the maintenance personnel of armoured forward area vehicles, was held in October
2019.
The French operational support detachment also deals with disposal and
trans-shipment of equipment for the Gabonese battalion of MINUSCA.
The information and communication systems detachment of the French
operational support detachment carries out computer maintenance and provides
equipment to the Force Commander of MINUSCA and his staff.
Health
The “Role 1” medical unit of the French operational support detachment assists
the eight officers and the non-commissioned officer of MINUSCA.
Joint support
The loan of technical equipment to the Portuguese quick reaction force for one
week in the context of the installation of their shelters.
Infrastructure of the French operational support detachment is made available
during the periods of transit of some authorities.

4/4

19-19069
