A/58/PV.78

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-eighth session

78th plenary meeting
Tuesday, 23 December 2003, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

The Hon. Julian R. Hunte . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Saint Lucia)

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Reports of the Second Committee
The President: The General Assembly will
consider the reports of the Second Committee on
agenda items 91 to 104 and 12.
I request the Rapporteur of the Second
Committee, Mr. José Alberto Briz Gutiérrez of
Guatemala, to introduce the reports of the Second
Committee in one intervention.
Mr. Briz Gutiérrez (Guatemala), Rapporteur of
the Second Committee (spoke in Spanish): I have the
honour to present for consideration the following
reports of the Second Committee on the agenda items
allocated to it by the General Assembly at its fiftyeighth session.
Under agenda item 12, entitled “Report of the
Economic and Social Council”, the Second Committee
recommends, in paragraphs 17 and 18 of document
A/58/495, the adoption of two draft resolutions and two
draft decisions, respectively.
Under sub-item (a) of agenda item 91, entitled
“Macroeconomic policy questions: international trade
and development”, the Second Committee recommends,
in paragraph 12 of document A/58/481/Add.1, the
adoption of two draft resolutions.
Under sub-item (b) of agenda 91, entitled
“Macroeconomic policy questions: science and
technology for development”, the Second Committee

recommends, in paragraphs 14 and 15 of document
A/58/481/Add.2, the adoption of two draft resolutions
and of two draft decisions, respectively.
Under sub-items (c) and (t) of agenda item 91,
entitled, respectively, “Macroeconomic policy questions:
Specific actions related to the particular needs and
problems of landlocked developing countries” and
“Macroeconomic policy questions: Outcome of the
International Ministerial Conference on Landlocked
and Transit Developing Countries and Donor Countries
and International Financial and Development
Institutions on Transit Transport Cooperation”, the
Second Committee recommends, in paragraphs 8 and 9
of document A/58/481/Add.3, the adoption of one draft
resolution and of one draft decision, respectively.
Under sub-item (d) of agenda item 91, entitled
“Macroeconomic policy questions: International
financial system and development”, the Second
Committee recommends, in paragraph 7 of document
A/58/481/Add.4, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item (e) of agenda item 91, entitled
“Macroeconomic policy questions: External debt crisis
and development”, the Second Committee recommends,
in paragraph 7 of document A/58/481/Add.5, the
adoption of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item (g) of agenda item 91, entitled
“Macroeconomic policy questions: Commodities”, the
Second Committee recommends, in paragraph 8 of
document A/58/481/Add.6, the adoption of one draft
resolution.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

04-20847 (E)

*
0
4
2
0
8
4
7
*

A/58/PV.78

Under agenda item 92, entitled “Sectoral policy
questions: preventing and combating corrupt practices
and transfer of funds of illicit origin and returning such
assets to the countries of origin”, the Second
Committee recommends, in paragraph 9 of document
A/58/482, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Agenda item 93 is entitled “Sustainable
development and international economic cooperation”.
Under sub-item (a), entitled “Women in development”,
the Second Committee recommends, in paragraph 7 of
document A/58/483/Add.1, the adoption of one draft
resolution.
Under sub-item (b) of agenda item 93, entitled
“Human resources development”, the Second
Committee recommends, in paragraph 8 of document
A/58/483/Add.2, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item (c) of agenda item 93, entitled
“International migration and development”, the Second
Committee recommends, in paragraph 8 of document
A/58/483/Add.3, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item (d) of agenda item 93, entitled
“Implementation of the Declaration on International
Economic Cooperation, in particular the Revitalization
of Economic Growth and Development of the
Developing Countries, and implementation of the
International Development Strategy for the Fourth
United Nations Development Decade”, the Second
Committee recommends, in paragraph 4 of document
A/58/483/Add.4, the adoption of one draft decision.
Agenda item 94 is entitled “Environment and
sustainable development”. Under sub-item (a), entitled
“Promotion of new and renewable sources of energy,
including the implementation of the World Solar
Programme 1996-2005”, I would first like to call the
attention of the plenary to a correction in paragraph 2
of the report the Second Committee contained in
document A/58/484/Add.l: San Marino and Andorra
are to be added to the list of subsequent sponsors of
draft resolution A/C.2/58/L.26. The Second Committee
recommends, in paragraph 7 of the same document, the
adoption of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item (b) of the agenda item 94, entitled
“Implementation of the United Nations Convention to
Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing
Serious Drought and/or Desertification, particularly in
Africa”, the Second Committee recommends, in

2

paragraph 14 of document A/58/484/Add.2,
adoption of two draft resolutions.

the

Under sub-item (c) of agenda item 94, entitled
“Convention on Biological Diversity”, the Second
Committee recommends, in paragraph 8 of document
A/58/484/Add.3, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item (d) of agenda item 94, entitled
“Further implementation of the Programme of Action
for the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing
States”,
the
Second
Committee
recommends,
in
paragraph
8
of
document
A/58/484/Add.4, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item (e) of agenda item 94, entitled
“International Strategy for Disaster Reduction”, the
Second Committee recommends, in paragraph 15 of
document A/58/484/Add.5, the adoption of two draft
resolutions.
Under sub-item (f) of agenda item 94, entitled
“Protection of global climate for present and future
generations of mankind”, the Second Committee
recommends, in paragraph 11 of document
A/58/484/Add.6, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item (g) of agenda item 94, entitled
“Sustainable mountain development”, the Second
Committee recommends, in paragraph 7 of document
A/58/484/Add.7, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 94, entitled “Environment and
sustainable development”, the Second Committee
recommends,
in
paragraph
6
of
document
A/58/484/Add.8, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 95, entitled “Implementation
of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further
Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the
World Summit on Sustainable Development”, the
Second Committee recommends, in paragraph 14 of
document A/58/485, the adoption of two draft
resolutions.
Under agenda item 96, entitled “United Nations
Decade of Education for Sustainable Development”, the
Second Committee recommends, in paragraph 10 of
document A/58/486, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Agenda item 97 is entitled “Operational activities
for development”. Under sub-item (a), entitled
“Operational activities”, and sub-item (b), entitled
“Economic and technical cooperation among developing
countries”, the Second Committee recommends, in

A/58/PV.78

paragraph 13 of document A/58/487, the adoption of
one draft resolution, and, in paragraph 14, the adoption
of one draft decision.
Under agenda item 98, entitled “Implementation
of the first United Nations Decade for the Eradication
of Poverty (1997-2006)”, the Second Committee
recommends, in paragraph 16 of document A/58/488,
the adoption of two draft resolutions.
Under agenda item 99, entitled “Training and
research”, I would first like to call the attention of the
plenary to a correction in draft resolution I, contained
in document A/58/489, entitled “United Nations
Institute for Training and Research”. In operative
paragraph 5 of that draft, the words “Institute’s training
office at Hiroshima, Japan” are to be replaced with the
words “UNITAR Hiroshima Office for Asia and the
Pacific in Hiroshima, Japan”. Operative paragraph 5
should then read as follows: “Also welcomes the
establishment of the UNITAR Hiroshima Office for
Asia and the Pacific in Hiroshima, Japan”. With this
correction, the Second Committee recommends, in
paragraph 16 of document A/58/489, the adoption of
two draft resolutions.
Under agenda item 100, entitled “Globalization
and interdependence”, the Second Committee
recommends, in paragraph 12 of document A/58/490,
the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 101, entitled “Implementation
of the outcome of the United Nations Conference on
Human Settlements (Habitat II) and of the twenty-fifth
special session of the General Assembly”, the Second
Committee recommends, in paragraph 15 of document
A/58/491, the adoption of two draft resolutions.
Under agenda item 102, entitled “Third United
Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries”,
the Second Committee recommends, in paragraph 12 of
document A/58/492, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 103, entitled “Permanent
sovereignty of the Palestinian people in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and of
the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan over
their natural resources”, the Second Committee
recommends, in paragraph 9 of document A/58/493,
the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 104, entitled “Follow-up to
the International Conference on Financing for
Development”, the Second Committee recommends, in

paragraph 15 of document A/58/494, the adoption of
one draft resolution.
Before concluding, I would like to take this
opportunity sincerely to thank the Chairman of the
Second Committee, Mr. Iftekhar Ahmed Chowdhury of
Bangladesh, as well as the Vice-Chairpersons,
Ms. Ulrika Cronenberg-Mossberg of Sweden,
Mrs. Irena Zubčević of Croatia and Mr. Henri
Raubenheimer of South Africa for their exceptional
cooperation and partnership during this very productive
session of the Second Committee.
Finally, I would like sincerely to thank all the
delegations that participated in our work; their dedication
and efforts were essential for the accomplishment of
the task entrusted by the Assembly to the Second
Committee during the current session. In conclusion, I
would like to thank the Secretariat for its outstanding
assistance to me and all the members of the Bureau.
The President: If there is no proposal under rule 66
of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the General
Assembly decides not to discuss the reports of the Second
Committee which are before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Second Committee have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the
relevant official records.
May 1 remind members that under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered in
a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, i.e., either in the Committee or in
plenary meeting unless that delegation’s vote in
plenary meeting is different from its vote in the
Committee.”
May I remind delegations that, also in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the
Second Committee, I should like to advise

3

A/58/PV.78

representatives that we are going to proceed to take
decisions in the same manner as was done in the
Second Committee, unless the Secretariat is notified
otherwise in advance.
This means that where a recorded vote was taken,
we will do the same. I should also hope that we may
proceed
to
adopt
without
a
vote
those
recommendations that were adopted without a vote in
the Second Committee.
Agenda item 91
Macroeconomic policy questions
Report of the Second Committee (A/58/481 and
Corr.1)
The President: May I take it that the General
Assembly wishes to take note of the report of the
Second Committee?
It was so decided (decision 58/544).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 91.
(a) International trade and development
Report of the Second Committee
(A/58/481/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the two draft resolutions recommended by
the Second Committee in paragraph 12 of its report.
Draft resolution I, entitled “International trade and
Development”, was adopted by the Second Committee.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 58/197).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Unilateral economic measures as a means of political
and economic coercion against developing countries”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,

4

Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic,
Chile, China, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Mongolia,
Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Netherlands, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Romania, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Serbia
and Montenegro, Seychelles, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Estonia,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, Israel, Japan, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Monaco,
Norway, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic
of Moldova, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine
Draft resolution II was adopted by 125 votes to 1,
with 37 abstentions (resolution 58/198).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Bhutan informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour; the delegations of Ireland, Italy, Latvia
and Romania had intended to abstain.]

A/58/PV.78

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 91?
It was so decided.
(b) Science and technology for development
Report of the Second Committee
(A/58/481/Add.2)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the two draft resolutions recommended by
the Second Committee in paragraph 14 of its report and
on the two draft decisions recommended by the
Committee in paragraph 15 of the same report.
Draft resolution I, entitled “Creation of a global
culture of cybersecurity and the protection of critical
information infrastructures”, was adopted by the
Second Committee.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 58/199).
The President: Draft resolution II, entitled
“Science and technology for development”, was
adopted by the Second Committee.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 58/200).
The President: Draft decision I, entitled
“Science and technology for development”, was
adopted by the Second Committee. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft decision I was adopted (decision 58/545).
The President: Draft decision II is entitled “Note
by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the
Secretary-General of the International Telecommunication
Union on the ongoing preparatory process for the World
Summit on the Information Society”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft decision II recommended by the Second
Committee?
Draft decision II was adopted (decision 58/546).
The President: I call on the representative of the
United States of America, who wishes to speak in
explanation of position on the decision just adopted.

Mrs. Tamlyn (United States of America): The
United States understands that the General Assembly,
in all of its decisions today to take note of reports of
the Secretary-General, is doing so consistent with
General Assembly decision 55/488 of 7 September 2001.
The President: We have heard the only speaker
in explanation of position.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (b)
of agenda item 91?
It was so decided.
(c) Specific actions related to the particular needs
and problems of landlocked developing
countries
(f) Outcome of the International Ministerial
Conference on Landlocked and Transit
Developing Countries and Donor Countries and
International Financial and Development
Institutions on Transit Transport Cooperation
Report of the Second Committee
(A/58/481/Add.3)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Second Committee in paragraph 8 of its report and on
the draft decision recommended by the Committee in
paragraph 9 of the same report.
The draft resolution, entitled “Almaty Programme
of Action: Addressing the Special Needs of
Landlocked Developing Countries within a New Global
Framework for Transit Transport Cooperation for
Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries”, was
adopted by the Second Committee. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/201).
The President: The draft decision is entitled
“Report on the transit environment in the landlocked
States in Central Asia and their transit developing
neighbours”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt the
draft decision recommended by the Second Committee?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 58/547).

5

A/58/PV.78

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-items (c) and (f) of agenda item 91?
It was so decided.
(d) International financial system and development
Report of the Second Committee
(A/58/481/Add.4)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Second Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.
The Second Committee adopted the draft resolution.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/202).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item
(d) of agenda item 91?
It was so decided.
(e) External debt crisis and development
Report of the Second Committee
(A/58/481/Add.5)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Second Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.

The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Second Committee in paragraph 8 of its report.
The Second Committee adopted the draft
resolution. May I take it that the General Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/204).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (g) of agenda item 91 and of agenda item 91
as a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 92
Sectoral policy questions: preventing and combating
corrupt practices and transfer of funds of illicit origin
and returning such assets to the countries of origin
Report of the Second Committee (A/58/482)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Second Committee in paragraph 9 of its report.
The draft resolution, entitled “Preventing and
combating corrupt practices and transfer of assets of
illicit origin and returning such assets to the countries
of origin”, was adopted by the Second Committee. May I
take it that the General Assembly wishes to do the same?

The Second Committee adopted the draft
resolution. May I take it that the General Assembly
wishes to do the same?

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/205).

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/203).

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 92?

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (e) of agenda item 91?

It was so decided.
Agenda item 93

It was so decided.
(g) Commodities
Report of the Second Committee
(A/58/481/Add.6)

6

Sustainable development and international economic
cooperation
Report of the Second Committee (A/58/483)
The President: May I take it that the General
Assembly wishes to take note of the report of the
Second Committee?

A/58/PV.78

It was so decided (decision 58/548).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item 93.
(a) Women in development
Report of the Second Committee
(A/58/483/Add.1 and Corr.1)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Second Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.
The Second Committee adopted the draft
resolution. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/206).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 93?
It was so decided.
(b) Human resources development
Report of the Second Committee
(A/58/483/Add.2)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Second Committee in paragraph 8 of its report.
The Second Committee adopted the draft resolution.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/207).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 93?
It was so decided.
(c) International migration and development
Report of the Second Committee
(A/58/483/Add.3)
The President: The Assembly will take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Second Committee in paragraph 8 of its report.

The Second Committee adopted the draft resolution.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/208).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (c) of agenda item 93?
It was so decided.
(d) Implementation of the Declaration on
International Economic Cooperation, in
particular the Revitalization of Economic
Growth and Development of the Developing
Countries, and implementation of the
International Development Strategy for the
Fourth United Nations Development Decade
Report of the Second Committee
(A/58/483/Add.4)
The President: The Assembly will take a
decision on the draft decision recommended by the
Second Committee in paragraph 4 of its report.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
adopt the draft decision entitled “Report of the
Secretary-General on progress towards and challenges
and constraints to the achievement of the major
development goals and objectives adopted by the
United Nations during the past decade”, recommended
by the Second Committee?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 58/549).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item
(d) of agenda item 93 and of agenda item 93 as a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 94
Environment and sustainable development
Report of the Second Committee (A/58/484 and
A/58/484/Add.8)
The President: May I take it that the General
Assembly wishes to take note of the report of the
Second Committee contained in document A/58/484?
It was so decided (decision 58/550).

7

A/58/PV.78

The President: The Assembly will now turn to
the draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 6 of its report contained in
document A/58/484/Add.8.

budget implications by the Fifth Committee. The
Assembly will take action on draft resolution I as soon
as the report of the Fifth Committee on its programme
budget implications is available.

The draft resolution, entitled “Report of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme on its twenty-second session”, was adopted
by the Second Committee. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?

The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution II recommended by the Second Committee
in paragraph 14 of its report.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/209).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
94.
(a) Promotion of new and renewable sources of
energy, including the implementation of the
World Solar Programme 1996-2005
Report of the Second Committee
(A/58/484/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Second Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.
The Second Committee adopted the draft
resolution. May I take it that the General Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/210).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 94?
It was so decided.
(b) Implementation of the United Nations
Convention to Combat Desertification in Those
Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or
Desertification, Particularly in Africa
Report of the Second Committee
(A/58/484/Add.2)
The President: Before proceeding further, I
should like to inform members that action on draft
resolution I will be postponed until the next meeting of
the Assembly, scheduled to take place today at 6.30
p.m., so as to allow time for the review of its programme

8

Draft resolution II, entitled “International Year of
Deserts and Desertification, 2006”, was adopted by the
Second Committee. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
58/211).
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of the United States, who wishes to speak in explanation
of position on the resolution just adopted.
Mrs. Tamlyn (United States of America): The
United States is disappointed by the continued
diversion of resources from the United Nations regular
budget to subsidize an independent and self-sustaining
treaty body, such as the United Nations Convention to
Combat Desertification. As a matter of principle, treaty
bodies can and should collect the necessary funds from
their membership to finance their activities.
The President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item
(b) of agenda item 94.
(c) Convention on Biological Diversity
Report of the Second Committee
(A/58/484/Add.3)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Second Committee in paragraph 8 of its report.
The Second Committee adopted the draft
resolution. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/212).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (c) of agenda item 94?
It was so decided.

A/58/PV.78

(d) Further implementation of the Programme of
Action for the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States
Report of the Second Committee
(A/58/484/Add.4)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Second Committee in paragraph 8 of its report.
The Second Committee adopted the draft resolution.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/213).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (d) of agenda item 94?
It was so decided.
(e) International Strategy for Disaster Reduction
Report of the Second Committee
(A/58/484/Add.5)
The President: The Assembly will take a
decision on the two draft resolutions recommended by
the Second Committee in paragraph 15 of its report.
Draft resolution I, entitled “International Strategy
for Disaster Reduction”, was adopted by the Second
Committee. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 58/214).
The President: Draft resolution II, entitled
“Natural disasters and vulnerability”, was adopted by
the Second Committee. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 58/215).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (e)
of agenda item 94.
(f) Protection of global climate for present and
future generations of mankind
Report of the Second Committee
(A/58/484/Add.6)

The President: I should like to inform members
that action on the draft resolution contained in the
report will be postponed until to the next meeting of
the Assembly, scheduled to take place today at 6.30
p.m., to allow time for the review of its programme
budget implications by the Fifth Committee. The
Assembly will take action on the draft resolution as
soon as the report of the Fifth Committee on its
programme budget implications is available.
(g) Sustainable mountain development
Report of the Second Committee
(A/58/484/Add.7)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Second Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.
The draft resolution, entitled “Sustainable
development and mountain regions”, was adopted by
the Second Committee. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/216).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (g) of agenda item 94?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 95
Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for
the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the
outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable
Development
Report of the Second Committee (A/58/485)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the two draft resolutions recommended by
the Second Committee in paragraph 14 of that report.
Draft resolution I, entitled “International Decade
for Action”, ‘Water for Life’, 2005-2015”, was adopted
by the Second Committee. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 58/217).
The President: Draft resolution II, entitled
“Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the

9

A/58/PV.78

Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the
outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable
Development”, was adopted by the Second Committee.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 58/218).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 95?
It was so decided.

May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
the draft decision entitled “Report of the Administrator
of the United Nations Development Programme on the
activities of the United Nations Development Fund for
Women”, recommended by the Second Committee?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 58/551).
The President: May I take it that the General
Assembly wishes to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 97?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 96
Agenda item 98
United Nations Decade for Education for Sustainable
Development

Implementation of the first United Nations Decade
for the Eradication of Poverty (1997-2006)

Report of the Second Committee (A/58/486)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Second Committee in paragraph 10 of its report.
The Second Committee adopted the draft resolution.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/219).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item 96?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 97
Operational activities for development

Report of the Second Committee (A/58/488)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the two draft resolutions recommended by
the Second Committee in paragraph 16 of its report.
Draft resolution I, entitled “Programme of Action
for the International Year of Microcredit, 2005”, was
adopted by the Second Committee. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 58/221).
The President: Draft resolution II, entitled
“Implementation of the first United Nations Decade for
the Eradication of Poverty (1997-2006)”, was adopted
by the Second Committee. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 58/222).

Report of the Second Committee (A/58/487)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Second Committee in paragraph 13 of its report and on
the draft decision recommended by the Committee in
paragraph 14 of the same report.
The draft resolution, entitled “Economic and
technical cooperation among developing countries”,
was adopted by the Second Committee. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/220).
The President: We turn now to the draft decision.

10

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 98?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 99
Training and research
Report of the Second Committee (A/58/489)
The President: I now call on the representative
of Spain, who wishes to speak in explanation of vote
before the voting.

A/58/PV.78

Mr. Colomina (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Spain
endorses the content of the draft resolution on the
United Nations Institute for Training and Research.
However, we would like to clarify our position on
operative paragraph 4 of the draft, which relates to the
need to continue developing and expanding
partnerships between the Institute and other bodies of
the United Nations system with respect to their training
programmes, in particular at the country level.
Spain would like to place on record the fact that it
interprets this operative paragraph as referring solely to
the establishment of partnerships between the Institute
and other organizations and bodies of the United Nations
system, and definitely not to possible partnerships
between UNITAR and territorial, non-State entities.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the two draft resolutions recommended by
the Second Committee in paragraph 16 of its report.
Draft resolution I, entitled “United Nations
Institute for Training and Research”, was adopted by
the Second Committee and was orally corrected by the
Rapporteur. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
adopt this resolution?
Draft resolution I, as orally corrected, was
adopted (resolution 58/223).
The President: Draft resolution II, entitled
“United Nations System Staff College in Turin, Italy”,
was adopted by the Second Committee. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 58/224).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item 99?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 100
Globalization and interdependence
Report of the Second Committee (A/58/490)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Second Committee in paragraph 12 of its report.
The draft resolution, entitled “Role of the United
Nations in promoting development in the context of
globalization and interdependence”, was adopted by

the Second Committee. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/225).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 100?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 101
Implementation of the outcome of the United Nations
Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) and of
the twenty-fifth special session of the General Assembly
Report of the Second Committee (A/58/491)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the two draft resolutions recommended by
the Second Committee in paragraph 15 of its report.
Draft resolution I, entitled “Implementation of the
outcome of the United Nations Conference on Human
Settlements (Habitat II) and the strengthening of the
United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UNHabitat)”, was adopted by the Second Committee. May
I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 58/226).
The President: Draft resolution II, entitled
“Rules of procedure of the Governing Council of the
United Nations Human Settlements Programme”, was
adopted by the Second Committee. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 58/227).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 101?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 102
Third United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries
Report of the Second Committee (A/58/492)

11

A/58/PV.78

The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Second Committee in paragraph 12 of its report.
The Second Committee adopted the draft resolution.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/228).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 102?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 103

Moreover, the draft resolution will contribute
nothing to the achievement of a lasting peace
agreement between Israelis and Palestinians, as it
prejudges issues that the sides had agreed would be
addressed through direct bilateral negotiations, thus
undermining the bilateral spirit of the peace process.
As in past years, Israel will vote against this
biased and counterproductive draft resolution. We urge
other delegations to do the same.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Second Committee in paragraph 9 of its report.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

Permanent sovereignty of the Palestinian people in
the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East
Jerusalem, and of the Arab population in the
occupied Syrian Golan over their natural resources
Report of the Second Committee (A/58/493)
The President: I now call on the representative
of Israel, who wishes to speak in explanation of vote
before the voting.
Mr. Sermoneta (Israel): My delegation deeply
regrets that the substantive debate in the Second
Committee this year was once again used as a platform
from which to level accusations against Israel and to
adopt a draft resolution which is completely one-sided,
inaccurate and, ultimately, counterproductive.
The draft resolution before us has nothing to do
with the issues addressed by the Second Committee,
and it shifts the focus of our work from those activities
identified by Member States as priorities. Its adoption
will only invite the further politicization of the work of
the Second Committee by the Palestinians, as well as
by others, and will further distract us from the
important work on our agenda.
As we sought this year to strengthen the
Organization by aligning the work of the Second
Committee with the priorities outlined in the outcomes
of the major international conferences, it appears that
this politically motivated item, whose impact is
dubious, might have been an appropriate place from
which to start the process of rationalizing and
harmonizing our work.

12

In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Cape
Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominica, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Serbia and Montenegro, Seychelles, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,

A/58/PV.78

Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), United States of America
Abstaining:
Australia, Cameroon, Costa Rica, Dominican
Republic, Honduras, Nauru, Nicaragua, Papua
New Guinea, Solomon Islands, Tonga
The draft resolution was adopted by 157 votes to
4, with 10 abstentions (resolution 58/229).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 103?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 104

The draft resolution, entitled “Follow-up to and
implementation of the outcome of the International
Conference on Financing for Development”, was
adopted by the Second Committee. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to adopt the draft resolution, as
orally corrected?
The draft resolution, as orally corrected, was
adopted (resolution 58/230).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 104?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 12 (continued)
Report of the Economic and Social Council
Report of the Second Committee (A/58/495)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the two draft resolutions recommended by
the Second Committee in paragraph 17 of its report and
on the two draft decisions recommended by the
Committee in paragraph 18 of the same report.
Draft resolution I, entitled “Public administration
and development”, was adopted by the Second
Committee. May I take it that the General Assembly
wishes to do likewise?

Follow-up to the International Conference on
Financing for Development
Report of the Second Committee (A/58/494)
the

Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 58/231).

Mr. Raubenheimer (South Africa): I apologize,
Mr. President, for interrupting your work, which has
been running so smoothly.

The President: Draft resolution II, entitled
“Agreement between the United Nations and the World
Tourism Organization”, was adopted by the Second
Committee. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?

The President: I give the floor to
representative of South Africa on a point of order.

We need to make a slight correction to operative
paragraph 17 of the draft resolution recommended for
adoption in paragraph 15 of the report. In the title of
the proposed agenda item, the words “the
implementation” should be replaced with “and
implementation”, and the words “outcome of the”
should be added, so that it reads “Follow-up to and
implementation of the outcome of the International
Conference on Financing for Development”.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Second Committee in paragraph 15 of its report.

Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 58/232).
The President: Draft decision I is entitled
“Documents relating to the report of the Economic and
Social Council”.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
adopt draft decision I, recommended by the Second
Committee?
Draft decision I was adopted (decision 58/552).
The President: Draft decision II is entitled
“Provisional programme of work of the Second
Committee for 2004”.

13

A/58/PV.78

A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gabon, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Ireland,
Italy,
Jamaica,
Japan,
Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Serbia and
Montenegro, Seychelles, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe

14

Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, United States of America
Draft decision II was adopted by 167 votes to 3
(decision 58/553).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Kuwait informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
[In the 79th plenary meeting the Rapporteur of
the Second Committee drew attention to the text
of a draft decision, distributed at that meeting and
subsequently issued as A/58/495/Corr.1, that was
meant to be included in A/48/495 as draft
decision II. Thus the draft text adopted as
decision 58/553 has been renumbered draft
decision III.]
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
12.
Agenda item 39 (continued)
New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress
in implementation and international support
(a) New Partnership for Africa’s Development:
progress in implementation and international
support
Draft resolution (A/58/L.17/Rev.1)
(b) Causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa
Draft resolutions (A/58/L.55 and A/58/L.56)
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly held the debate on this agenda item
from the 32nd to 35th plenary meetings, on 15 and 16
October 2003.
I give the floor to the representative of South
Africa to introduce draft resolutions A/58/L.17/Rev.1
and A/58/L.56.
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): I have the honour to
present draft resolution A/58/L.17/Rev.1, under subitem (a) of agenda item 39 of the General Assembly,
entitled “New Partnership for Africa’s Development:
progress in implementation and international support”.
The draft resolution is based on the general debate in

A/58/PV.78

the fifty-eighth session of the General Assembly,
including the proposal made therein on the report of
the Secretary-General, entitled “The New Partnership
for Africa’s Development: first consolidated report on
progress in implementation and international support”
(A/58/254). The negotiations were smooth, and there
was consensus on the content of various parts of the
draft resolution. The New Partnership for Africa’s
Development (NEPAD) is an important framework for
achieving accelerated growth and economic and
sustainable development in Africa. NEPAD recognizes
that peace and security and good governance, including,
among other things, the rule of law, transparency and
respect for human rights, are important to attaining
sustained growth and sustainable development.
In its resolution 57/7 of 4 November 2002, the
General Assembly adopted NEPAD as the framework
within which the international community, including
the United Nations, should focus its efforts for Africa’s
development. The Group of Eight (G-8) countries have
also made NEPAD the framework for their support to
Africa. The principles of ownership and partnership of
the Third Tokyo International Conference on African
Development will also support the implementation of
NEPAD.
While recognizing that progress has been made in
the implementation of the objectives and priorities of
NEPAD, the draft resolution calls upon Member States
and the international community, including the United
Nations, to announce their support in moving forward
with the implementation of NEPAD.
This draft resolution welcomes the efforts of
African countries in the management and resolution of
conflicts in the region, as well as the progress made in
the African Peer Review Mechanism, particularly with
regard to the accession of a number of States members
of the African Union and the appointment of the panel
of eminent persons for the African Peer Review
Mechanism.
The draft resolution further recognizes the efforts
made by African countries in raising awareness of
NEPAD and involving all stakeholders, namely,
Governments, the private sector and civil society,
including women’s organizations, in the implementation
of NEPAD. It also heralds the decision of the African
Union’s Executive Council to integrate NEPAD into
the African Union structures and processes.

The issue of adequate external financial resources
for the implementation of NEPAD is a critical one. In
this regard, the draft resolution welcomes the pledges
made by the development partners for increased
official development assistance, including to the
untying of such assistance. The draft resolution stresses
the need to find a durable solution to Africa’s external
debt problem, especially for heavily indebted poor
countries in Africa.
Equally important is the issue of increased market
access through trade and the need for developed
countries and their partners to support the promotion of
private investment, particularly in the key sectors of
African economies. The draft resolution further
recognizes the need to take concrete steps to implement
the existing frameworks for South-South cooperation,
including through triangular cooperation in the
implementation of NEPAD.
The draft resolution notes with satisfaction the
growing collaboration among the entities of the United
Nations system and encourages them to continue such
efforts to support the implementation of NEPAD. It
also welcomes the creation of the Office of the Special
Adviser on Africa.
The draft resolution further requests the
Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report to
the fifty-ninth session of the General Assembly on the
implementation of NEPAD based on the inputs from
various stakeholders.
I wish to express the African Group’s appreciation
to all members of the Group of 77 and China for their
strong support during the negotiation process. We also
thank them for sponsoring this draft resolution,
together with a number of other countries. Among
those who have joined us in sponsorship are the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Spain and Sweden.
Before presenting this draft resolution for adoption,
there is a slight correction I would like to make in the
second last line of the sixth preambular paragraph. As
it now appears, it is the “African Partnership Forum”.
In fact, it should read “Africa Partnership Forum”.
I wish to present, through you, Mr. President, this
draft resolution for adoption by the General Assembly.
I am now pleased to introduce the draft resolution
contained in document A/58/L.56. This draft appears
under agenda item 39 (b) and is entitled

15

A/58/PV.78

“Implementation of the recommendations contained in
the report of the Secretary-General on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa”.

United Nations system should support efforts in
conflict prevention and post-conflict development
through enhanced coordination, coherence and
sustained financial and political support.

The draft resolution is based on the general debate
in the fifty-eighth session of the General Assembly,
including the proposals made therein on the report of the
Secretary-General entitled “Implementation of the
recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa” (A/58/352).

The draft resolution recognizes that poverty
eradication is a critical challenge to achieving
sustained economic growth and development. The draft
resolution calls upon Member States to provide
adequate support to eradicate poverty and to strengthen
institutions to maintain the rule of law, transparency
and accountable public administration.

The Secretary-General’s report underscores the
nexus between peace and development. NEPAD also
recognizes peace and security as an important
precondition
for
Africa’s
development.
The
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General’s
1998 report on the causes of conflict and the promotion
of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa
(A/52/871) are as pertinent and relevant to the African
situation today as they were when the report was
submitted in 1998 to the Security Council and
subsequently to the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council. As such, the draft
resolution reaffirms that the implementation of the
recommendations of the Secretary-General’s report
must remain a priority on the agenda of the United
Nations and Member States, and that the General
Assembly must continue to play the primary role in
monitoring progress in the implementation of the
recommendations.
The draft resolution reaffirms that the
responsibility for peace and security lies primarily with
African countries as well as with regional and
subregional organizations, and welcomes the efforts of
African countries towards establishing a peace and
security council of the African Union, while it
encourages African Union member States that have not
yet ratified the protocol to do so. It welcomes the
decision of the European Union to establish a peace
facility to support the establishment of the African
Peace and Security Mechanism to support African
efforts and peace initiatives. It also welcomes the
establishment of the Security Council’s Ad Hoc
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution
in Africa and the Economic and Social Council’s Ad
Hoc Advisory Group on African countries emerging
from conflict, such as Guinea-Bissau and Burundi. In
addition, it underscores that Member States and the

16

The draft resolution notes with concern that
progress in the implementation of the recommendations
of the Secretary-General’s report remains slow and
uneven, and it notes the need to continue to monitor the
implementation of the recommendations. In that regard,
it welcomes the designation of the Office of the Special
Adviser on Africa to continue to monitor — through
the already-established interdepartmental task force on
African affairs — progress in the implementation of the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General’s
report. It further requests the Secretary-General to
report on the progress made in the implementation of
the resolution to the fifty-ninth session of the General
Assembly.
In submitting this draft resolution for
consideration by the General Assembly, I wish to
express the appreciation of the African Group to all
members of the Group of 77 and China for their
support during the negotiation process. We also wish to
thank them, together with a number of other countries,
for sponsoring the draft resolution. Among those that
have joined the list of sponsors recently are Austria,
Denmark, Germany, Greece, Luxembourg, Mozambique,
Netherlands, Rwanda, Singapore and Sweden.
This draft resolution is being presented for
adoption by the General Assembly.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mozambique to introduce draft
resolution A/58/L.55.
Mr. Chidumo (Mozambique): On behalf of the
African Union, I have the honour to introduce the draft
resolution contained in document A/58/L.55, entitled
“International Day of Reflection on the 1994 Genocide in
Rwanda”. I am pleased to announce that the following
countries have joined the list of sponsors: Ethiopia,

A/58/PV.78

Germany, Greece, Mauritius, the Republic of Korea,
Somalia, Sweden, Uganda and the United Kingdom.
From April to July 1994, we witnessed in
Rwanda one of the most despicable acts of genocide in
the history of mankind when up to 1 million people
were brutally murdered in a tragedy in which
Rwandans, Africans and, ultimately, humanity at large
were the victims. The genocide in Rwanda remains a
vivid memory of the cruelty that Rwandans have
endured, and it requires us to reflect on the matter with
a view to preventing it from ever happening again.
Within the framework of preventing and dealing
with the wounds of genocide, the Executive Council of
the African Union decided, at its second ordinary
session, held in 2002 in Ndjamena, to recommend the
proclamation of an International Day of Reflection on
the 1994Genocide in Rwanda and recommitment to the
fight against genocide throughout the world. That
recommendation was subsequently endorsed by the
second ordinary session of the Assembly of Heads of
State and Government of the African Union, held in
Maputo in July 2003. It was therefore on instruction
from the heads of State and Government of the African
Union that we tabled this draft resolution, which, if
adopted, would mainly decide to designate 7 April 2004
as the International Day of Reflection on the Genocide
in Rwanda and seek the solidarity and commitment of
the international community at large in observing that
day through relevant commemorative activities.
The International Day of Reflection on the 1994
Genocide in Rwanda would enable us to honour the
memory of those innocent men, women, children and
elderly persons who died at the hands of extremist
killers in Rwanda. The International Day of Reflection
would also enable us to recommit ourselves to ensuring
that genocide never happens again anywhere on our
planet. As the international community, we must ensure
that our “never again” really means “never again”. To
that end, the draft resolution calls on all States to
ensure that there is no repetition of the kind of event
that occurred in Rwanda.
It is the wish of the sponsors that this draft
resolution be adopted by consensus. In that regard, I
call upon all Member States to show their solidarity by
adopting the draft resolution by consensus.
The President: Before we proceed further, I
should like to consult the Assembly with a view to
proceeding immediately to consider the draft

resolutions contained in documents A/58/L.17/Rev.1,
A/58/L.55 and A/58/L.56. In that connection, since the
draft resolutions were circulated only today, it would
be necessary to waive the relevant provision of rule 78
of the rules of procedure, which reads as follows:
“As a general rule, no proposal shall be discussed
or put to the vote at any meeting of the General
Assembly unless copies of it have been circulated
to all delegations not later than the day preceding
the meeting.”
Unless I hear any objection, I shall take it that the
Assembly agrees with this proposal.
It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly will
proceed to consider draft resolutions A/58/L.17/Rev.1,
A/58/L.55 and A/58/L.56.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Ms. Kelley (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to inform
representatives that, under the terms of operative
paragraphs 33 and 34 of draft resolution
A/58/L.17/Rev.1, the General Assembly would
welcome the creation of the Office of the Special
Adviser on Africa, would request the SecretaryGeneral to take measures to strengthen the Office to
enable it to effectively fulfil its mandate, and would
request the Secretary-General to submit a report on the
implementation of the resolution to the fifty-ninth
session of the General Assembly.
By its resolution 57/300 of 20 December 2002,
the General Assembly approved the transfer of the
resources allocated to the Office of the Special
Coordinator for Africa and the Least Developed
Countries and those from the Office of the Adviser for
Special Assignments in Africa, to the new Office of the
Under-Secretary-General and Special Adviser on Africa,
and requested the Secretary-General to ensure that the
new Office is reflected in the proposed programme
budget for the biennium 2004-2005 with the allocation
of adequate resources for its expanded mandate. The
Assembly also entrusted that Office with responsibility
for, inter alia, coordinating and guiding the preparation
of Africa-related reports and inputs, in particular support
for the New Partnership for Africa’s Development, and
for coordinating the interdepartmental task force on

17

A/58/PV.78

African affairs to ensure the coherence of and an
integrated approach to United Nations support for Africa.
Provisions for these activities have already been
included in section 11 of the proposed programme
budget for the biennium 2004-2005, United Nations
support for the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development. Hence, no additional appropriations
would be required as a result of the draft resolution.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/58/L.17/Rev.1, entitled
“New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress
in implementation and international support”.
Before proceeding to take action on the draft
resolution, I should like to announce that, since its
introduction, Ukraine has become a sponsor of draft
resolution A/58/L.17/Rev.1.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/58/L.17/Rev.1, as orally corrected?
Draft resolution A/58/L.17/Rev.1, as orally
corrected, was adopted (resolution 58/233).
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/58/L.55, entitled
“International Day of Reflection on the 1994 Genocide
in Rwanda”.
Before proceeding to take action on the draft
resolution, I should like to announce that, since its
introduction, the following countries have become
sponsors of draft resolution A/58/L.55: the Russian
Federation and France.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to adopt draft resolution A/58/L.55?
Draft resolution A/58/L.55
(resolution 58/234).

was

adopted

The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/58/L.56, entitled
“Implementation of the recommendations contained in
the report of the Secretary-General on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa”.
Before proceeding to take action on the draft
resolution, I should like to announce that, since its
introduction, Italy has become a sponsor of draft
resolution A/58/L.56.

May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to adopt draft resolution A/58/L.56?
Draft resolution A/58/L.56
(resolution 58/235).

adopted

The President: I call on the representative of
Canada, who wishes to speak in explanation of position
on resolution 58/234.
May I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes, and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Ms. Price (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada
was a sponsor of draft resolution A/58/L.55 on the
establishment of an International Day of Reflection on
the 1994 Genocide in Rwanda, and we supported its
adoption.
(spoke in English)
Over the past decade, we have continued to
witness events which make a mockery of declarations of
“never again”. Appropriately commemorating the horrific
events of April 1994 is essential to understanding not just
our past failures, but also our future responsibilities. For
the United Nations to remain relevant, we must not avert
our eyes from such atrocities because some Members
insist on a narrow interpretation of sovereignty — one
that implies only privileges, not responsibilities. We
should acknowledge that States have a fundamental
responsibility to protect their people, and that there is a
related responsibility of the international community to
take action to prevent or halt genocide or other atrocities
when the State in question is unable or unwilling to do
so, as was so tragically the case in Rwanda.
(spoke in French)
We must deal with this crucial issue in the
context of discussions on the reform of the United
Nations, as the Secretary-General has emphasized. In
recognizing its errors of the past, the international
community must strengthen its resolve to respond more
effectively in future for the benefit of the peoples of
the world — those for whom the Charter was written.
The President: We have heard the only speaker
in explanation of position.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item
39?
It was so decided.

18

was

A/58/PV.78

Agenda item 47

noted that HIV/AIDS has cut life expectancy by as much
as 20 years for millions of people in sub-Saharan Africa.

Follow-up to the outcome of the twenty-sixth special
session: implementation of the Declaration of
Commitment on HIV/AIDS

At his press conference on 18 December 2003,
the Secretary-General described combating HIV/AIDS
as one of the Organization’s top priorities for the
coming year. He noted that the epidemic was killing
8,000 people a day. He rightly pointed out that, for the
countries worst afflicted by HIV/AIDS — like South
Africa, Zimbabwe and Zambia — the AIDS epidemic
is a “real weapon of mass destruction”.

Draft resolution (A/58/L.54)
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/58/L.54.
I call on the representative of Singapore, who
wishes to speak in explanation of position before action is
taken on the draft resolution.
May I remind delegations that explanations of
position are limited to 10 minutes, and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): In the interests of
saving time, I will not read out the full text of my
explanation of position, as I believe the text will be
circulated shortly.
At the outset, I would like to express my
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for putting forward
this important draft resolution, entitled “Follow-up to
the outcome of the twenty-sixth special session:
implementation of the Declaration of Commitment on
HIV/AIDS”. I would also like to commend my good
friend Mr. Denis Dangue Réwaka, the Permanent
Representative of Gabon, and his colleagues, for having
held successful consultations on behalf of the Office of
the President. We believe that the adoption by the
General Assembly of the draft resolution before us today
will help to keep the international community focused on
combating the scourge of the HIV/AIDS epidemic.
Singapore has requested this opportunity to state its
full support for the global effort to combat HIV/AIDS.
The HIV/AIDS pandemic has grown into a global
crisis of staggering proportions. The latest statistics on
the disease make for sobering reading. According to
the joint report by the Joint United Nations Programme
on HIV/AIDS and the World Health Organization,
AIDS Epidemic Update 2003, an estimated 40 million
people were living with HIV/AIDS in 2003.
Sub-Saharan Africa has been by far the worst
affected by the HIV/AIDS epidemic. Southern Africa
alone accounts for about 30 per cent of people living
with HIV/AIDS worldwide — yet this region has less
than 2 per cent of the world’s population. In its World
Health Report 2003, the World Health Organization

Amid the gloom of the current HIV/AIDS crisis,
the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and
Malaria stands out as a beacon of hope in combating
the epidemic. As a partnership among Governments,
civil society, the private sector and affected
communities, the Global Fund represents an innovative
approach to international health financing. Global Fund
grants will support a major scaling-up of HIV
treatment. Over the next five years, more than 500,000
people will begin to receive antiretroviral treatment,
representing a near tripling of coverage in poor
countries, including more than a sixfold increase in
Africa. In line with the Secretary-General’s recent call
for the Global Fund to be fully funded, I am pleased to
announce that Singapore will be contributing $1
million over five years to the Fund, beginning in 2004.
As part of a region where the epidemic is rapidly
growing, Singapore also faces the challenge of
combating HIV/AIDS. Hence, we have made
prevention of the disease a key priority. We have
adopted a comprehensive, multisectoral national AIDS
control programme. At the regional and international
levels, Singapore cooperates actively with the
Association of South-East Asian Nations to control the
spread of HIV/AIDS in South-East Asia. And, at the
international level, Singapore cooperates with the
World Health Organization and the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS).
The HIV/AIDS pandemic is a serious global
problem and poses one of the greatest challenges to
mankind. It is only right that the international
community continue to pay serious attention and to
redouble its efforts to address this mounting global
crisis. That is why we are very pleased to support the
draft resolution before us for consideration.
The President: We have heard the only speaker
in explanation of position before action is taken on the
draft resolution.

19

A/58/PV.78

The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/58/L.54, entitled “Follow-up to the
outcome of the twenty-sixth special session:
implementation of the Declaration of Commitment on
HIV/AIDS”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/58/L.54?
Draft resolution A/58/L.54
(resolution 58/236).

was

adopted

The President: I call on the representative of
Brazil, who wishes to speak in explanation of position
on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Meyer (Brazil): Brazil wishes to offer an
explanation of position following the adoption of the
resolution contained in document A/58/L.54, on the
follow-up to the outcome of the twenty-sixth special
session.
We attach high priority to the implementation of
the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS, and we
welcome the adoption of this resolution by consensus.
There is no doubt that HIV/AIDS represents one of the
greatest challenges of our time. We must send a strong
signal on the urgent need for strengthening and
accelerating the global response to the pandemic.
As made clear by my delegation throughout the
negotiating process, we remain concerned that the
ninth preambular paragraph contains the expression
“emphasis on prevention measures” and that operative
paragraph 5 (d) (i) refers to the statement “prevention
is the mainstay of the national, regional and
international response”. For there to be any real hope
of success in the global fight against HIV/AIDS, we
must acknowledge that prevention, care, support and
treatment are mutually reinforcing elements of an
effective response. They must be integrated into a
comprehensive approach to combat the epidemic. The
provision contained in the eighth preambular paragraph
must be our guiding principle.
“Prevention” refers to measures aimed at
protecting non-infected persons from contracting HIV.
Nevertheless, people infected with HIV/AIDS need
care, support and treatment. We cannot abandon the 42
million people worldwide living with HIV/AIDS. We
must therefore address prevention and treatment on the
same footing and with the same emphasis. And we say
that on the basis of our concrete accomplishments.

20

Brazil’s positive experience related to the effects
of free and universal access to medication, including
antiretroviral therapy, is widely acknowledged. Since
1996, we have seen AIDS-related mortality slashed by
50 per cent. Hospital admissions have dropped 75 per
cent. Opportunistic illnesses have been drastically
reduced. The positive consequences of this costeffective policy are far-reaching. The number of people
living with HIV/AIDS today in Brazil — 1 million —
is half of what the World Bank foresaw a decade ago
for the year 2003. The successful results that Brazil has
achieved in its fight against HIV/AIDS are the outcome
of a strong approach to both prevention and treatment
as well as human rights advocacy.
The global response to HIV/AIDS must be
commensurate with the scale of the pandemic. It is a
tragedy that, in addition to the 42 million people
worldwide living with HIV/AIDS, the pandemic claimed
more than 3 million lives in 2003 and has orphaned 14
million children. It must also be noted with profound
concern that an estimated 5.5 million people in lowand middle-income countries are considered in need of
antiretroviral therapy, but that only an estimated
300,000 are receiving those medicines.
Hence, the emergency to which operative
paragraph 3 refers means the global health emergency:
the failure to deliver antiretroviral therapy for
HIV/AIDS to the millions of people who need it, as
defined by UNAIDS and the World Health
Organization. It is a notion contained in the resolution
entitled “Access to medication in the context of
pandemics such as HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and
malaria”, adopted yesterday by the General Assembly.
In the eleventh preambular paragraph, we are
reaffirming the importance of the elimination of all forms
of discrimination against people living with or at risk of
HIV/AIDS, including those most vulnerable. And we
must be reminded that no grounds for discrimination —
including sexual orientation — to prevent the full
enjoyment of human rights are legitimate.
In operative paragraph 6, we welcome with
appreciation the Doha Declaration on the Agreement
on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property
Rights and Public Health and the World Trade
Organization’s decision of 30 August on a mechanism
to give developing countries that cannot produce cheap
generic drugs the right to import them from other
countries that can. It is imperative to work to

A/58/PV.78

implement that agreement to provide for better access
to low-cost and effective drugs and related
pharmaceutical products. And it is equally imperative
that the international community support developing
countries in achieving the “3 by 5” target, as mentioned
in operative paragraph 7.
Mr. President, my delegation wishes to express its
appreciation to your Office and to Ambassador Denis
Dangue Réwaka, Permanent Representative of Gabon,
the facilitator of the informal consultations, for his
dedication in helping Member States to reach
consensus on this resolution. We also request that this
statement be made part of the official record.
The President: We have heard the only speaker
in explanation of vote.
On behalf of the General Assembly, I should like
to take this opportunity to thank Ambassador Dangue
Réwaka of Gabon for having so ably conducted the
negotiations on the resolution just adopted.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 47.
Agenda item 51
2001-2010: Decade to Roll Back Malaria in
Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa
Draft resolution (A/58/L.53)
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly held a debate on this agenda item at
its 41st plenary meeting, on 22 October 2003. In this
connection, the Assembly has before it a draft
resolution, issued as document A/58/L.53. I give the
floor to the representative of South Africa to introduce
draft resolution A/58/L.53.
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): On behalf of all
countries concerned about malaria, I would like to
express my deep appreciation for all the delegations
who cooperated in ensuring smooth progress and a
positive outcome to the negotiations on the draft
resolution before the Assembly today under item 51.
As the Assembly knows, malaria is one of
Africa’s deadliest diseases. In fact, malaria remains the
single biggest cause of death worldwide, especially
among children. At least 1 million children die of malaria

each year, 90 per cent of them in sub-Saharan Africa. The
disease places an enormous burden on the healthcare
systems of poor countries, and, like HIV/AIDS, is a
major factor in slowing economic development.
I have the honour to introduce this draft
resolution on behalf of Cameroon, Djibouti, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, the Gambia, Japan, Madagascar,
Mali, Mauritius, Mozambique, Rwanda, South Africa,
the Sudan, Sweden, Togo and Uganda.
The draft resolution calls on the international
community to support ways of developing the
manufacturing capacity of insecticide-treated nets in
Africa and to facilitate the transfer of technology to
make those nets more effective and long-lasting. The
need for effective, prompt, affordable and quality
treatment is also of the utmost importance. We stress
those recommendations in particular because African
countries may not be able to meet the targets set at the
Abuja Summit or at the Millennium Summit if serious
efforts are not made to scale-up successful
programmes. That will require additional resources.
The draft resolution calls on the international
community to renew efforts to ensure that the fight
against malaria receives adequate funding to support
sound national plans to control malaria in endemic
countries, countries which are often found among the
poorest. It is clear that without making progress on
malaria the other critical Millennium Development
Goals will not be met in Africa by 2015.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/58/L.53. Before
proceeding to take action on the draft resolution, I
should like to announce that since the introduction of
the draft resolution, the following countries have
become sponsors of A/58/L.53: Ireland and Italy.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/58/L.53?
It was so decided (resolution 58/237).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 51?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 5.05 p.m.

21
