S/PV.9301

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9301st meeting

Monday, 10 April 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia/Mr. Polyanskiy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Mr. Olmedo
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Shino
Mr. Camilleri
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Hauri
Mr. Abushahab
Ms. Jacobs
Mr. Wood

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security
Risks stemming from violations of the agreements regulating the export of
weapons and military equipment
Letter dated 3 April 2023 from the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2023/243)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-09954 (E)
*2309954*

S/PV.9301

Threats to international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
The President: Before we start our meeting, I
would like to wish a happy Easter to all those colleagues
who celebrated in recent days.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President (spoke in Russian): I would like
to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of
the Council, to His Excellency Mr. Pedro Comissário
Afonso, Permanent Representative of Mozambique,
for his service as President of the Security Council
for the month of March. I am sure I speak for all
members of the Council in expressing our deep
appreciation to Ambassador Afonso and his team for
the great diplomatic skill with which they conducted
the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
Risks stemming from violations of the
agreements regulating the export of weapons
and military equipment
Letter dated 3 April 2023 from the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2023/243)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Belarus,
India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Lebanon,
Mexico, Pakistan, Poland and South Africa participate
in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Yury Ambrazevich, Deputy Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Belarus.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure, I invite Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu,
Under-Secretary-General and High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2023/243, which contains the text of a letter
dated 3 April 2023 from the Permanent Representative
2/26

10/04/2023

of the Russian Federation to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Nakamitsu.
Mrs. Nakamitsu: The illicit and unregulated trade
in, and the diversion of, weapons and their ammunition
has been a major concern for the international
community. Illicit and unregulated arms transfers
can instigate, fuel and prolong armed conflict, armed
violence, terrorism and crime. They can destabilize
entire regions, contribute to and enable human rights
abuses and lead to violations of arms embargoes.
To respond to the risks associated with illicit and
unregulated arms transfers, States have established a
number of international, regional and bilateral arms
control treaties, agreements and frameworks to prevent
and eradicate the illicit trade in, and diversion of,
conventional arms, to regulate the international arms
trade and to promote transparency in weapons transfers.
At the international level, that includes, for instance,
the Arms Trade Treaty — whose tenth anniversary we
just marked on 2 April — as well as the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects, the International Tracing Instrument
and the Firearms Protocol. Those instruments vary in
scope and membership, but they are all guided by the
overarching principle of preventing and combating the
illicit trade in arms. My Office shares that objective
and has been supporting States in the full and effective
implementation of those instruments. As such, Member
States are urged to comply with their international
obligations under the agreements to which they
are parties.
Regulating the international arms trade and
preventing the illicit trade in conventional weapons and
ammunition requires robust frameworks for the effective
control over the export, brokering, import, transit,
storage and retransfer of weapons and ammunition.
Emanating from any arms transfer is the inherent risk
of diversion of the equipment to unauthorized end
users. Measures to counter the potential diversion of
weapons and ammunition contribute to international
peace and security, particularly to conflict resolution
and prevention efforts.
In accordance with international norms, any
transfers of arms and ammunition should include
pre-transfer risk assessments and post-shipment
23-09954

10/04/2023

Threats to international peace and security

controls, such as on-site inspection and end-user
verifications. Preventing diversion also requires
cooperation and information exchange between
importing, transit and exporting States, appropriate
accounting practices and safeguarding of arms and
ammunition, as well as customs and border control
measures. Tracing weapons and ammunition is another
important measure to effectively address diversion.
That requires the marking of conventional weapons and
their ammunition and recordkeeping and protocols for
international cooperation need to be in place.
Transparency in armaments is yet another
confidence-building measure that can serve to reduce
tensions, ambiguities and misperceptions among
Member States. The United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms, which was established in 1992,
remains a key tool in that regard. I strongly encourage
all Member States to participate in that transparency
mechanism by reporting on exports and imports
of equipment that falls within the Register’s seven
categories of major conventional arms, as well as small
arms and light weapons and procurement through
national production. I also call on all States that have
not yet done so to join the Arms Trade Treaty.
Finally, I call on States to consider the differential
impact of the illicit trade in arms and ammunition on
women, men, girls and boys. Taking that into account,
we must guarantee the full, equal, meaningful and
effective participation of women in decision-making and
implementation processes related to conventional arms
control. Only then can we make a real contribution to
international and regional peace, security and stability,
reduce human suffering and promote transparency
and cooperation.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the Russian Federation.
Questions concerning control over the supply
of conventional arms and military equipment have
recently taken on particular relevance. Risks associated
with their uncontrolled spread and their falling into the
hands of criminals and terrorists by way of the black
market are growing exponentially. We consider today’s
debate a good opportunity to discuss with a wide range
of Member States the existing regional and international
agreements in this area, as well as the threats posed by
violations thereof.

S/PV.9301

The Russian Federation gives priority attention
to issues regarding control over supply of military
equipment. We are consistently strengthening our
relevant national legislation and are prepared to share
our own experience in that area. We support relevant
initiatives in Africa, Latin America and other regions
where people know at first-hand about the devastating
consequences of the illegal diversion of weapons. We
note the adoption by certain regional groupings of
specific commitments in this area, in particular the
European Union (EU) common position, which in 2008
established the basic rules for members of the EU on
control over the export of military technologies and
equipment. The latter was adopted in the framework
of section V of the 1992 Treaty on European Union and
was approved by a relevant decision of the European
Council. It is therefore mandatory for all EU member
States when it comes to their positions and actions.
The Russian Federation is also making an active
contribution to the work of existing United Nations
international mechanisms. In particular, we consider
the United Nations Register of Conventional Arms
as a universal tool for increasing transparency. We
regularly transfer relevant data to the Register, while
the importance of providing such information is
enshrined in Russian national legislation. We believe
that ensuring the universalization of the Register is
the main task in achieving its goals — that is to say,
increasing the number of countries that regularly
submit annual national reports on the export and import
of weapons.
We also pay special attention to the implementation
of the United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. We consistently
propose a number of specific measures that could
contribute to the practical implementation of joint
efforts to curb the illegal circulation of small arms and
light weapons, namely, putting in place a universal
ban on the transfer of all types of small arms and light
weapons to entities not authorized by the Governments
of recipient States; ensuring strict regulation and
direct control by States in the territory under their
jurisdiction over brokering activities related to the
export of weapons and setting a maximum limit on the
number of such brokers; introducing a strict ban on the
re-export or subsequent transfers of imported small
arms and light weapons without the written consent
of the State that originally exported them — that is,
making end-user certificates a required condition in

23-099543/26

S/PV.9301

Threats to international peace and security

10/04/2023

exporting weapons — and preventing the production of
small arms and light weapons under expired licenses
or without a license from the country that owns the
technology for its production.

themselves provoked in Ukraine was a clear illustration
of the insincerity of their statements in support of
international efforts to combat the uncontrolled spread
of military goods.

As for the international Arms Trade Treaty (ATT),
we must once again note that the standards it sets
are significantly lower than Russian’s standards. The
ATT does not include a direct ban on the unlicensed
production and transfer of weapons to non-State
actors, or provisions regulating the procedure for the
re-exporting of military goods only with the consent
of the original exporting State. At the same time, we
continue to monitor the implementation of the Treaty
and consider it important that its signatories fulfil the
legal obligations they undertook.

Russia has repeatedly convened meetings of the
Security Council regarding the dangerous consequences
of pumping the Kyiv regime with weapons, which
clearly illustrates the risks of violating the obligations
assumed in the area of control over military goods. We
note that, regardless of the attitudes of certain countries
as to what is happening in Ukraine, those risks are quite
real and applicable to any other region or State. It is the
duty of the Security Council to respond and discuss,
including jointly with other Member States, potential
measures to curb those risks.

During discussions at specialized platforms,
we consistently point out that the fight against the
uncontrolled proliferation of military goods must
remain the focus of attention of all Member States.
In the absence of appropriate agreements, it is often
impossible to trace the chain of transfer of military
goods — and thereby establish control over them — and
countries and entire regions end up flooded with illegal
weapons, which leads to an increase in violence
and crime.

First of all, among such risks, we would point to
the erosion of international law in the area of supply
of military goods. Violations of bilateral agreements,
including bans on third-country re-exports or production
without the permission of the country supplying the
weapons or technology, run counter to fundamental
practices in the area of supply of military goods.
Covert weapons deliveries to a given region through a
third country further distort the picture of arms flows
throughout the world and decrease transparency in that
area. Unfortunately, Western countries are not only
not trying to combat such violations, but they are even
encouraging them.

At the same time, we believe that the Security
Council, which deals with issues of control over the
supply of military goods within the framework of its
mandate, should not duplicate the functions of the
General Assembly, where discussions of relevant
global measures are being held. However, the Council
is obliged to respond to threats to international peace
and security that arise when individual countries
violate their obligations previously assumed in relation
to the supply of military weapons and violate already
concluded agreements.
The world has already faced the consequences of
such irresponsible policies many times. A number of
States, guided by their geopolitical ambitions, have
throughout the years carried out large-scale deliveries
of weapons and ammunition to various regions around
the world, including the Middle and Near East, the
Balkans and North Africa. Subsequently, faced with
the bitter experience of the radicalization of so-called
“opposition forces” they supported and the subsequent
uncontrolled spread of military equipment around the
world, Western countries have consistently promoted the
concept of “responsible behaviour” and strengthening
control over arms trade. However, the crisis they
4/26

The United States and its allies are putting pressure
on third countries, demanding that they violate
such agreements with Russia and other States in the
interest of increasing weapon supplies to Kyiv. On
30 November, United States Secretary of State Blinken
clearly announced that they would resume production
of Soviet-designed weapons systems at facilities
in Eastern European States, whereas inter-State
agreements with those countries stipulate obligations
not to supply such weapons without the written consent
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics — or of
Russia, as its successor. Therefore, such actions are a
direct violation of the fundamental international norms
in the area of conventional arms control, regardless of
the purpose.
It is no coincidence that the requirement of
including end-user certificates as part of all deliveries of
military goods has become a universally acknowledged
international practice. Ignoring that leads to the fact
that the weapons supplied often end up on the black
markets and fall into the hands of organized crime.
23-09954

10/04/2023

Threats to international peace and security

Another very dangerous consequence of the
unchecked supply of weapons is the risk that they will
end up in the hands of terrorists, particularly when
we are talking about especially sensitive weapons, for
example, portable air-defence systems or anti-tank
systems, which pose massive risks for international
civil aviation and rail transport.
We recall that signatories of the Arms Trade Treaty
as well as EU countries have assumed obligations
to prevent the use of weapons that are supplied by
them to undermine global peace and stability, violate
international humanitarian law, commit acts of violence,
escalate armed conflict and facilitate repression,
genocide and so on. When weapons are provided to
a regime that, for many years, has been using and
continues to use them to fire on civilians and civilian
infrastructure, one cannot talk about these obligations
being complied with. This contempt for one’s own
obligations, setting aside the moral part of the question,
creates a significant risk that the unchecked provision
of weapons will take place in other conflict zones,
notwithstanding the likelihood of further escalation. At
the same time, baseless accusations that any given State
is allegedly providing arms to Russia in violation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions have not been
supported by any evidence, and we have repeatedly
officially refuted them.
Another less visible but very serious risk of
irresponsible behaviour in relation to the transfer of
arms is the “fusion” of national Governments and their
military-industrial complexes. Of course, curbing this
is of no interest to the military-industrial complexes
of Western countries, and their Governments have
taken on analogous positions. The failure to strengthen
oversight on arms control leads to many other very
serious consequences for international peace and
security. We hope that today’s open debate will allow
Member States to talk about threats to various regions
of the world and share their own experiences, ideas and
initiatives when it comes to how to curb those risks.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): First, let
me begin by thanking Mozambique for an outstanding
presidency in March. I was pleased to be able to participate
in the Security Council trip to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo during the Mozambican presidency, and
we appreciated Mozambique’s deliberate approach to
its work in that role.

S/PV.9301

Russia, on the other hand, began its presidency
by trying to justify kidnapping Ukrainian children.
Today’s meeting is a thinly veiled effort to portray
Russia as a responsible actor in arms control, attempting
to obfuscate the reality that it launched an unjustified
armed invasion of its neighbour.
Despite the circumstances that bring us to the Security
Council Chamber, I thank the High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs for her thoughtful and thorough
briefing today. For over two decades, the United States
has assisted other Governments in developing and
adopting the necessary laws, regulations and policies to
control the import and export of conventional weapons.
We do this because we know that transparent laws and
regulations allow countries to work together to hinder
the illicit proliferation of these weapons.
Our own policy on international arms transfers is
laid out in our conventional arms transfer policy, which
was updated earlier this year and is a matter of public
record. Even with strong laws and wise policies in place,
there are inherent risks of weapons capture and illicit
diversion on the battlefield in any armed conflict. The
United States takes these risks very seriously. We assess
the risk for potential illicit diversion of weapons when
evaluating any proposed defence transfer anywhere in
the world and take proactive steps to protect United
States defence and dual-use technologies and prevent
their diversion. We also carefully assess the risk of
battlefield loss, particularly in complex environments.
Let us now focus on the most conspicuous such
environment today, Ukraine. We must not pretend that
the conflict in Ukraine is a matter of weapons-export
systems. Ukraine was invaded, and it has every right to
defend itself, which is reflected in the United Nations
Charter, and the international community has every
right to continue its long-standing support for Ukraine’s
defence. This equipment provides important support
to Ukraine, and Ukraine has a strong incentive to
protect it. The United States continues to work closely
with Ukraine to establish and implement procedures
to mitigate the risk of illicit diversion of weapons and
military equipment.
The Government of Ukraine is committed to
appropriately safeguarding defence equipment and
accounting for its transfer. We welcome the Ukrainian
Government’s formation of a commission in 2022
to strengthen the monitoring of donated military
equipment just this summer.

23-099545/26

S/PV.9301

Threats to international peace and security

Russia, on the other hand, has never let facts
interfere with its false narratives. In a blatant effort
to discredit Ukraine and weaken international support
for Ukraine’s self-defence, Russia continues to spread
disinformation about diversions. In fact, the greatest
risk of illicit trafficking comes from battlefield capture
of weapons by Russia and pro-Russia forces. Russia
has proposed that it would supply captured weapons to
separatists in eastern Ukraine. These statements and
actions are dangerous and irresponsible.
Russia has also turned to rogue regimes to try to
unlawfully obtain weapons and equipment to support its
military operations. In November 2022, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea delivered infantry rockets
and missiles into Russia for use by the Kremlin-backed
Wagner Group, and we know Russia is actively seeking
to acquire additional munitions from the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. Such arms transfers from
the Democratic People’s Republic to Russia directly
violate Security Council resolutions. These actions,
particularly by a permanent member of the Security
Council, are deeply disturbing and serve only to fuel
Moscow’s brutal war of aggression against Ukraine.
Iran has also transferred unmanned aerial
vehicles to Russia, a fact that Iran’s Foreign Minister
acknowledged in public statements on 5 November.
Russia is using these drones to attack Ukraine’s civilian
infrastructure. Let me state it clearly: resolution 2231
(2015), specifically Annex B, paragraph 4, prohibits
all countries, even permanent members of the Security
Council, from transferring these types of drones from
Iran without advance Security Council approval.
The most effective and obvious path towards peace
and reducing risk of illicit diversion of arms would be
for Russia to end the war that it started and withdraw
its forces from all of Ukraine’s sovereign territory. We
once again urge Russia to do so, and to do it now.
Mr. Camilleri (Malta): I too begin by thanking High
Representative Nakamitsu for her informative briefing.
Malta
strongly
supports
export-control
mechanisms and agreements, which are crucial
tools in preventing sensitive. materials technology
and equipment from falling into the wrong hands,
contributing to the implementation of treaty obligations
on non-proliferation and facilitating peaceful uses by
enabling the secure transfer of dual-use technology.
Malta is a committed member of the Australia
Group, the Nuclear Suppliers Group and the Wassenaar
6/26

10/04/2023

Arrangement on Export Controls for Conventional
Arms and Dual-Use Goods and Technologies, and it
strictly implements the European dual-use exportcontrol regulations and the relevant annexes. These
export-control groups are voluntary arrangements
comprising States from all regions that seek to prevent
the uncontrolled proliferation of certain dangerous
weapons, materials and technologies, including to
non-State actors and terrorists.
Malta signed the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT) as soon
as it was opened for signature in 2013 and has been a State
party since 2014. The Treaty regulates the international
trade in conventional arms and seeks to prevent and
eradicate illicit trade and diversion of conventional
arms by establishing the highest possible common
international standards governing arms transfers.
Malta places a high priority on the universalization and
full implementation of the ATT. The Treaty has a wide
membership of 112 States parties, and we encourage all
States that have not yet done so to sign and ratify the
Treaty without further delay.
The European Union (EU) has some of the highest
standards of export controls in the world. It has adopted
a uniform approach to the export of small arms and light
weapons and their ammunition, and it established a set
of common features that end-user certificates will have
to respect to diminish the risk of diversion to illicit or
unintended users.
EU member States committed to preventing and
curbing the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons
and their ammunition through the 2018 EU strategy.
Malta’s Sanctions Monitoring Board adopts a rigorous
approach to implementing arms embargoes, and their
circumvention directly undermines regional and
international peace, security and stability.
Malta fully supports the Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. We
welcome the consensus outcome reached by all Member
States during the eighth Biennial Meeting of States
to Consider the Implementation of the Programme of
Action last summer.
Malta is also a firm supporter of the African
Union’s Silencing the Guns initiative. That is
underpinned by our determination to break the cycle
of violence and conflict in Africa through the effective
implementation of agreements on landmines and the
non-proliferation of small arms and light weapons on
23-09954

10/04/2023

Threats to international peace and security

the continent. Challenges that lead to marginalized
communities acquiring weapons, such as poverty and
unemployment, should be addressed simultaneously to
ensure a holistic approach to tackling the conflict cycle
in a sustainable manner.
We have consistently supported the International
Tracing Instrument, which requires States to ensure
that weapons are properly marked and that records
are kept, and advocated for the Instrument’s adaption
to new technological developments in order to
remain effective.
I conclude by expressing Malta’s concern regarding
the many different conflicts with which countries
around the world are having to deal. We firmly believe
that any provision of arms to State or non-State
actors that violates Security Council resolutions is an
affront to the authority and integrity of the Security
Council itself. As such, all such violations must be
investigated and, when necessary, addressed in order to
ensure accountability.
Ms. Jacobs (United Kingdom): I would like to
start by congratulating Mozambique on its presidency
of the Security Council in March. I also thank UnderSecretary-General Nakamitsu for her briefing today.
As the perpetrator of a war of aggression against
a sovereign nation, Russia has taken up the Security
Council presidency, while it fails to meet the most basic
obligations of a State Member of the United Nations.
Russia’s decision to unleash an illegal war of choice on
an innocent people threatens the fundamental principles
of the Security Council. As it sources weapons for
its war, Russia is violating the very United Nations
sanctions that it helped to draft on States such as Iraq
and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
The wider consequences of this war for food and
commodity prices are severe and are likely to drive
further conflict. The United Kingdom calls on all other
States to cease assistance to the Russian military and its
affiliated forces. Arming the aggressor State is fuelling
global instability.
To preserve the principles of sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Charter of the United Nations,
Member States should assist Ukraine in protecting
itself from that aggression, in line with Article 51 of
the Charter. The United Kingdom has provided a wide
range of equipment and support to Ukraine and, as a
responsible State Member of the United Nations, will
continue to do so.

S/PV.9301

Globally, the diversion and misuse of conventional
arms cost hundreds of thousands of lives across the
world every year, undermine security and sustainable
development and fuel conf lict, crime and terrorism.
The Security Council can play an important role in
that issue, complementary to multilateral and national
processes. Regrettably, it is Russia that has long
sought to undermine such work by opposing new texts
and consistently abstaining from resolutions on the
issue, such as resolutions 2117 (2013), 2220 (2015) and
2616 (2021).
The United Kingdom operates one of the most
robust arms export control regimes in the world.
We are committed to the full implementation and
universalization of the Arms Trade Treaty. We remain
committed to all related United Nations mechanisms,
including the Programme of Action on Small Arms. We
will continue to support appropriate measures through
the Security Council.
Let me finish by restating one simple point: if
Russia is serious about strengthening international
peace and security, its first action should be to end its
illegal invasion, withdraw from Ukraine and uphold its
responsibilities under the Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. Olmedo (France) (spoke in French): I thank
High Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing.
The threat posed by the uncontrolled proliferation
and diversion of conventional weapons is a grave
matter that deserves serious treatment. That is why we
regret the attempted exploitation that we are witnessing
today. It is astonishing to see Russia concerned about
the consequences of a war of aggression that it itself
started and for which it bears sole responsibility.
Let us recall the facts. If Ukraine needs weapons
today, it is because Russia has unleashed that war
and because it amassed thousands of tons of military
equipment on the border of Ukraine before invading
it. It is indeed Russia that is violating the resolutions
of the Security Council in order to replenish its
dwindling stockpiles of ammunition because it has
been relentlessly bombing civilian populations and
infrastructure for months in defiance of international
humanitarian law. That finally exhausted its stocks.
There is strong evidence that Russia is using combat
drones supplied by Iran and acquiring missiles and
munitions from North Korea.
Some of those arms shipments directly benefit the
Wagner Group. That Group’s massive and systematic

23-099547/26

S/PV.9301

Threats to international peace and security

abuses have been substantiated. Moreover, the Russian
authorities openly acknowledge the Group’s role in
Ukraine after having long denied its existence.
France and the European Union will continue to
provide Ukraine with all the support that it needs for
as long as it is required. Such support, whether bilateral
or through the European Union, is exclusively aimed at
enabling Ukraine to exercise its right to self-defence
and preserve its sovereignty, territorial integrity and
independence — principles that are enshrined in
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
Our objective is clear: we want a return to lasting
peace. The only way to achieve that is to defeat the
Russian aggression.
France underlines Russia’s cynicism in referring
to instruments to which it has not adhered. It claims
to baselessly accuse us of not respecting them. Unlike
Russia, France respects its obligations. France is
committed to promoting and universalizing the Arms
Trade Treaty, which Russia has not joined. France also
promotes the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat
and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects. We encourage all States
to adopt control measures regarding the recipient, final
use and non-re-export.
The best way to prevent trafficking is to stop the
conflicts that fuel it. That is what Russia must do
immediately by ceasing its aggression, withdrawing all
its troops from the territory of Ukraine and respecting
that country’s sovereignty, as the International Court of
Justice ordered it to do more than a year ago.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I congratulate
Mozambique on its exemplary leadership during its
presidency of the Security Council in March. I wish
Russia every success during its presidency in April. I
thank Under-Secretary-General Izumi Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
The compounded international crises have brought
arms proliferation issues to the forefront of international
security concerns. The distressing evidence of massive
rearmament, which is evident in several crisis-ridden
regions of the world, revives the fears and traumas of
the two world wars and the concerns regarding the Cold
War era’s frantic race towards deterrence.
We seem to be moving away from the hope held by
the international community to limit, if not contain, the
most deadly and inhumane weapons. Today that hope,
which led to the adoption of relevant multilateral and
8/26

10/04/2023

regional disarmament instruments and culminated in
the adoption of the Arms Trade Treaty in 2013, seems
to have lost steam. We saw the heightened level of
awareness that prevailed at the end of the Second World
War, thanks to the scope of its atrocities and horror,
when the peoples of the world said “never again” to war
and its death machines. The first words of the Charter
of the United Nations are an indelible expression of that
sublime aspiration of humankind. Incomprehensibly,
our generation has stood idly by while witnessing
a terrible retreat, as if the blood that was shed in the
past was not enough, the frenzied destruction was not
devastating enough, and humankind had been struck
by mass amnesia regarding the recent history that led
us to found the United Nations on the funeral ashes of
the League of Nations. The demons of wildly excessive
armaments are looming and driving humankind
towards an irreversible retreat into the abyss.
Apart from the major recent events themselves,
we must take stock of their implications, consider
the possible responses available to the international
community and draw lessons from our successive
crises in order to strengthen the fight against the
proliferation of weapons, particularly nuclear
weapons, which are part of a much broader problem
that includes several other categories of weapons
of mass destruction — chemical, biological and
radiological weapons of mass destruction — including
the development in a growing number of countries of
ballistic capabilities that could considerably extend
their potential range of action. Regardless of the
motivations of the various parties, we must emphasize
that the recent and ongoing crises have two main
characteristics. On the one hand, they are fuelled by
shortcomings in the international non-proliferation
regime; on the other, they are particularly dangerous for
international security and call for an urgent response
on the part of the international community.
The peoples of the world have placed a great deal
of hope in disarmament treaties, in particular the
international nuclear non-proliferation regime, which
is made up of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT), the nuclear-weapon-free-zone
treaties, the various safeguards agreements concluded
by individual States with the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) and export-control regimes for
sensitive items. The seriousness of the current situation
portends a critical phase for international security,
with the risk of a trend to nuclear proliferation and its
effects in the years to come, while posing at least three
23-09954

10/04/2023

Threats to international peace and security

major dangers for international security. The first is the
undermining of the credibility of the NPT. The second
is a severe risk of international destabilization that
could lead to a much more unstable strategic landscape.
The third is a heightened concern about the possible
links between proliferation and terrorism.
Mutual deterrence was undeniably important
during the Cold War between the two blocs. Those days
are clearly over. Today more than ever, an arms race
based on deterrence carries more risks of uncontrolled
escalation and poor political control over nuclear forces,
not to mention the possibility of internal destabilization
owing to the complexity of the contexts and the large
number of actors involved. The growing levels of
tension between poles of influence and the insatiable
quest for hegemony encourage States to renege on
their international commitments, which adds to the
difficulty of controlling weapons technology transfers.
We should also be worried about the fact that new
proliferation crises may arise at a time when the threat
of mass terrorism has gone beyond the nightmare that a
terrorist group might develop a nuclear weapon or attack
a nuclear facility. Those scenarios are not academic.
Many countries do not have strict legal controls on the
use, export and secure storage of their weapons.
It is more important than ever to keep the fight
against the proliferation of weapons, particularly
nuclear weapons, at the heart of the global security
agenda. The Security Council must ensure that the
authority and effectiveness of the relevant international
instruments are strengthened. Since the Council’s
unanimous adoption of resolution 1540 (2004), on
non-proliferation, the Council’s responsibility has been
at the centre of the fight against proliferation, which
is a threat to international peace and security under
Chapter VII of the Charter. The Council is mandated
to promote the universality and full implementation of
treaties, while at the same time undertaking cooperative
efforts to prevent the trafficking of weapons of
mass destruction and their means of delivery. The
international community must show that it can be
united in taking action and can transcend differences
between the strategic interests of States or groups of
States. In moving beyond ambivalence or ambiguity
in national positions and differences in approach, the
international community must find a way to unite in
a single international and universal instrument all
the improvements that the non-proliferation regime
requires and pragmatically strengthen all our existing
frameworks in order to bind States more firmly to an

S/PV.9301

entire network of other commitments that nonetheless
contribute to non-proliferation. We must focus our
action on something that is particularly important to
the future of non-proliferation, and that is sanctioning
States that do not honour their commitments.
This is a call to the Council to take bolder action on
the most pressing issues affecting international peace
and security and that can be more tangibly manifested
within the IAEA and the Review Conferences of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons. That kind of bold action is also vital in dealing
with the illegal transfer of conventional arms through
closer cooperation at the global and subregional levels,
including measures to trace conventional weapons.
It will be crucial to respect the treaties that we
have concluded and address violations of international
non-proliferation commitments with sanctions that
provide sufficient deterrence. The Security Council
should make it a rule to automatically be seized of such
situations when a violation is identified. The Security
Council should also take the principled position of
underlining the seriousness of such acts by specifying
the range of measures or sanctions that it could adopt
as a result.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the
critical importance for our collective security system
of dispelling any impression of a legal vacuum or
weakness that could lead others to believe that breaches
or violations of the non-proliferation regime would
have no consequences for the States that commit them.
It is the responsibility of every part of the international
community to redouble its efforts to strengthen
international unity in order to achieve the goal of
non-proliferation of weapons, particularly nuclear
weapons, on which the survival of humankind depends.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank Under-Secretary-General Izumi Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
The uncontrolled spread, destabilizing stockpiling
and illicit use of conventional weapons are longstanding concerns for Switzerland. That is why, at the
international level, Switzerland is committed to the
adoption of rules governing the transfer of conventional
weapons and to fully upholding them. At the national
level, Switzerland controls the transfer of war materiel,
as well as specific military and dual-use products. I
would like to underscore three points.

23-099549/26

S/PV.9301

Threats to international peace and security

First, we call on all States to comply with the Arms
Trade Treaty (ATT) and to implement the provisions
of the instruments to which they are party. The ATT,
the Wassenaar Arrangement, the United Nations
Register of Conventional Arms and the principles
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe that govern the transfer of conventional arms
are key instruments establishing rules in that regard.
They strengthen transparency and confidence among
Member States and participating States, both globally
and regionally, thereby contributing to peace, security,
stability and the reduction of human suffering.
Secondly, the Charter of the United Nations
authorizes the use of armed force in specific cases.
For the acquisition of such weapons by States to be
legitimate, international law and the rules applicable to
conventional arms exports must be respected. It is also
paramount that States ensure that the weapons supplied
cannot be used to commit war crimes, such as attacks
on civilians, civilian objects or other crimes under
international law, including gender-based violence. It
is therefore essential that measures to limit those risks
and prevent possible diversion be taken, including
risk assessments prior to transfers, the use of end-user
certificates and post-shipment verification.
Thirdly, member States are required to comply with
the obligations on conventional arms exports resulting
from the measures taken by the Council, acting under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. We
are concerned about violations of those resolutions
in several contexts. Conventional arms shipments
in violation of those provisions destabilize already
fragile situations and undermine efforts to resolve and
prevent conflict.
Switzerland will continue its commitment to
ensuring that the export and use of conventional arms
comply with international law and applicable rules.
Mr. Fernandes (Mozambique): I begin by
congratulating and wishing good luck to the Russian
Federation on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of April. I would also
like to express gratitude for the kind words addressed
to Mozambique. I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today’s open debate on the important and
timely topic of the risks stemming from violations of
the agreements regulating the export of weapons and
military equipment. We also wish to thank the briefer,
Under-Secretary-General Izumi Nakamitsu, for her
useful insights.
10/26

10/04/2023

My country, Mozambique, attaches great
importance to the topic under discussion today. The
world is currently experiencing growing tensions in
international security and an increase in the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons. Such arms
significantly hamper our collective efforts to achieve
and maintain peace and security. According to the
2021 report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/839), at
least 176,095 civilians were killed between 2015 and
2020 in various armed conflicts, while 27 per cent of
those civilian deaths were caused by small arms and
light weapons. Critically, access to small arms and
light weapons by terrorist groups has also exacerbated
armed violence. The proliferation and illicit trafficking
of those weapons has disproportionately affected the
people living in the most vulnerable regions of the
world, in particular the African continent. The illicit
trafficking in small arms and light weapons further
aggravates the poor living conditions and the well-being
of people who have already been living in precarious
situations due to protracted conflicts.
That unfortunate situation is happening despite
calls from the international community, demanding
increased transparency in military armament sales, in
particular with regard to trade in small arms and light
weapons. We are also witnessing arms and ammunition
purchases worldwide, with uncooperative sellers being
subjected to enormous political pressure, even reportedly
involving direct blackmail and threats. It is in that
context that the implementation of the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All its Aspects and Africa’s Silencing the Guns agenda
are of paramount importance and advances in the
matter are urgently needed. We believe that preventing
violations of the agreements and regulations related
to the transfer of conventional weapons and military
equipment constitutes the collective responsibility of
all States Members of the United Nations. Allow me
to make some concrete suggestions on the potential
way forward.
First, under the Programme of Action, it is
important that we each control our national weapon
storage and management systems in order to avoid small
arms and light weapons ending up in the hands of illicit
users. To that end, as part of its ongoing peace process,
Mozambique continues to reinforce its strategies and
hosts international experts, who share knowledge and
best practices with national authorities. At the same
time, we must also look at and beyond our borders to
23-09954

10/04/2023

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV.9301

halt the illicit flow of weapons. We call on States in
which weapons are being produced to enforce existing
international standards in order to ensure that weapons
produced within their borders may be traded only with
legitimate partners.

Disarmament Affairs Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing
today and for her tireless work on the disarmament
file. My delegation welcomes the participation in this
meeting of the representatives of Belarus, Indonesia,
Poland, South Africa, Mexico, Lebanon and India.

Secondly, the arms race must stop in order to ensure
the preservation of international peace and security.
We believe that continued competition in weapons
stocks and increased expenditures perpetuate a global
environment of insecurity and undermine the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. In that regard,
we call on those States with the capacity to acquire
advanced military technology and nuclear weapons
to refrain from engaging in competition in the global
arms trade.

As a party to the Arms Trade Treaty, Brazil
abides by the set of principles that it outlines. They
are binding on States parties to the Treaty and offer
valuable guidelines for arms transfers generally. First,
the Treaty highlights the importance of respecting and
ensuring respect for international humanitarian law and
human rights law, regardless of military objectives or
security concerns. Secondly, it urges States to regulate
their arms trade through effective systems of national
control so as to prevent diversion. Those principles
should serve the objectives of promoting responsible
action in arms trading, building confidence, reducing
human suffering and contributing to international and
regional peace and security and stability.

Thirdly, binding international conventions and
laws must be fully respected and implemented. We
encourage individual States to harmonize their own
legislation with international obligations. We are of
the view that new technologies should be carefully
managed and legislated to ensure they are not used to
prolong or worsen the humanitarian situation.
Fourthly, international cooperation on arms control
efforts is required. We value the great transformative
potential of the Silencing the Guns agenda, a flagship
initiative of the African Union. That and similar
initiatives in other parts of the world need to be nationally
owned, with the support of regional and international
partners, at both the bilateral and multilateral levels.
More action must be taken to prevent and combat
all forms of transborder illicit weapons trafficking.
To that end, the sharing of information, appropriate
accountability and safeguards related to arms and
ammunition sales are of paramount importance. Since
2018, Mozambique has become the 100th State party to
the Arms Trade Treaty, which is a clear demonstration
of my country’s commitment to arms control and
reduction and to the disarmament agenda.
In conclusion, Mozambique reiterates its
commitment to universal disarmament and ending
the illicit trade and proliferation of small arms and
light weapons so as to ensure international peace and
security and the protection of human lives.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Let me start
by congratulating Mozambique on an impeccable
presidency last month. Let me also wish Russia a
productive and successful presidency during the month
of April. I would like to thank High Representative for

Brazil is encouraged by recent efforts in the General
Assembly to improve the through-life management of
conventional ammunition, such as those in the Openended Working Group on Conventional Ammunition.
We have made progress on discussions on ammunition
marking and tracing, which should contribute to
reducing diversion and improving the oversight of
ammunition use in conflict zones. The adoption of a set
of political commitments during our next session could
consolidate those advances and bring greater stability
and predictability to ammunition management.
We met to discuss the topic of arms transfers last
year, and at the time we deplored the fact that the war
in Ukraine had already dragged on for six months
(see S/PV.9127). More than six months later, we are
back in this Chamber to discuss a similar topic while
the war continues unabated, with larger arsenals and
a growing humanitarian toll. Brazil strongly believes
that the increasing flow of weapons into the conflict in
Ukraine will only fuel more violence and will not help
to end it. While arms exports should be subject to strict
regulations and guiding principles, let us not lose sight
of the forest for the trees. We continue to believe firmly
that there is no alternative to negotiating a ceasefire
as a first step towards solving the present crisis. We
must do more than abide by rules that limit damage
by weapons in conflict situations — we must engage
in proactive diplomacy to wind conflicts down where
they exist and prevent their occurrence where they are

23-0995411/26

S/PV.9301

Threats to international peace and security

likely. That is our primary role in the Council, and it is
a role we must urgently relearn how to perform.
Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I welcome the briefing by the High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, as well
as the valuable recommendations she made.
In line with the rule of law among nations, any
violation of agreements involving aspects of peace and
security, arms control, disarmament or non-proliferation
represents a threat to international peace and security.
That is the case, for example, with regard to the violation
of security assurances relating to Ukraine’s accession
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, as agreed in the Budapest Memorandum.
It is also the case with regard to violations of arms
embargoes and sanctions regimes prohibiting exports or
transfers of arms. Worse still, it is the case with regard
to arms exports to countries engaged in hostilities or
military occupation in violation of the Charter of the
United Nations.
The Security Council must join multilateral
efforts with greater determination to ensure that major
producers and exporters of conventional weapons
do not favour their industries over global stability.
Conventional weapons continue to be one of the
main causes of deaths and injuries in the world. Such
weapons exacerbate conflicts and fuel terrorism and
transnational organized crime, undermine security
in border zones, stoke violence in fragile areas and
weaken traditionally stable ones. They undermine
peace and security, with a disproportionate impact on
women and girls.
Ecuador will therefore always be concerned
about the challenges to peace and security posed by
the destabilizing accumulation and unrestricted flow
of firearms, including large-scale flows of arms and
ammunition into any situation of armed conflict.
In every such case we are concerned about the risks
of diversion, spread and escalation and recognize
that measures to counter those risks are central,
including, of course, export-control measures, which
are fundamental. In exercising such measures, States
must comply with the responsibilities arising from
their international obligations, as well as regional and
multilateral ones.
Beyond that, the Security Council must strengthen
its efforts to support the integrated management of
arms and ammunition as a central support for reducing
12/26

10/04/2023

violence in the world. To that end, it is essential that the
Council support efforts to implement and strengthen
the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, as well as the International
Tracing Instrument, among other things. And it is time
to revitalize efforts to effectively implement resolution
2220 (2015), which takes into account all multisectoral
axes, as well as the need for synergies within and
outside the United Nations system, and which also
covers the issue of export controls. It is imperative to
ensure that export-control efforts focus on the need to
protect civilian populations and the lives and safety
of individuals.
Ecuador is concerned about the continued
production and export of weapons with indiscriminate
effects on populations, whose use is incompatible with
the rules of international humanitarian law. Ecuador
rejects cluster munitions in general, especially the use
of explosives in populated areas, and any production,
export or use of weapons where the principles of
distinction, proportionality and precaution cannot
be respected.
Before concluding, I should stress our alarm at the
fact that global military spending in 2022 exceeded
$2 trillion, and that in the context of the military
aggression against Ukraine, that trend will worsen
in 2023. We urge the Russian Federation to end its
military occupation and hostilities against Ukraine.
Ecuador rejects armed violence, militarization and a
focus on armaments, while unambiguously recognizing
the right of peoples to self-defence in accordance with
international law and the Charter of the United Nations,
including its Article 51.
Finally, the Council should be guided by the
recommendations set forth in the Secretary-General’s
biennial report (S/2021/839). We hope that the next
report will elaborate on the measures that the Security
Council should take to counter threats to international
peace and security.
Mr. Spasse (Albania): I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
As this is the first formal meeting of the Security
Council for this month, I would like, as other colleagues
before me have done, to thank Mozambique for having
presided over our work in a very thoughtful and
professional way in March. I very much hope that we
will be able to proceed in a normal way during this
23-09954

10/04/2023

Threats to international peace and security

month, bearing in mind that we find ourselves in an
unusual situation and in unchartered waters. The
contradiction could not be more unsettling: a country
that has brutally violated the Charter of the United
Nations and the very basic rules that govern relations
among States is presiding over the body responsible for
peace and security. That country, a permanent member
of the Security Council, has done everything it can to
undermine peace and security, and it has endangered
the world. As this is unprecedented, States Members of
the United Nations and public opinion worldwide have
every right to feel worried. We are in this Chamber to
discharge our responsibility as a member of the Council,
in respect of the rules of procedure that govern this
body, and in no way to provide the current presidency
with moral credentials.
Albania attaches great importance to disarmament,
non-proliferation and arms-control instruments. We
stress the need not only to preserve, but also to further
strengthen, these instruments. The Arms Trade Treaty
(ATT) recognizes the legitimate interests of States in
transferring arms. The faithful implementation of the
ATT is a humanitarian imperative to prevent serious
violations of international humanitarian law.
Unfortunately, we are witnessing a worrisome trend
where a number of States are stepping away from their
obligations. One of the most worrisome examples is the
policy adopted by Iran, which, by its actions, including
the illegal transfer of weapons to its proxies in the
region and other countries, seeks to undermine peace
and security. We have also, more than once, highlighted
in this Chamber the most recent policies of Russia,
which, in violation of Security Council resolutions, is
using weapons purchased from the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and Iran to feed its illegal war and
destroy Ukraine.
Illicit small arms fuel armed violence and organized
crime, global terrorism and conflict. They pose a
serious threat to peace, reconciliation, safety, security,
stability and sustainable development. We support the
universalization of the Arms Trade Treaty as a crucial
instrument capable of mitigating risks. We call on all
States, in particular major arms exporters, importers
and transit States to ratify and accede to the Treaty
without further delay. We also encourage the effective
implementation of the Programme of Action on Small
Arms and Light Weapons and the International Tracing
Instrument, which constitute the main framework
of measures to prevent, combat and eradicate the

S/PV.9301

illicit trade in small arms in all its aspects. We
reiterate the importance of arms embargoes and their
implementation by all Member States. We encourage
States to strengthen their monitoring capacities, the
enforcement of arms embargoes and, finally, to support
the work of United Nations expert groups. We stress
the importance of cooperation among regional and
subregional organizations in the fight against arms
trafficking and diversion.
In conclusion, we believe that transparency
measures, such as arms export controls, contribute
to the strengthening of mutual trust between States.
Mutual trust is essential in the defence and promotion
of the principles of arms control, disarmament and
non-proliferation. It serves to maintain the international
order based on rules established in the Charter of the
United Nations.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): First
of all, I would like to extend to you, Mr. President, and to
Russia our congratulations on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. The Chinese
delegation will support you, Sir, and your colleagues in
discharging your responsibilities. I would also like to
congratulate Mozambique for its successful presidency
of the Council during the month of March.
I would like to thank Russia for the initiative it has
taken in convening today’s meeting and to express our
gratitude to High Representative Izumi Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
At present, the international security landscape
features interlocking changes and turbulence.
Geopolitical jostling is becoming increasingly intense.
The global security deficit continues unabated. In
this context, we see an increase in the scale of the
global arms trade, an expanding regional arms race
and the intensification of irresponsible arms exports.
International peace and security are facing enormous
risks and challenges.
In China’s view, first of all, it is imperative that
the legal instruments and institutional arrangements for
conventional arms control be effectively implemented.
To regulate arms trade, the international community
made unremitting efforts over many years towards the
elaboration and formulation of a number of important
instruments, including the United Nations Programme
of Action on Small Arms and Light Weapons,
the International Tracing Instrument, the Arms
Trade Treaty and the Firearms Protocol. Important

23-0995413/26

S/PV.9301

Threats to international peace and security

arrangements have been established, such as the United
Nations Register of Conventional Arms. Member
States should actively support the United Nations as
the primary channel for conventional arms control,
fully and faithfully implement their treaty obligations,
promote the universality and effectiveness of the
relevant treaties, make full use of pertinent mechanisms
and continuously improve them so as to competently
strengthen arms-export controls. The Security Council
has previously held discussions on issues relating
to weapons of mass destruction and small arms and
light weapons. Today’s meeting, convened by Russia,
instils fresh momentum to such discussions at the
Council level.
Secondly, it is necessary to pay utmost attention
to the impact of the export of armaments on conflict
and post-conflict situations. The continued illicit flow
of conventional weapons into war-stricken areas and
conflict zones is tantamount to adding fuel to the fire,
which will lead only to the aggravation and continuation
of the fighting. Once wars end, these weapons often
stay in circulation locally, take the lives of innocent
people and cause profound harm.
The tragic events in Afghanistan and Iraq remind
us that the transfer of weapons into conflict zones must
be handled in a more responsible manner, especially
through the effective implementation of end-user
and end-use certification. At the same time, we also
need to design Council sanctions with precision.
While enforcing relevant arms embargoes, we should
safeguard the needs of the countries concerned in
terms of their national defence and army building.
Additionally, efforts must be made to prevent weapons
from falling into the hands of illegal armed groups
and terrorists.
Thirdly, it is essential to stand firm in opposing the
use of arms exports to serve geopolitical self-interests.
We call upon all countries, especially the major military
Powers, to fulfil their international obligations, adopt
responsible arms-export policies and stop using arms
exports to interfere in the internal affairs of other
countries. In this regard, I find myself obliged to point
out that a certain military Power has a lax arms-export
regulatory regime and has even transferred military
products to non-State actors on a long-term basis.
That country withdrew from the Arms Trade Treaty in
2019. That country’s arms exports in 2022 accounted
for almost 40 per cent of the world’s total, which is a
dominant position indeed. That country cooperates with
14/26

10/04/2023

foreign partners on nuclear submarines and transfers
highly enriched weapons-grade uranium. That country
has reneged on commitments made in diplomatic
communiqués, challenged the sovereignty of other
countries, connived with separatist forces and escalated
arms sales. All such actions stoke confrontation, lead
to instability, advance a geostrategic agenda and stir up
tensions. They must be resisted.
Fourthly, we must vigorously promote the building
of a balanced, effective and sustainable security
architecture. Last April, Chinese President Xi Jinping
proposed a global security initiative. It advocates that
all countries adhere to a common, comprehensive,
cooperative and sustainable security concept, uphold
the principle of indivisible security and build a world
of lasting peace and universal security through
joint efforts.
That initiative also guides the conventional arms
control process and weaponry export control. All
countries, particularly the major military Powers,
should lead by example, bear in mind the concept of
peace and cooperation, which represents security for all
by turning swords into ploughshares, abandon the Cold
War mentality and zero-sum thinking, pay attention
to each other’s legitimate security concerns, strive to
maintain a global military balance and strategic stability
and jointly contribute positive momentum to promoting
peace and stability in the world and the region.
China has always taken a prudent and responsible
approach to arms exports. China cooperates only with
sovereign States in the conventional arms trade and does
not provide arms to non-State actors. We explicitly ask
Governments of countries receiving military products
to provide end-user and end-use certificates and to
commit to not transferring weapons imported from
China to third parties without China’s consent. China’s
accession to the Arms Trade Treaty in 2020 and its
commitment to the ratification process for accession to
the Firearms Protocol exemplify China’s determination
and sincerity in firmly upholding the multilateral
arms control process to maintain international peace
and security. China stands ready to work with the
international community to continue its unremitting
efforts to build a world of lasting peace and universal
security and to promote a community with a shared
future for humankind.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Nakamitsu for her insightful briefing.
23-09954

10/04/2023

Threats to international peace and security

First, let me touch on the importance of the
regulation of conventional weapons in general terms.
Japan is deeply concerned about the significant number
of civilian casualties resulting from the unlawful use
of conventional weapons. The illicit trade in, and
uncontrolled accumulation of, small arms and light
weapons can fuel instability and terrorism, posing a
serious threat to international peace and security.
Japan urges all Member States to effectively and
seriously implement international agreements and
commitments related to the control and disarmament
of conventional weapons. For example, the Arms Trade
Treaty (ATT) is a landmark agreement to regulate the
international trade in conventional arms. The date of
2 April marked the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
the ATT. Japan calls on all Member States that have not
yet done so to join the Treaty.
In addition to treaties, Security Council resolutions
stipulate obligations for Member States. There are
growing concerns over reports of Iranian and North
Korean weapons being transferred to Russia, in
violation of the relevant Security Council resolutions.
The transfer of arms in violation of Security Council
resolutions is illegal and should never be tolerated. The
Security Council should support efforts to investigate
and clarify such cases to ensure the full implementation
of those resolutions.
Japan is also committed to promoting the
implementation of the Programme of Action on Small
Arms, adopted at the United Nations Conference on
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
all its Aspects in 2001, and supporting international
cooperation and assistance in that area. As part of
that effort, as a sponsor together with Colombia and
South Africa, Japan has been submitting annual
General Assembly draft resolutions since 2001, the
most recent of which was adopted by consensus last
December (resolution 77/71). I thank all Member States
in that regard.
In addition, Japan has been a proactive contributor
to the Saving Lives Entity trust facility, which now
operates in Africa and Latin America and assists
Member States in tackling illicit small arms and
light weapons. Japan reiterates its firm commitment
to enhancing the effective regulation of conventional
arms and combating their unlawful transfers.
Let me now turn to my second point. Regarding the
alleged concerns about the transfer of defence equipment

S/PV.9301

to Ukraine, we must look at the fundamental cause of
the issue — Russia’s aggression against Ukraine, which
the General Assembly deplored in the strongest terms
in its resolution ES-11/1.
Japan reiterates its condemnation of Russia’s
aggression against Ukraine in the strongest terms.
Russia’s actions are a clear and flagrant violation of
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
We underscore Ukraine’s right of self-defence to defend
itself against aggression. It is ironic that Russia, which
has been hesitant to support the Arms Trade Treaty
despite the repeated international calls, is accusing
other countries of violating the Treaty.
The support of the international community in
stopping the aggression is entirely legitimate in terms
of the maintenance of international peace and security
and ending the continued violations of human rights
and the humanitarian crisis in Ukraine. By contrast, no
nation should support Russia’s aggression.
Russia should not abuse its position as the President
of the Security Council to divert attention from its acts.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): At the
outset, I would like to express sincere appreciation to
Mozambique and to congratulate it on its successful
presidency of the Security Council last month. I wish
the same to the Russian Federation on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month. I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Nakamitsu for her briefing today.
In recent years, we have witnessed a worrisome rise
in geopolitical tensions. That turmoil has mirrored a
global increase in military expenditure, which reached
an all-time high of $2.1 trillion last year. That figure
could rise even higher if trust among major Powers
continues to be eroded.
The right of States to develop security and defence
capabilities for their self-defence is tempered by both
risks and responsibilities. An effective and accountable
security sector is indispensable to addressing threats
to the security and territorial integrity of States. At the
same time, the proliferation of weapons is fraught with
unintended consequences and poses significant threats
to international peace and stability.
Today I want to speak on this topic in two ways:
first, by acknowledging what has been done and,
secondly, by offering views on what we have yet to do.

23-0995415/26

S/PV.9301

Threats to international peace and security

First, it is useful to recall the strides made so far
in managing weapons transfers in accordance with
international law. States have come together, including
within this institution, to develop international norms
and best practices regarding the manufacture, trade and
possession of conventional arms and weapons needed for
self-defence, while addressing the risks of illicit trade
and diversion. The Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and its International
Tracing Instrument are elements of that framework
within this institution. The United Nations has played
a key role in facilitating the further development of the
framework to improve regulation and address gaps.
Meanwhile, the Security Council continues to consider
and discuss the illicit transfer of weapons and military
equipment in connection with counter-terrorism and in
some country-specific contexts.
Despite the strides made, challenges in regulating
arms remain. That leads me to my second point, namely,
what remains to be done in the area. Efforts towards
greater effectiveness of arms control demand a strong
emphasis on tracking and tracing systems, which is key
to achieving assurances that the weapons being delivered
in legitimate good-faith transfers do not end up in the
wrong hands, particularly those of terrorists. With that
in mind, we underline the importance of ensuring that
weapon stockpiles are carefully managed. The lack of
effective arms control risks the safety and security of
populations at large. But it is usually women and girls
who are the first to experience the negative impacts
of the uncontrolled spread of weapons, often further
increasing their exposure to gender-based violence.
We cannot address the destabilizing impact of the
illicit proliferation of arms without referring to weapons
of mass destruction. Chemical, biological, radiological
and nuclear weapons pose some of the most significant
and greatest existential threats to our survival. Although
the performance of international instruments regulating
such weapons has long been discussed both within and
beyond this Chamber, participation and enforcement
must be strengthened. We encourage all Member States
to join the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and other agreements for the regulation of
weapons of mass destruction, and to comply with all
relevant international obligations, including Security
Council resolutions. Until that is done, the proverbial
sword of Damocles will remain poised above our heads.
16/26

10/04/2023

Weapons and arms may be a reality of the world
we live in, but the United Arab Emirates will never tire
of calling for peaceful means, including diplomacy, for
the resolution of disputes and the cessation of hostilities
throughout the world. Before that moment is reached
and before the guns are silenced, we must do everything
that we can to mitigate the risks associated with the
use and transfers of arms around the globe. Above all,
our discussion today takes place at a time when urgent
humanitarian needs and longer-term development are
not being adequately met. We should therefore recall
that every dollar spent on a weapon is one dollar less
available for funding schools, hospitals, public services
and the very institutions that strengthen international
peace and security.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): Let me begin by
congratulating Mozambique on its successful
presidency of the Security Council last month and
by wishing you and your delegation, Sir, the best of
luck and a successful presidency. I also thank your
delegation for convening this open debate, and the High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs, Mrs. Izumi
Nakamitsu, for her briefing.
Inasmuch as the ideal world should be anchored
firmly on a culture of peace, the reality is that very few
periods of human history have been free from violence
and war. Over the past century and beyond, that reality
has shaped the international law and commonly agreed
rules that have aimed to abate the impact of conflicts
and wars on our aspiration for stable and peaceful
societies. As we have come to appreciate from the
two World Wars, the instruments of war and violence
should not be wielded abroad, except for the purposes
of collective security or of individual or collective selfdefence, as provided for by Article 51 of the Charter of
the United Nations. As a country, and consistent with the
views of the International Court of Justice, we uphold
the inherent rules of self-defence under customary
international law, which provide that self-defence must
be necessary and proportionate to the aggression.
Some have chosen to establish a link between high
military expenditure and their national security. For
our part, we do not lose sight of the correlation between
the business of weapons and the state of insecurity
in several parts of the world. Violations of national
regulations on the export of weapons and military
equipment have led to the proliferation of arms and have
exacerbated conflicts. They have also led to significant
national security threats in many States. Indeed, in
23-09954

10/04/2023

Threats to international peace and security

addition to the consequences of diversion, which
have had particularly adverse effects for the African
continent, the counterbalancing actions against the
build-up of military arsenals by strategic competitors
have also had negative global socioeconomic effects.
It is therefore not surprising to see that in recent years
there has been an exponential growth in the business of
weapons and military equipment. As the 2022 report of
the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute
notes, world military spending in 2021 reached an
all-time high of $2.1 trillion, as other delegations
mentioned earlier.
When one reviews the direction, trends and upsurge
in the international flow of conventional weapons
between 2018 and 2022, the results are intriguing,
correlating with some of the armed conflicts around
the world and manifesting in conflicts that have also
involved non-State actors, such as political militias,
criminals and terrorist groups. In asserting the right of
every State to legitimately use force within its territory,
and mindful of the rights of its citizens, we also make
the point that the influx of weapons into any conflict
situation aggravates that conflict. In order to address
the risks associated with such violations, we would like
to make three brief additional points.
The first is that exporting countries, in particular
the major weapon-exporting States, need to strengthen
regulations for all aspects of export-control processes,
backed by effective monitoring and enforcement
action to improve compliance. In emphasizing the
responsibility of the major exporters, four of whom are
permanent members of the Council, we also underscore
the importance of international instruments and treaties
aimed at preventing the illicit acquisition, proliferation
and misuse of conventional weapons. In that regard, it
is regrettable that, of the five major weapon-exporting
countries, the two most significant ones have opted
not to join the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT). We urge
them to reconsider their decision, and we particularly
emphasize the need for the universalization of the ATT
in order to regulate international trade in conventional
arms and prevent their diversion. As a State party to
the ATT, we would like to highlight articles 6 and 7
of the Treaty, which explicitly prohibit arms transfers
that would be contrary to international legal obligations
or contribute to the commission of genocide, crimes
against humanity and certain war crimes.
Secondly, Ghana believes that greater transparency
within the rubric of international cooperation is

S/PV.9301

necessary for reducing the risks that appertain to
international peace and security from the production
and sale of weapons and military equipment. Mindful
of that concern on the African continent, regional
disarmament measures — such as the Convention on
Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and
Other Related Materials of the Economic Community
of West African States; the Nairobi Protocol for the
Prevention, Control and Reduction of Small Arms
and Light Weapons in the Great Lakes Region and
the Horn of Africa; and the Protocol on the Control of
Firearms, Ammunition and Other Related Materials
in the Southern African Development Community
Region — have aimed at ensuring transparency in arms
transfers in order to enable States to identify and trace
conventional weapons in a timely and reliable manner.
That is critical for combating diversion and preventing
the acquisition of such weapons by unauthorized end
users, including terrorist groups. We urge further
global efforts in that direction and reaffirm the
importance of the effective implementation of treaties
such as the ATT; the Firearms Protocol; the Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects and its International Tracing Instrument; the
Anti-Personnel Mine Ban Convention; the Convention
on Cluster Munitions; and the Convention on Certain
Conventional Weapons.
Thirdly, through the tool of sanctions, the Council
has been deeply involved in efforts to prevent the flow
of arms to conflict parties and settings. That tool,
however, requires recalibration in order to ensure
that arms embargoes do not undermine the legitimate
efforts of States to defend their territory, but instead
target armed groups and other groups that exploit
opaque trading and transfer arrangements, which often
also benefit those who have sought to make a business
out of war. That understanding must extend the effects
of sanctions to those that manufacture such tools of
violence and should ordinarily be responsible for how
their products are traded and used.
In conclusion, I would like to underscore that, while
Ghana does not see any prohibition in the Charter against
Member States possessing and using conventional arms
in defence of their territorial integrity, if it is done
in conformity with international law, we are also of
the view that, no matter their numbers and potency,
weapons can never settle a conflict permanently.
Dialogue and diplomacy remain the only pathway to the
peaceful resolution of any conflict.

23-0995417/26

S/PV.9301

Threats to international peace and security

The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a further statement in my capacity as the representative
of the Russian Federation.
I feel obliged to respond to the remarks today by
certain representatives in which they directed unfounded
accusations at Russia. The purpose of today’s debate is
not to discuss the situation in Ukraine and the danger
of the continuing flood of weapons there. We have
had that discussion regularly and have provided the
relevant facts. Today we had hoped for a depoliticized,
substantive discussion between the members of the
Council and other Member States about the concrete
risks created by violations of international agreements
regulating the supply of military equipment. Obviously
those risks exist, and it is certainly not our fault that
Western States’ policy on the Ukrainian crisis clearly
demonstrates that.
We have already noted that the accusations about
supplies of such equipment to Russia in contravention
of Security Council resolutions are baseless, unlike
the specific cases of violations of existing agreements
by Western States. Neither Kyiv nor its sponsors have
presented proof of their accusations beyond arguments
of the “highly likely” variety, just as none of the
specialized bodies created in support of the relevant
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006) on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
have been able to confirm the unfounded opinions
we have heard expressed today. And yet a number of
Western States continue to make them, as we have seen
today. Washington and its satellites have clearly been
unable to come up with any other ways to conceal their
role in provoking and fuelling the crisis in Ukraine. We
will now provide concrete and strictly factual examples
of how the Western States are violating the obligations
they undertook earlier in the context of Ukraine.
For a long time now Russia has been drawing
attention to the fact that the flood of weapons being
supplied to the Kyiv regime would end up on the
black market and in the hands of organized crime and
terrorist groups. And that is now confirmed by the
facts. The weapons supplied by Western countries are
now surfacing in various European States and adding
to the arsenals of organized crime, as European police
representatives have admitted. Arms supplied by the
West to Ukraine are making their way around the world
and have already fallen into the hands of insurgents,
especially in Africa, as we have all heard about in
statements by African leaders. The signatories to the
18/26

10/04/2023

Arms Trade Treaty and the countries of the European
Union (EU) have completely ignored their obligations
when it comes to supplying arms to Kyiv, which has
continued to use them to bomb the peaceful population
and civilian infrastructure of the Donbas for years.
The flood of weapons supplied to Kyiv continues.
Over the past year, the combined direct military
assistance from NATO member States totalled
$40 billion along with $12 billion through the EU.
But beyond direct assistance alone there is more,
camouflaged as general aid. Josep Borrell Fontelles,
High Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, made a noteworthy
admission when he said recently that the so-called
European Peace Facility is being used to fund arms
supplies to Ukraine, in spite of its obvious breach of
the EU’s founding agreements, obligations under the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the policy aims of the Facility itself. What is that
if not an overt violation of obligations, not to mention
how cynical it sounds?
We would also like to draw attention to the fact
that the issue of the supply of weapons to Kyiv has
now developed a strategic dimension, since the list of
military equipment is expanding, which means that in
this specific case certain States are not only violating
their obligations but are not setting any reasonable
limits on themselves, despite the very serious risk of an
escalation of the crisis in Ukraine. On the contrary, the
West has no interest in ending the crisis in Ukraine. It
wants to prolong it and it admits that without a twinge
of conscience.
The countries of the West have consistently ignored
the so-called concept of responsible behaviour that they
themselves have touted when it comes to promoting
their own interests in various regions of the world. The
examples abound. The United States and its allies are
well aware of the dire consequences of the use of toxic
armour-piercing munitions with depleted uranium
thanks to their invasions of Yugoslavia and Iraq, but
that has not stopped London from announcing plans to
send munitions of that kind to Kyiv. It is not responsible
behaviour to transfer military equipment to the Kyiv
authorities, who cannot monitor its further transfer. The
Western countries have brought this up themselves and
have supposedly even taken steps to strengthen control
over the distribution of so-called military assistance.
However, attempts to organize an audit through the
United States Congress of the aid provided to Kyiv
23-09954

10/04/2023

Threats to international peace and security

got no support, and on 28 February Robert Storch,
the Department of Defense Inspector General, was
forced to admit that Washington had received reports
of improper handling of weapons supplied to the Kyiv
regime. Meanwhile, shadow arms markets are already
overflowing and continue to be replenished, including
with Western-produced weapons that have not been
used in combat before.
We have already mentioned the risks of merging the
military-industrial complex and national Governments.
It is no secret that huge funds supposedly intended
to help Ukraine are trickling down to the pockets of
Western manufacturers of military equipment, whose
profits have increased by approximately 50 per cent
since the start of the conflict in Ukraine, according to
various estimates. Even in the United States Congress,
Michael McCaul, the Chairman of the United States
House Committee on Foreign Affairs, has mentioned
that only 20 per cent of Washington’s financial
assistance goes directly to Kyiv, with some 60 per
cent of it going to Americans. Clearly the coinciding
interests of Governments and arms producers lead to
the artificial prolongation of these and other conflicts,
and it is civilians who suffer the most.
We would like to express our gratitude to those who
approached today’s discussion responsibly, as befits the
members of the Security Council. We are also grateful
to States that share the idea that the Security Council
can discuss concrete measures to improve the situation.
We hope that other countries will take a similarly
responsible approach.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Belarus.
Mr. Ambrazevich (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): I
would like to congratulate the Russian Federation on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and wish you every success in carrying out your
important role, Mr. President.
According to the United Nations, a quarter of a
million people are killed by firearms around the world
every year. It is no accident that small arms and light
weapons are referred to as a new type of weapon of
mass destruction. Former Secretary-General Kofi
Annan noted in one of this reports that the death toll
from small arms far exceeds that inflicted by other
weapon systems. The damage caused by conventional
weapons to infrastructure and cultural, educational,

S/PV.9301

religious and health facilities also has long-term
socioeconomic consequences. The fact is that the
senseless and uncontrolled pumping of weapons into
States today, even under the noble pretext of providing
security and building defence capacity, is fuelling
armed conflicts and contributing to the destabilizing
stockpiling of weapons. That is a direct path towards
the militarization of a region or regions, the creation
of a military imbalance and the escalation of tensions.
The excessive stockpiling of weapons also significantly
increases the risk of their diversion into illicit trafficking.
After all, most weapons enter the black market through
the legal trade. Illicit flows of small arms and light
weapons and other conventional weapons create fertile
ground for the growth and strengthening of terrorist
structures and transnational organized crime. Despite
the extensive toolkit developed by the international
community to control the export of conventional arms
and the national export control legislation already in
force, those mechanisms do not always work. What,
therefore, are the causes of the ineffectiveness of
existing instruments?
The first cause is the deliberate violation by certain
States of existing agreements and their own national
laws on export control, especially with regard to end
users and targeted use controls on arms transfers.
The second cause is the selective interpretation of
export criteria for narrow political goals.
Thirdly, there are gaps in the multilateral
instruments themselves. For example, the issues
of harmonization and control with respect to the
re-export of arms, the prohibition of arms transfers
to unauthorized non-State actors and the lack of
consensus on humanitarian risk assessment criteria
have not been adequately addressed, which has created
loopholes for the diversion of conventional arms into
the hands of unauthorized end users and consequently
to illicit trafficking.
Belarus has a multitiered national export control
system that makes it possible to effectively prevent
military goods from being diverted to illicit trafficking.
In our country, we prioritize the issue of control over
the re-export of military equipment. One prerequisite
for the end user and international import certificates
provided by foreign partners is the obligation not
to re-export without Belarus’ prior consent. When
necessary, we may request the importing State to verify
that the weapons we supply are indeed being used for the
stated purposes. We believe that those elements should

23-0995419/26

S/PV.9301

Threats to international peace and security

be an integral part of every national export control
system and of the relevant multilateral agreements. In
order to minimize the risks of conventional weapons
ending up in illegal trade flows, the following steps
are necessary.
First, we must strictly abide by international and
national export control commitments, while avoiding
any exemptions that serve narrow political interests. In
that context, parties must refrain from arms transfers to
conflict zones, even if a Security Council arms embargo
has not been imposed on that particular region.
Secondly, existing multilateral arrangements and
national legislation should be strengthened, where
necessary, through provisions for mandatory controls
on the re-export of military equipment, including the
prohibition of the re-export of such arms without the
written consent of the original exporter.
Thirdly, the Security Council should be tasked
with regularly reviewing the issue of arms transfers to
armed conflict zones in order to ensure that they are not
used to further escalate such conflicts.
In conclusion, I should like to point out that
Belarus, which finds itself very close to the epicentre of
the events in Ukraine, cannot help but be legitimately
concerned by the ongoing arbitrary actions of NATO
countries stepping up arms supplies to Ukraine and
the direct consequences of such actions, such as the
spread of those weapons throughout the region, with
them ending up in the hands of non-State actors and
terrorists. We are convinced that the time will soon
come when Western weapons will fall into the hands
of extremists and be used against them. We agree with
Russia that there is a need to strengthen depoliticized
arms control by the international community and the
relevant United Nations bodies. We also agree with
Ghana’s assertion that all conflicts are ultimately
resolved through diplomacy and negotiation.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Nasir (Indonesia): I would like to begin by
congratulating Mozambique on its successful presidency
last month, and I thank you, Sir, for convening this
open debate. I also thank Under-Secretary-General
Nakamitsu for her presentation.
The continuing global rise in military expenditure
is disturbing. Given finite resources, the increases
in global military expenditure often come at the
20/26

10/04/2023

expense of international development. The Stockholm
International Peace Research Institute’s database
showed a seven-year consecutive increase in arms sales.
In 2021, the value of arms sales was several times higher
than that of total official development assistance in the
same year, according to the data of the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development.
At a time when the majority of the global
population is fighting to recover from a pandemic and
faces various development challenges, the contrast
between arms sales and official development assistance
shows that our priority has been misplaced. That is
indeed concerning, especially in the light of the current
geopolitical tension. We do not want to add fuel to the
potential conflict that may be simmering beneath — not
to mention the potential impact on global peace and
security should those weapons fall into the wrong
hands. The diversion of arms and military equipment
could increase the threats from armed groups, terrorists
and criminal organizations. While underscoring the
sovereign rights of States with respect to conventional
arms and ammunition, we must intensify international
cooperation to prevent their diversion. In that regard,
allow me to highlight three points.
First, we must strengthen collective efforts
to combat the illegal trafficking in weapons and
ammunitions. The full implementation of existing
international mechanisms, such as the Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, must be supported. The Programme of
Action should be implemented in a balanced, full and
effective manner, in accordance with national laws
and regulations. Particularly important are the issues
of capacity-building for developing countries, the
exchange of information and the sharing of databases
to support tracing efforts.
Secondly, regional mechanisms to address the
transboundary nature of the flow of arms should be
strengthened. Much regional cooperation in that field,
particularly in Africa, the Western Balkans and the
Caribbean region, has proven to have an impact. The
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
continues to strive towards the implementation of the
Programme of Action. ASEAN has also established a
working group on arms smuggling, which focuses on
training and information-sharing. Enhancing regional
cooperation is an important building block in the global
effort to counter illicit arms transfers.
23-09954

10/04/2023

Threats to international peace and security

Thirdly, we need to boost national capacities — a vital
element, considering that the responsibility to address
the illicit flow or transfer of small arms and ammunition
ultimately rests with individual countries. Capacitybuilding programmes play an important role in that
regard. Such capacity-building programmes should not
take a one-size-fits-all approach, but rather focus on
the unique conditions and needs of each country. If all
countries have the adequate capacities and tools at their
disposal, we can better address those challenges.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Poland.
Mr. Szczerski (Poland): Let me begin by thanking
Madam Under-Secretary Izumi Nakamitsu for her very
insightful briefing.
Poland fully supports and complies with all armscontrol regimes and transparency measures aimed at
reducing the risk of military conflicts. We are truly
devoted to global cooperation in this area, as proven by
the numerous initiatives introduced and facilitated by
our country throughout the years.
In the light of recent developments, we believe
that it is especially important for the international
community to tackle the challenge of illicit arms
flows to terrorist organizations and private mercenary
groups operating in foreign countries. These groups’
actions are extremely harmful to global peace, and we
laud such worthy efforts to counter these trends as the
African Union’s Silencing the Guns in Africa initiative.
On the other hand, based on Article 51 of the
United Nations Charter, we are absolutely convinced
that a country aggressed by its neighbour has a right
to legitimate self-defence, including by military force.
Assisting such a country is not only admissible, but
legally substantiated and morally right. A case in point
is Ukraine, which is fighting a just war, defending
itself from a brutal aggression from Russia. We are
supporting the victim of this aggression by providing
humanitarian, financial and military assistance, and
we will continue to do so until a just peace is restored,
international law is obeyed, and perpetrators are
brought to justice. Poland is proud to be a part of the
world’s collective self-defence against the trespasser
trampling on the most fundamental principles of the
United Nations Charter.
This is our stance because Poland anchors its
foreign policy on the need to ensure peace and
strengthen security in our region. We want it to be free

S/PV.9301

of domination, suppression and external threats. We
want it to be stable and sheltered from the scourge of
war. We are resolute in our actions because our own
history is marked with numerous examples of the
horrors of war, including those stemming from Russia.
This year, as every year, in the first days of April, we
commemorate one of the most tragic events in Poland’s
recent history — the Katyn massacre. Back in 1940, on
a secret order issued by Joseph Stalin, the Soviet secret
police conducted a series of mass executions of nearly
22,000 Polish officers and prisoners of war from the
Polish intelligentsia. These events occurred just months
after Stalin’s Red Army had joined Hitler’s Wehrmacht
in the military invasion of Poland, which effectively
started the Second World War. Polish prisoners, their
hands tied, were shot in the back of the head and dumped
in the pits of unmarked mass graves — one by one,
22,000 times. It is no surprise, then, that the images
from last year’s events in Bucha and Irpin brought the
horrible memories from our own past to mind.
It was in the hope that this tragic history would
never repeat itself that the late Polish President Lech
Kaczynski stood before crowds gathered in Tbilisi,
Georgia, in 2008, on the brink of another Russian
invasion of a neighbour. At that time, President
Kaczynski uttered these very prophetic words:
“[Russia] believes that the times of its empire,
which had fallen less than 20 years ago, are coming
back — that domination will once again be a
characteristic of this region. It will not!”
President Kaczynski’s mission to defend the
sovereignty of the countries in our region continued
until the very last day of his presidency, which was
brutally interrupted by a fatal plane crash on this very
day 13 years ago. The tragic symbolism of that event is
amplified by the fact that President Kaczynski, together
with his spouse, the Polish First Lady, Mrs. Maria
Kaczynska, and the rest of his official delegation,
were then on their way to the commemoration of
the seventieth anniversary of the Katyn massacre
I mentioned a moment ago. They all perished near
Smolensk, in Russia.
The investigation into this heartbreaking tragedy
that took lives of 96 people has not been concluded as of
today, as Russia has stubbornly persisted in withholding
from Polish investigators some of the crucial evidence
in the case, namely, the plane remains and the flight
recorders. In addition, access to some key witnesses

23-0995421/26

S/PV.9301

Threats to international peace and security

has also been denied. One may ask, what is the mystery
behind that plane crash that prevents Russia from
granting access to those key pieces of evidence?
For the foregoing reasons, from within the Security
Council Chamber, I am calling on Russia to release the
missing evidence, return the plane wreckage belonging
to Poland under international law and fully cooperate
with Polish investigators in order to clarify all the
circumstances of the disaster so characteristic of the
tragic history of our region.
The President (spoke in Russian): As President of
the Security Council, I must thank the representative of
Poland for his statement, despite the personal challenge
it poses to us. We will find a different time and place to
address that issue.
I now give the floor to the representative of
South Africa.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): South Africa
congratulates the Russian Federation on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of April.
We welcome the opportunity to participate in
today’s open debate on this important matter, which
affects the attainment of peace and security in many
parts of the world. I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Nakamitsu for her briefing, which
shed much light on the threats posed to international
peace and security by the risks stemming from
violations of agreements regulating the export of
weapons and military equipment.
The regulation of South Africa’s conventional
arms, including the transfer of such arms, is governed
strictly by our country’s National Conventional Arms
Control Act. This act of parliament was the result of
South Africa’s decision in 1995 to create the National
Conventional Arms Control Committee, which is at
the Cabinet level. The primary goal of this Committee
has been, and still is, to establish and promote our
country as a responsible producer, possessor and trader
in conventional arms, advanced technologies and
dual-use goods.
South Africa continues to be an active and
constructive partner in terms of global conventional
arms control, particularly as a State party to such
legally binding instruments as the Certain Conventional
Weapons Convention, the Anti-Personnel Mine Ban
Treaty and the Convention on Cluster Munitions. In
22/26

10/04/2023

addition, as far as United Nations political processes
are concerned, South Africa consistently participates
in and submits it annual reports to the United Nations
Register of Conventional Arms. We continue to be
one of the three main sponsors, along with Colombia
and Japan, of the annual General Assembly resolution
entitled “The illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons in all its aspects”, most recently, General
Assembly resolution 77/71.
Under the theme of this debate, South Africa wishes
to emphasize that the adoption of the Arms Trade
Treaty (ATT) arose from the growing global need,
desire and resolve to deal with and curb inadequate
controls on the global conventional arms trade. As
stated in the objectives of the Treaty, the ATT aims to
establish the highest possible common international
standards for regulating or improving the regulation of
the international trade in conventional arms, as well as
to prevent and eradicate the illicit trade in conventional
arms and prevent their diversion.
The ATT may be perceived by some States,
including some represented at this table, to have certain
shortcomings, but there is no clear reason why this
should be an obstacle to any State Member of the United
Nations becoming a State party to the Treaty. The ATT
is a global instrument that is unique in nature, and there
is currently simply no alternative to it as far as arms
trade is concerned in terms of furthering respect for the
United Nations Charter, particularly its Article 2.
In conclusion, in the spirit of the theme of today’s
open debate, South Africa calls on all States Members
of the United Nations committed to the responsible
regulation of export controls of conventional weapons
to ratify and accede to the Arms Trade Treaty
without further delay. This will ensure that our words
are strengthened by our concrete commitment to
multilateral outcomes.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We appreciate the convening of today’s open
debate. For Mexico, it is especially important that
the Security Council continue to seriously analyse
the negative consequences of arms trafficking and
diversion, especially when they are the result of direct
violations of embargoes and binding agreements.
The reports of the Secretary-General and of the
different panels of experts established by the Security
23-09954

10/04/2023

Threats to international peace and security

Council itself show, in fact, that arms embargoes are
constantly violated. One need only consult those
concerning Libya or the Central African Republic,
to mention but two. On many occasions, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and organizations
such as the Stockholm International Peace Research
Institute, as well as the Small Arms Survey, have also
documented illicit transfers of a wide range of weapons
in various regions.
Mexico therefore believes that it is necessary to
strengthen measures to effectively implement Security
Council resolutions. At the end of 2021, my country
sponsored resolution 2616 (2021) as a contribution to
strengthening the tools at the Council’s disposal. We
therefore welcome the fact that the concept note (see
S/2023/243) for this open debate raises questions that,
in our view, can be fully answered through the strict
implementation of that resolution.
Resolution 2616 (2021) particularly emphasizes
respect for arms embargoes imposed by the Council.
Violating those embargoes means that more weapons
become available in various situations and, as a result,
the suffering of civilian populations increases. It
contains provisions on the need for capacity-building
and the provision of assistance, but it also promotes
more collaborative action among States, including
regional land, maritime and air cooperation. It supports
and strengthens common frameworks such as the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects and other regional initiatives, strategies
and action plans.
All States parties to the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT)
must comply with its provisions, particularly regarding
the denial of transfers that would be in violation of
the Treaty, as well as carrying put the rigorous risk
analysis that it stipulates. We call on States that are
not yet party to the ATT to commit to responsibly
complying with strict precautionary standards in their
transfers on the basis of objective criteria beyond their
geostrategic interests or those of private companies,
which sometimes engage in negligent practices with the
acquiescence of States.
We therefore reiterate that it is the responsibility of
all States, particularly producer States, to strengthen
the existing international frameworks to ensure
effective control throughout the life cycle of arms
and ammunition.

S/PV.9301

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): Let me begin by thanking
the delegation of the Russian Federation for organizing
today’s open debate. I also thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Nakamitsu for her briefing.
The illicit transfer and illegal diversion of arms,
including conventional arms and ammunition, small
arms and light weapons, as well as weapons of mass
destruction, their delivery systems and related
materials, equipment and technology, to non-State
actors, including armed and terrorist groups, pose
serious threats to international peace and security. The
unravelling of the global disarmament architecture and
landmark arms control agreements raise deep concerns
about the edifice built up over several decades and the
uncertainties that lie on the road ahead.
The export of weapons and military equipment in
violation of international law, exacerbating geopolitical
tensions, cannot be ignored. All signatories and parties
to, and members of, international instruments, treaties
and organizations on disarmament, arms control and
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
their delivery systems and related materials, equipment
and technology must strive to fulfil their obligations in
a transparent manner.
The quantum of those threats multiplies when
certain States with dubious proliferation credentials,
in view of their masked proliferation networks and
deceptive procurement practices of sensitive goods
and technologies, collude with terrorists and other
non-State actors. For example, the increase in the
volume and quantity of small arms acquired by
terrorist organizations time and again reminds us that
they cannot exist without the sponsorship or support
of States.
In our context, we face the serious challenge of the
cross-border supply of illicit weapons using drones,
which cannot be possible without active support
from the authorities in control of those territories.
The international community should condemn such
behaviour and hold such States accountable for
their misdeeds.
For its part, India has accorded a high importance
to the work of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), on non-proliferation. We
have been consistent in stressing the importance of
addressing the rapid evolution of proliferation risks due

23-0995423/26

S/PV.9301

Threats to international peace and security

to new and emerging technologies, particularly access
to weapons of mass destruction, their means of delivery
and related materials, equipment and technology by
terrorist groups and other non-State actors.
As a responsible member of the international
community and a significant importer and exporter of
arms, India is a party to major international instruments,
such as the Chemical Weapons Convention, the
Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention and the
Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons, among
others. India also supports the Programme of Action on
Small Arms, as well as the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms and the United Nations Report on
Military Expenditures. Furthermore, India is a member
of three of the multilateral export control regimes on the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
their delivery systems, related materials, equipment and
technologies, including the Wassenaar Arrangement,
which deals with export controls for conventional arms
and dual-use goods and technologies.
India has strong and effective national export
controls governing the transfer of conventional
weapons, which conform to the highest international
standards, and we remain committed to preventing
the illegal transfer of conventional weapons. India
has undertaken robust national efforts through the
appropriate legal and regulatory frameworks to address
conventional ammunition management from the point
of manufacture to its disposal or use. With our longstanding commitment to global non-proliferation, we
have established a strong legal and regulatory system
in India to implement the provisions of resolution 1540
(2004) and our other international obligations.
The pursuit of the prevention of the unregulated
trade in conventional weapons and related dual-use
goods and technologies cannot restrict, and should
not prejudice, the legitimate right of States to engage
in the arms trade for self-defence and in pursuit of
their foreign policy and national security interests. It
is therefore important to strike a balance between the
obligations of exporters and importers without unduly
hampering the legitimate trade in conventional arms.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Ahmadi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate. I
also thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her insightful briefing.
24/26

10/04/2023

I congratulate Russia on its presidency of the Security
Council for this month and commend Mozambique on
the successful completion of its March presidency.
My delegation had not initially intended to speak
regarding the issue under the agenda item for today’s
meeting. However, to our dismay, the United States
and certain members of the Security Council once
again abused the Council’s forum, as is their standard
practice, to further their own political agendas and level
baseless charges against my country. That compelled
my delegation to ask for the floor and make a statement
in unambiguous denial of those baseless assertions.
First of all, the export of weapons and military
equipment is a highly sensitive issue that requires
Member States to uphold their commitments if they are
to prevent them from falling into the hands of terrorist
and criminal groups. Failure in that area can have
serious consequences for international and regional
peace and security. And exporting weapons and military
equipment to countries affected by conflict can help to
intensify the violence and prolong the conflicts. That in
turn leads to increased casualties, civilian displacement
and humanitarian crises. Furthermore, violations
of obligations can fuel arms races and create power
imbalances, exacerbating conflicts and undermining
efforts for their peaceful resolution.
As a victim of foreign-backed terrorist groups and
organized crime dealing with the dire consequences of
drug trafficking and the trade in illicit weapons, the
Islamic Republic of Iran is deeply concerned about the
illicit transfer of weapons and small arms to terrorist
groups. We strongly condemn and categorically reject
the baseless allegations that the United States and
various Council members have made about my country
at this meeting. Iran has always upheld its obligations
under international law and has never transferred
arms in violation of its obligations. Our position on
the ongoing Ukraine crisis is clear and consistent.
We have always advocated for resolving the conflict
through peaceful means. We have repeatedly denied the
completely unfounded claims that we have transferred
weapons for use in the Ukraine conflict, including
unmanned aerial vehicles, allegations that have nothing
to do with resolution 2231 (2015). It is evident that the
prime objective of such assertions and fabrications is to
divert attention from the United States and the West’s
massive transfer of high-tech weapons to Ukraine with
the aim of prolonging the conflict. We have advised
the United States and other members to cease their
23-09954

10/04/2023

Threats to international peace and security

unprofessional and irresponsible behaviour and to fully
comply in good faith with all their legal obligations
under resolution 2231 (2015).
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Mohammad Khan (Pakistan): I thank
you, Sir, for convening this timely and important
debate. We wish you a successful presidency of the
Security Council. I also acknowledge the presence of
Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, Under-Secretary-General and
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, and
thank her for her constructive briefing, which provided
us with insightful input for today’s debate.
The negative consequences resulting from the
misuse of weapons, whether small or heavy, are well
known and amply documented, as are other factors such
as illicit trading, brokering, diversion, lax regulations
and the weak management of weapon stockpiles.
Innocent people, including women and children, fall
victim every day to the murderous designs of terrorists,
criminals and insurgents using such weapons.
Peacekeepers, police and security forces bear the brunt
of it in the line of duty. These lethal instruments of
violence are widely available, inexpensive and easy to
transport and conceal.
We concur that such weapons are major enablers of
criminal violence and conflict. The nexus of organized
crime, drug trafficking and the illegal arms trade adds
a layer of complexity to a daunting challenge. The
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects, the International Tracing Instrument
and the Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing
of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and
Components and Ammunition provide solid normative
frameworks for addressing the use, regulation and
impact of such weapons. All States should intensify
their efforts to fully implement those mechanisms. For
developing countries, particularly in Africa, the role of
international assistance and cooperation is critical. It
is the principal enabler of global, regional and national
efforts to regulate and prevent their use. We therefore
call for a stronger commitment from the international
community to mobilizing resources to that end.
Arms regulations, including through enhanced
controls and improved standards for their transfer,
are essential, and it is vital to enforce the Security
Council’s arms embargoes. Effective marking and

S/PV.9301

increased cooperation in the tracing of weapons are
necessary. Those mechanisms, however, primarily
focus on regulating the supply side of such weapons.
We urgently need to develop mechanisms and mobilize
the political will required to address the demand
side. That means dealing with unresolved disputes,
the root causes of conflicts, the breeding grounds of
terrorism and the factors behind the rise in organized
crime. In most cases, peace and security are threatened
by the ultra-nationalist and hegemonic policies of a
few States, particularly those that are turbocharged
by their extremist ideologies. They seek to build up
their conventional and nuclear-weapon capabilities,
including by acquiring weapons with which to threaten
neighbours, impose their regional hegemony and
promote great-Power aspirations. They also indulge
in behaviour that seeks to oppress their minorities and
crush their quest for self-determination. Such States are
emboldened by a lack of global accountability and by the
generous supply of advanced weapons, and technologies
from multiple sources have also emboldened such
regimes to follow that aggressive course.
It is even more important to address the causes of war
than its instruments. In order to deal with the growing
and unacceptable human cost that such weapons inflict,
particularly in situations of foreign occupation and
suppression of the right to self-determination, we need
a comprehensive and integrated approach. It is perhaps
time to initiate a new debate on the links between the
excessive production, trade and use of such weapons
and their impact on societies. We know from historical
experience that instituting controls on trade and
transfers cannot be separated from the motives behind
arms production. Similarly, the acquisition of arms by
States motivated by security needs cannot be de-linked
from their production and sale, which is driven by
profit and politics. It remains a grim irony that the
weapons that propel and sustain conflicts come from
areas or regions that enjoy peace. A mere four countries
account for two thirds of all global arms exports, while
the major importers are developing countries, mainly
in the Middle East, Asia and Africa. We need to make
the entire chain of the development, production, trade,
transfer and impact of such weapons part of a new
global debate. Pakistan has developed the necessary
legislative, regulatory, enforcement and institutional
mechanisms to regulate the sale, supply, import and
transfer of such weapons. An internal ministerial
group addresses those issues in an integrated manner.
We have adopted policy guidelines for the export of

23-0995425/26

S/PV.9301

Threats to international peace and security

conventional arms and established mechanisms to
regulate the trade, ownership and use of such weapons.
We are also taking additional measures, including in
the areas of enforcement, imports and licensing.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lebanon.
Mr. Jardali (Lebanon): I would first like to
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month, and to thank you
for organizing this important open debate.
Lebanon shares with many other countries a grave
concern about the exacerbation of the problems linked
to non-compliance with arms-transfer obligations, as
well as the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons.
Many of the conflicts in my region and neighbouring
regions are linked to such transfers. Non-compliance
with arms-transfer obligations escalates and prolongs
local conflicts and further destabilizes regional
stability. It intensifies violations of human rights by
State and non-State actors, thereby worsening the lives
of civilians. It is also an enabler of terrorist groups,
since such illicit trades and transfers can result in
weapons falling into the hands of terrorists or other
non-State actors, increasing the risk of terrorism and
other forms of violence. And it has a direct negative
impact on the economic and social development of the
countries affected.
The international community can play a crucial role
in enhancing the efforts of all States to prevent violations
of agreements and regulations concerning the transfer
of conventional weapons and military equipment. Many
treaties and agreements are in force to regulate arms
exports and transfers, but clearly that is not enough
and more needs to be done. Existing international
treaties and agreements need to be strengthened.
Providing technical assistance and training to Member

26/26

10/04/2023

States in order to enhance their capacity to implement
arms transfer regulations and ensure proper end-use
monitoring is also required. All States, especially
the main exporters of arms and weapons, need to be
transparent about their arms exports and transfers and
share information about the potential violations of arms
transfer agreements and regulations. Sanctions and
arms embargoes put in place by the Security Council
need to be respected and implemented by all States. At
the national level, updating and strengthening national
legislation is needed regularly, including through
measures such as stricter licensing requirements and
mandatory end-use monitoring.
Enhancing border control is also a key element,
which requires investing in technology and training so
that customs officials can identify and intercept illegal
arms shipments by land and sea. Bilateral and regional
cooperation, assistance and capacity-building, in-kind
provision of advanced equipment for border control
and monitoring and sharing intelligence on illicit arms
flows all play an important role in making border
control efficient. The effective control of arms and
weapons exports can play a significant role in limiting
the length of local conflicts. By limiting the availability
of weapons to warring parties, arms control measures
can reduce the intensity and duration of conflicts,
which can help to prevent the escalation of violence and
promote conflict resolution through peaceful means.
Finally, the Security Council has a very important
responsibility within its mandate to ensure that
arms embargoes are respected and enforced. Unity
among its members and their commitment to the full
implementation of Security Council resolutions, as well
as unity among the other States Members of the United
Nations, are also key to the effective implementation of
any measure taken by the Council.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

23-09954
