S/PV.8587

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8587th meeting

Friday, 26 July 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Meza-Cuadra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Peru)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Moriko
Mr. Beras Hernández
Mr. Sipaco Ribala
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Mabhongo
Ms. Pierce
Ms. Norman-Chalet

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-23111 (E)
*1923111*

S/PV.8587

The situation in Afghanistan

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Afghanistan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, and Ms. Jamila Afghani,
Women’s International League for Peace and Freedom,
Afghanistan section.
Ms. Afghani is joining via video-teleconference
from Kabul.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to warmly welcome the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, Her Excellency Ms. Amina Mohammed, to
whom I now give the floor.
The Deputy Secretary-General: I thank the
President of the Security Council for convening today’s
meeting on women, peace and security in Afghanistan,
and the Council for its continued engagement around
this issue.
Let me start by expressing my deep condolences
to the Government and the people of Afghanistan
for the horrific attacks that took place yesterday.
Indiscriminate attacks that kill women and children
are an affront to our humanity and a crime under
international humanitarian law. The United Nations
stands with Afghans as they work for lasting peace
and security.
I returned this week from a visit to Afghanistan,
which I undertook with the Under-Secretary-General
for the Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs and the Executive Directors of UN-Women
and the United Nations Population Fund. This was the
third visit of its kind, following visits to Nigeria and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in 2017, and to
Chad, the Niger and South Sudan last year. We wanted
to assess and build on progress since the Secretary2/22

26/07/2019

General visited Afghanistan two years ago and to
explore the United Nations support for the women
and peace and security agenda. I sincerely thank the
Government and the people of Afghanistan for their
hospitality and the robust and constructive interactions.
I thank the members of the international community
who took time to meet us and share their hopes while
we were in Kabul. I thank the United Nations system in
Afghanistan for upholding our values at great risk.
During our visit, we were privileged to hold talks
with His Excellency President Ashraf Ghani, His
Excellency the Chief Executive, the First Lady and other
senior leaders and religious scholars. We made a field
visit to the province of Bamiyan and talked to many
extraordinary women leaders and decision-makers,
many of them young, working in civil society
organizations, in the security sector, as entrepreneurs
or as health-care workers.
Afghan women have paid a high price during the
conflict that has affected their country for most of the
past four decades. Under the Taliban Government,
women and girls were denied access to education,
health services and protection from extreme violence
and could not participate in political or public life. Over
the past 18 years, there has been significant progress.
Women are in senior roles in the Ministries of Defence,
Foreign Affairs and Interior Affairs. Some 27 per cent
of the civil service is female, and there are women
serving as mayors and provincial governors.
Critical elections are scheduled for September, and
the heads of the Independent Election Commission and
Electoral Complaints Commission are both women. It
is vital for the legitimacy of the political system that
all stakeholders, including the Government, political
leaders, candidates and parties, contribute to an
enabling environment for a credible electoral process.
I know that in due course Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo will talk in more detail on this issue.
As we witnessed again yesterday, conflict continues
in Afghanistan. In 2018, the country suffered the
highest number of civilian casualties since the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan began
recording figures in 2009. In the first five months of
this year, more than 100,000 people were displaced by
conflict, and we know displacement increases the risk
of gender-based violence in all areas. In areas where
the Taliban have reclaimed control, there are reports of
honour killings, stoning and other attacks on women’s
19-23111

26/07/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

rights. Peace, security and economic stability are
urgently needed.
During our visit, we heard a strong call from Afghan
women for peace — but for peace that safeguards their
hard-won rights and does not backtrack on what has
been achieved. All the women we spoke to want an
inclusive peace centred on women, and, I would say
here, on the victims and the survivors over the years.
Afghan women, like women everywhere, must play
a part in decisions that will affect their future. In
Bamiyan, we saw the incredible mine-clearance work
that women are doing with the support of the United
Nations, risking their lives alongside men to bring
safety to their communities.
Inclusivity is not only the right thing to do for
women and girls. It is the only way to make durable
peace. As one woman told us: “It is an illusion if you
think that you are going to give away people’s rights
and then have any real peace.” It will take time for
peace to be sustainable and it must be inclusive of the
whole country, of women and of victims. Building a
culture of peace means addressing the violations and
divisions of the past. The country needs closure.
Inclusion and consensus are also essential
to creating the greatest possible peace dividend,
benefiting all parts of the economy and all sections
of society. We must continue to support Afghans in
rebuilding trust across communities and in addressing
stigma and discrimination based on gender, ethnicity or
regional differences.
Afghanistan has made great progress for women
since the fall of the Taliban. More than 3 million
children are back in school, with 9 out of 11 million
Afghan children now enrolled. Investments in
reducing maternal mortality are saving thousands of
lives. Improved infrastructure and power supplies are
connecting more remote areas to national economic
opportunities, including exports to neighbouring
countries. We saw that in Bamiyan, where a provincial
hospital dispenses free world-class care to people of
Bamiyan and the neighbouring areas. That is possible
thanks to the innovative partnership between the
Government and the Aga Khan Foundation.
Afghanistan has done more to invest in women’s
leadership than many countries with greater means.
Women, especially young women, are rising to reclaim
their rightful place in all areas of society, and many
are quite simply inspiring. One entrepreneur, who has

S/PV. 8587

created hundreds of jobs for women in a factory and
a market, told me: “When we empower a woman, we
empower a generation.”
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
holds great promise for the lives of Afghans across
the country. Twenty-four United Nations agencies are
working in strategic partnership with the Government
on issues from food security and clean water to the rule
of law, often risking their lives. The reform of the United
Nations development system is enabling our country
team to work in a more integrated way than ever before,
responding to the President’s call to be more effective,
efficient and responsive to country-led priorities.
Achieving Sustainable Development Goal (SDG)
5, on gender equality, will be essential to ensuring
that women have access to education, health care
and decent work and that women are represented in
all areas of society and in all political and economic
decision-making processes, including in Government
and especially the peace negotiations. SDG 16, on peace,
justice and strong institutions, will also be essential to
holding free, fair and credible elections, to building trust
in State institutions and to facilitating reconciliation
and the reintegration of former combatants after the
signing of any peace agreement.
In the short term, 6.3 million people need urgent
humanitarian aid across Afghanistan. Halfway through
the year, the humanitarian response plan is only 27 per
cent funded. We must increase the level of urgency to
provide immediate support and protection to displaced
people and those in greatest need.
Afghanistan is at an important crossroads. We
welcome the Government’s commitment to peace and
to upholding the democratic rights of all Afghans, who
have suffered beyond imagination over recent decades.
Afghan women play a central role in creating peaceful,
inclusive communities with opportunities for women,
girls, men, boys, people with disabilities and victims
and survivors of the conflict. They need and deserve
the support of the entire United Nations system and the
international community to invest in building on the
gains, while sustaining the peace.
The voices of women, especially the victims, must
be heard at the table in the peace process and beyond. I
am pleased to say that we are considering a significant
investment in preventing and ending violence against
women in Afghanistan through our joint Spotlight
Initiative with the European Union.

19-231113/22

S/PV.8587

The situation in Afghanistan

During our visit, my colleagues and I saw enormous
grounds for hope. We left with great optimism for a
better future for Afghanistan and its impressive people.
I urge the Council to do all in its power to support
Afghans in realizing their hopes and aspirations for a
lasting peace, stability and prosperity.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Mohammed for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: This is an important year for
Afghanistan as the population marks the 100th year of
its independence. As the Deputy Secretary-General just
highlighted, the country is at a pivotal juncture with an
unprecedented opportunity for peace. While a number
of initiatives are ongoing, presidential elections are
only nine weeks away.
Allow me to update the Security Council briefly on
political developments since the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, briefed the Council on 19 June (S/PV.8555).
I will first turn to elections. Our message to the Afghan
people is the need for the upcoming presidential
election, scheduled for 28 September, to be credible
and held on time. We are pleased to once again provide
technical assistance for the conduct of the elections.
I am pleased to report that the Independent Election
Commission has made steady progress in preparing for
the voting. during our recent visit I met with members
of the Independent Election Commission and of the
Electoral Complaints Commission in order to receive
an update on their plans and learn of the challenges that
they still face. In addition to a large technical support
team embedded with both electoral bodies, the United
Nations has also deployed two non-voting members to
each Commission. They are experienced former electoral
commissioners from Bulgaria, Ghana, Kenya and
Nepal, appointed to provide advice to the Commissions.
The Afghan commissioners were appointed through
a consultative process that included political parties,
civil society and presidential candidates.
Regarding the progress made, an election
budget of $149 million has been finalized. The
Government has committed to covering a significant
portion — $90 million. The international community
has pledged to finance the remaining $59 million.
4/22

26/07/2019

The voter registration update exercise was just
concluded. More than half a million more Afghans have
registered, of whom some 36 per cent are women. This
is the first time that citizens were given an opportunity
to review and make corrections to the 2018 voter list.
The IEC announced a preliminary figure of 9.6 million
registered voters for the upcoming elections. The
Independent Election Commission is also working to
implement biometric voter verification and electronic
results transmission technology. If successfully
implemented, they will introduce an additional layer
of fraud mitigation and address specific post-election
challenges observed in 2018.
The security assessment of more than 5,000 polling
centres has been completed. Security arrangements
for the campaign period are also being put in place.
However, security has been a consistent concern in
Afghan elections, often infringing on the right to
vote, particularly of women and of those living in very
insecure areas. We encourage the Afghan Government
and the Independent Election Commission to pay
attention to the security of all voters, including women,
during the process.
Ahead of the campaign, starting this weekend,
the Independent Election Commission also issued
accreditation letters for the agents of presidential
candidates. There are now 18 presidential candidates,
three of whom have women as vice presidential
candidates on their slates.
Despite the progress, challenges remain. The
recruitment of thousands of polling staff needs to
be finalized. The training of those staff, as well as
observers and candidate agents, is extremely important.
The necessary equipment and materials will need to be
in place to complete all preparations in a timely fashion
and deliver the upcoming elections in a credible and
transparent manner. With only nine weeks remaining
to the polling and the Commissions working against
the clock, there is no room for delays of a technical or
political nature. Close collaboration among all actors
is critical to ensuring that the remaining steps are
completed according to the set electoral calendar.
However, successful elections are not determined
by only technical matters. Maintaining a level playing
field among all candidates is key to credible elections.
The United Nations urges all actors to exercise
restraint and show respect for the independence of the
Independent Election Commission and the Electoral
19-23111

26/07/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV. 8587

Complaints Commission. We also encourage both
Commissions to regularly engage with a broad range
of stakeholders and ensure that the public is kept fully
informed during the process.

respect international humanitarian law, ensure access
for humanitarian agencies to provide life-saving
assistance, and distinguish between combatants and
civilian targets to protect civilians from hostilities.

Similarly, we expect the candidates and other
stakeholders to assume their important responsibility for
the credibility of the electoral process. The overriding
responsibility for a successful election lies with the
political leaders themselves. Credible presidential
elections are vital in order to give the newly elected
President the authority needed to bring the country
together in the peace process.

Afghans deserve peace and the right to choose
their representatives. The United Nations remains
committed to assist Afghanistan in its efforts aimed
at attaining peace, stability and prosperity. As the
Deputy-secretary General said, we urge the Security
Council to do the same.

Let me now turn to the peace process. As the
Deputy Secretary-General stated, all Afghans we met
made clear their desire for peace now and view recent
events as an unprecedented opportunity to achieve
peace after so many decades of conflict. Direct talks
between the United States and the Taliban continue.
The first intra-Afghan peace conference, co-hosted
by Germany and Qatar, took place from 7 to 8 July
in Doha. While delegates, including Government
officials participated in their individual capacities, this
was an important step forward towards one common
objective — to start formal negotiations between the
Government of Afghanistan and the Taliban to reach a
sustainable peace agreement. Additional intra-Afghan
conferences are being planned.
Regional engagement to support the Afghan
peace process has also intensified. From 10 to 11 July,
representatives of China, Russia and the United States
held their third consultation on the Afghan peace
process in Beijing. Pakistan joined the consultation.
On 19 July, the fifth round of the China-AfghanistanPakistan Practical Cooperation Dialogue took place
in Islamabad.
Our interlocutors stressed that peace cannot come
at any cost, particularly the democratic gains of the last
18 years. I was heartened to see women-representatives
participating in the Dialogue in Doha. As the Deputy
Secretary-General stressed earlier, women need to
fully, effectively and directly participate in peace talks
and negotiations for a peace process to be sustainable.
A political solution to the conflict in Afghanistan
remains more relevant than ever, as civilians continue
to bear the brunt of the conflict. All too often, civilians
are either injured or killed, including when caught in the
crossfire, struck by explosive weapons or deliberately
targeted. We call on all parties to the conflict to

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Afghani.
Ms. Afghani: I am Jamila Afghani, President of
the Afghanistan section of the Women’s International
League for Peace and Freedom, a feminist and pacifist
organization working for peace through equality, justice
and demilitarization. I also serve as Executive Director
of Medica Afghanistan, which provides psychosocial
and legal services to approximately 2,000 victims of
sexual and gender-based violence per year.
In my 22 years as a feminist religious leader, I
have trained as human rights defenders and advocates
more than 6,000 imams and 10,000 women activists,
focusing on the principles of moderation, social justice,
tolerance, gender equality and social participation.
My statement today will focus on three key issues: the
gendered impact of the conflict, the importance of free
and fair elections and the need for Afghan women’s
meaningful participation in the current peace talks.
The conflict in Afghanistan has resulted in civilian
deaths, casualties and displacement, with more than
2 million refugees living outside the country. In the first
quarter of 2019 alone, 110,000 people were reported
newly displaced. Undoubtedly, the humanitarian
situation in Afghanistan remains serious and requires
immediate attention.
Women are also adversely impacted by genderbased violence, armed violence, and unequal access to
education and poverty alleviation. Women live under
the constant threat of insecurity, with profound limits
on their political, civil, social and cultural rights. Their
ability to freely access education and work — to safely
travel to school and jobs — is affected by attacks on
schools and places of work. The situation is worse for
women and girls in rural areas.

19-231115/22

S/PV.8587

The situation in Afghanistan

Gender-based violence against women and girls
by State and non-State actors continues. More than
60 per cent of women have experienced violence. The
targeting of schools and education personnel, night
raids on households, the abduction and recruitment
of boys for armed violence, acts of violence against
journalists, media workers and health-care facilities,
torture of conflict-related detainees, the abduction
and assassination of religious leaders, and sexual
and gender-based violence against women and girls
continue to characterize the human rights situation
in Afghanistan.
Yet despite the fact that women are affected by the
conflict, and even though women and youth comprise
the majority of the Afghan population, they are minor
players in political life and the economy. Women remain
sidelined in the current peace talks.
After four decades of war, Afghanistan is today at a
critical juncture. Two important tasks lie ahead of us: the
peace process and the upcoming presidential elections,
Free, fair and secure elections will be important for
the intra-Afghan peace talks and formal negotiations
between the Government and the Taliban to be
successful. In earlier elections, polls indicated that
approximately 4.2 million out of the 8.8 million
registered to vote actually voted. Many Afghans
appeared to have stayed at home instead of going to
the polling stations owing to fears of violence. Voting
was also marred by technical obstacles and corruption
throughout the country. The upcoming September
presidential elections will require addressing these
issues in order to ensure full participation of Afghan
voters, especially women and persons with disabilities.
We are also concerned about the possibility of a failed
election and waste of resources, whereby the gap
among political parties, the Afghan Government and
Taliban would be widened. This requires the immediate
attention of the United Nations and other relevant actors.
Since September 2018, the United States and other
countries have been working quickly to facilitate efforts
to achieve a negotiated peace settlement. There has
been a clear absence of the meaningful participation
of women and such other actors as victims directly
affected by war in the peace process, alarming many
who know that an inclusive delegation for peace is
important to ensuring the success of the process and
the sustainability of peace in Afghanistan.
6/22

26/07/2019

Afghan women must be able to meaningfully
participate in decisions that directly affect them,
including the design, implementation and monitoring
of such decisions. Although the United States is
obligated to ensure women’s active participation in the
peace processes, pursuant to its own domestic Women,
Peace and Security Act of 2017 and its Strategy on
Women, Peace and Security of 2019, its approach to
its peace talks with the Taliban has instead led to the
marginalization of women in the peace process.
Women have participated as members of the
High Peace Council in discussions for a future peace
agreement, but this is no longer a viable pathway for the
meaningful contribution of women in the peace process
because the High Peace Council is limited to serving
as a consultative body, merely raising public awareness
rather than directly contributing to the peace process.
Furthermore, Afghans remain concerned about the
politicization of the peace talks by national, regional and
international actors that do not advocate the interests of
Afghans. At the recent peace talks in Doha, 11 strong
women participants demonstrated their solidarity and
commitment to national interests and communicated
directly with the Taliban about their rights,
Afghan women today are not the women of 30 or
40 years ago.
We know our rights; they have been granted by our
faith and are guaranteed by the Constitution, as required
by international conventions ratified by Afghanistan.
The international community must stand with us at this
critical moment and ensure that our rights will not be
compromised for a political peace deal. It must actively
push for women to be given a place the table and to be
publicly and actively engaged in building the future of
their country in order to ensure sustainable peace for
the nation.
I therefore urge the Council to ensure clear
procedures to engage Afghan women from diverse
backgrounds in peace negotiations and conflict
resolution efforts, including negotiators and religious
leaders who can bridge the current political gaps
towards sustainable peace. Furthermore, the Council
should ensure that the organization and facilitation of
the elections scheduled for later this year make space
for women through enhanced security for women voters
and candidates and for networks among Government,
civil society and other stakeholders to promote the
participation of women as voters, candidates and
19-23111

26/07/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

observers. As the most important and trustworthy
body in the world, the United Nations must call for an
immediate ceasefire and a stop to the bloodshed on
both sides.
Finally, the Council should inquire about the
measures being taken to ensure the security and
protection of women leaders, women religious
peacemakers, women’s rights activists, women human
rights defenders and journalists.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Afghani for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Mr. President, I thank you
for putting this item on the agenda. It was not difficult
to convince you, Sir, as we co-chair the Informal
Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security. I
thank you very much and I also thank my colleague
from Indonesia, with whom we are penholders on
Afghanistan, so, in a joint move, we put this very
important issue on the agenda.
I would like to start by thanking Deputy SecretaryGeneral Amina Mohammed and Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo for their trip to Afghanistan.
It sent a very important signal to the United Nations
system and the international community, and that
signal was recognized in the country. I also thank them
for their briefings.
I can only subscribe to what they both said with
regard to the issue of women and peace and security.
First, Ms. Mohammed reminded us about the progress
made. When we think of the Taliban of 20 years ago,
we recall the marginalization of women who were not
allowed to get a real education or accept a job, let alone
participate in political life. What we have achieved
today therefore is very good. As the Deputy SecretaryGeneral said, “women are rising”. Women are now in
school. I remember, when I was in Afghanistan years
ago, I saw girls in a schoolroom and was touched
by how eager they were to learn. It is a wonderful
image. Based on the statistics we heard, women now
participate in political life. They have jobs. They are
journalists. They are rising, as Ms. Mohammed said.
More infrastructure — such as schools — is open to
them. A great deal has already been achieved. It has
to be absolutely clear that whatever the outcome of the
political process, the rights that have been achieved

S/PV. 8587

thus far must be safeguarded and guaranteed. And, of
course, we have to go beyond that.
We heard about the positive aspects, but our
briefer Jamila Afghani informed us of what is on the
negative side of the equation. The conflict is ongoing.
We would like to express our condolences about the
recent attacks that occurred. Women — and children
for that matter — continue to be the primary victims of
conflict. They have to survive in a situation of violence,
and they have to figure out how their families will also
survive. We hear that sexual and gender-based violence
continues to occur in the country. Much therefore
remains to be done.
In terms of women’s participation, we heard that
they are participating but not on the front lines. It is
wonderful that there are three female vice-presidential
candidates but there is no female presidential candidate.
We are pleased that Afghanistan’s Permanent
Representative to the United Nations is a woman,
although she is not here today. Germany has not yet
had a woman Permanent Representative to the United
Nations. We have to change that— perhaps not too
quickly— but that must change.
With regard to what needs to be done in the
negotiations, Germany helped to put together the
intra-Afghan dialogue, in which 20 per cent of the
participants were women — we were very pleased that
Jamila Afghani was one of the participants — but this
is not enough. In the negotiations taking place in Doha
between the United States and the Taliban, we must
ensure that women do not remain in the background
but that they are at the table, listened to and able to
make a real impact so that their rights are respected.
The country will not be at peace if women’s rights are
not protected or if they do not have equal opportunities.
In addition, accountability for crimes that have been
committed is extremely important.
I thank Ms. Mohammed for her remarks on the
work of the United Nations. I very much welcome
cooperation with the European Union-United Nations
Spotlight Initiative. There is perhaps one operational
point within the United Nations system: in the local
staff of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan more women could be employed, which, I
think, will also have a strong impact.
In her plea for more women’s participation, which
we all support, Jamila Afghani said that the international
community must stand with the women of Afghanistan.

19-231117/22

S/PV.8587

The situation in Afghanistan

26/07/2019

I can confirm that the Security Council does support
them, and I hope everyone will join that support. The
international community also stands behind her and her
work. I wish her every success in her efforts.

established by President Ghani in November 2018 as
the negotiating team, five are women. We hope that
the number of women and the scope of their roles will
continue to increase.

Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I thank the President for
convening today’s meeting. The beauty of speaking
after my German colleague and fellow penholder is
that I do not have to say much. He made many points
with which I agree, except for the one about changing
Permanent Representatives. Like Germany, we have
not yet had a woman Permanent Representative, but we
have had a female Foreign Minister.

We were happy to hear from Deputy SecretaryGeneral Amina Mohammed just now that the role
played by women in Afghanistan is improving: in terms
of improving school enrolment, reducing maternal
mortality and participating in political life. However,
I think much remains to be done. Of course, we concur
with Ms. Mohammed’s point that, in building a culture
of peace, including women is the only way to make
peace. This is a very important aspect.

First, I would like to thank Deputy SecretaryGeneral Amina Mohammed and Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo for their briefings and their
recent visit to Afghanistan. I agree with Mr. Heusgen
that the visit was certainly a show of force and support
for the process in Afghanistan. I would also like to
thank Ms. Jamila Afghani for her valiant work on
behalf of Afghan women.
It is a critical time for Afghanistan, as efforts for
an intra-Afghan dialogue gather pace and Afghanistan
moves towards the presidential election in September.
We thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her
briefing in this regard. We are happy to hear that an
increasing number of people are registering to vote
and that 36 per cent of them are women. That is a sign
of progress.
There have been many calls by Afghan women for
women’s rights and roles not to be compromised in the
name of an agreement. I think this is a point on which
we can certainly concur with Ms. Jamila Afghani.
The two-day solidarity mission by all-women top
United Nations officials that focused on women and
peace and security has reinforced the message that the
international community cares about the well-being
of Afghan women. Their meaningful participation
in building an inclusive and democratic Afghanistan
ensures that the rights of all segments of society are
equal and protected.
I would just like to add three points. First, the
need for greater and more meaningful participation of
women in the peace and reconciliation process cannot
be overstated. Indonesia remains a strong believer in
the idea that the meaningful participation of women
in the peace and reconciliation process increases the
chances for peace to be sustained. We are pleased
that, of the 37 members of the reconciliation council
8/22

Secondly, I would like to underscore the importance
of continuing to mainstream the women and peace and
security agenda in Afghanistan. There have been an
increased number of positive signs of the advancement
of the women and peace and security agenda in recent
years, but this progress needs to happen all over the
country. Indonesia hopes that success in the peace
and reconciliation process will lead to unstoppable
advancement everywhere. In this regard, we support
the Government’s efforts to finalize the second phase
of its national action plan on women and peace and
security for the period 2019-2022.
We also applaud the election of two women — to lead
the Independent Election Commission and the Electoral
Complaints Commission. Moreover, the fact that
36 per cent of the 8.5 million registered voters in the
October 2018 parliamentary elections were women
only underlines their enthusiasm for contributing to the
democratic process. However, we heard Ms. Afghani’s
plea and concur that there is a need for greater
involvement of women in Afghan democratic life, and
I think that the Council needs to do more to this end.
Thirdly, the security situation should improve. It
is regrettable that, despite the ongoing peace process,
bombing and attacks are also ongoing, resulting in
many civilian casualties. This cannot continue. We
call for all Afghan political leaders to commit to the
peace process and to the protection civilians. Indonesia
condemns yesterday’s attacks in several provinces in
Afghanistan, and we express our deepest sympathy
and condolences to the families of the victims and to
the Government of Afghanistan. Attacks on civilians,
particularly women and children, are a crime.
We once again reiterate that violence and extremism
have no place in religion. Accordingly, Indonesia will
19-23111

26/07/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

continue to support endeavours to involve members of
ulema in peacemaking so that they convey the message
of peace and harmony and become the voice of reason.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to start by thanking Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed and Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo for briefing us on their recent joint
mission to Afghanistan, together with the Executive
Directors of the United Nations Population Fund and
UN-Women, and for outlining the current situation
in Afghanistan. I have also listened attentively to the
remarks of Ms. Jamila Afghani, who spoke on behalf of
civil society in Afghanistan today.
At present, the situation in Afghanistan is at a
critical juncture. Election preparations and the peace
and reconciliation process are moving ahead side by side,
while the security situation is a source of concern and
the humanitarian situation remains grim. The United
Nations and the international community must continue
to support the Afghan political and reconciliation
process, preparations for the presidential election and
capacity-building in fighting terrorism and maintaining
stability. They must also honour their commitments in
providing assistance to improve the local humanitarian
situation and support Afghan reconstruction and
reintegration into regional economic cooperation.
Although they are important force for maintaining
international peace and security, women are also
a vulnerable group prone to be victimized in
armed conflicts. Women are important builders of,
contributors to and participants in the peace process.
The international community must support Afghanistan
in enhancing protection for women, ensuring women’s
full access to participation and decision-making in the
political sphere and peace process. At same time, it is
also important to fully accommodate and respect local
social realities and cultural traditions, build up the
country’s capacities relating to women and peace and
security, and respect the country’s national ownership
of the process.
Just now, Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo
also talked about the China-Russia-United States
consultation in Beijing, which is the third round of
consultations in Beijing on the issue of Afghanistan.
We welcome Pakistan joining the consultations and
trust that it will play an absolutely crucial role in
advancing peace in Afghanistan. After the meeting, the
four parties issued a four-party joint statement on the

S/PV. 8587

Afghan peace process. I wish to take this opportunity to
brief the Council on the outcomes of this consultation.
The four sides exchanged views on the current
situation and joint efforts aimed at realizing a political
settlement that would advance peace, stability and
prosperity in Afghanistan and throughout the region.
They emphasized the importance of their trilateral
consensus on the Afghan peace process reached in
Moscow on 25 April. They welcomed recent positive
progress, as the crucial parties concerned have advanced
in their talks and increased contacts with each other.
They also welcomed the intra-Afghan meetings held in
Moscow and Doha.
The four sides called for relevant parties to
seize the opportunity for peace and immediately
start intra-Afghan negotiations among the Taliban,
the Afghan Government and other Afghans. They
reaffirmed that negotiations should be Afghan-led
and Afghan-owned and further agreed that these
negotiations should produce a peace framework as
soon as possible. This framework should guarantee
the orderly and responsible transition of the security
situation and set out the details of an agreement on a
future inclusive political arrangement that is acceptable
to all Afghans.
The four sides encouraged all parties to take
steps to reduce violence, leading to a comprehensive
and permanent ceasefire that starts with intra-Afghan
negotiations. The four sides agreed to maintain the
momentum of the consultations and will invite other
important stakeholders to join them on the basis of the
trilateral consensus agreed on 25 April in Moscow.
This broader group will meet at the start of the
intra-Afghan negotiations.
China supports the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan and other competent entities
in playing a greater role on the issue of Afghanistan.
Alongside the international community, China is
ready to continue contributing to security, stability,
development and prosperity in Afghanistan.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to offer my condolences to the families
of the victims of the attacks in Kabul yesterday. The
Afghan civilian population has once again been
challenged by tragic circumstances.
I thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed for her briefing and especially for her visit

19-231119/22

S/PV.8587

The situation in Afghanistan

to Afghanistan last week, which sent a strong message
on the participation and protection of women. I would
also like to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for her
briefing and Ms. Jamila Afghani for her commitment
to the inclusion of women in Afghan politics.
Finally, I thank Peru, Germany and Indonesia
for taking the initiative to organize today’s meeting.
Equality between women and men and the participation
of women are a priority in French diplomacy, as
championed by President Macron in Europe, within
the Group of Seven and at the United Nations. We
are pleased to have the opportunity to discuss this
issue today.
Today I will make two main observations. First,
with respect to the issue of the protection of women,
they remain, as the last 24 hours have once again
highlighted, the first victims of the conflict. We must
not lose sight of the fact that women continue to be
subjected to the worst forms of violence, particularly
in Taliban-controlled areas. France reiterates its full
support for Afghanistan and the Government’s ongoing
efforts aimed at protecting Afghan women from
violence, including sexual violence.
We especially welcome the commitments
undertaken to fully implementing the women and peace
and security action plan and call on Afghanistan, with
the support of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the international
community, to pursue this objective. We recall the
importance of the European Union-United Nations
Spotlight Initiative in strengthening the fight against
violence against women and thereby in promoting the
empowerment of women and equality between women
and men.
Secondly, the participation of women in the
peace process and Afghan political life must, more
than ever, remain at the heart of the concerns of the
Afghan Government, UNAMA and the international
community. To be sustainable and meet the expectations
of the entire Afghan population, the peace process
must be inclusive. It is essential that women participate
directly and meaningfully in peace discussions.
France welcomes the progress made at the Doha
meeting held on 7 and 8 July. We hosted a delegation of
15 Afghan women in Paris in June to discuss their role
in the peace process and receive training on negotiating.
Nevertheless, there is still a long road ahead, and the
preservation and consolidating of Afghanistan’s human
10/22

26/07/2019

rights achievements, including women’s rights, must
remain an absolute priority.
With two months to go before the presidential
elections, it is also essential to continue efforts to ensure
the full participation of women in Afghan politics and
electoral processes. Progress has been made, with
women constituting 35 per cent of the electorate in the
upcoming presidential elections in September, an 8 per
cent increase over the October 2018 parliamentary
elections. We encourage the Afghan Government to
take all measures to allow all Afghan women to vote.
It is regrettable that no women are running in the
elections of 28 September. Women continue to face
too many obstacles, ranging from intimidation and
physical threats to lack of financial resources. It is
therefore crucial that we lend our support to UNAMA
and beyond.
Let me conclude by reaffirming the three priorities
on which our efforts must focus in this pivotal period:
redoubling efforts to protect civilians, including
humanitarian and medical personnel, and meet
humanitarian needs; bringing to fruition efforts to
achieve a negotiated and lasting peace in Afghanistan;
and ensuring the successful holding of presidential
elections. It is imperative that the international
community, and in particular the Security Council,
continue to support Afghanistan on its path towards
peace, democracy and development.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to begin
by expressing our condolences to Tunisia for the death
of the President, but I also wish to join my colleagues
in condemning the recent attacks in Kabul and other
parts of Afghanistan, which are a very sad reminder
of why peace is so essential. Afghanistan has suffered
enough from such attacks, and we send our deepest
condolences and sympathies to the Government and the
families of the victims.
Like others, I think that it is very good that we
are able to have this discussion today. Thank you,
Mr. President, for scheduling it, and I thank the
Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo and
Ms. Afghani, from the Women’s International League
for Peace and Freedom. When I was in Afghanistan, I
saw for myself the very good work that the Women’s
International League for Peace and Freedom does. It is
good to hear more about it today.
It was also excellent that the Deputy SecretaryGeneral was able to visit the country, and forgive me
19-23111

26/07/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

for saying so, but particularly with a broken leg; that
takes a lot of guts and organization, and I thank her very
much for doing that. I think that it not only underscores
the importance of the issue but also the determination
all of us have to help Afghanistan and try to move this
really important agenda forward.
I can confirm that, as the Deputy Secretary-General
said, the European Union and the United Nations will
increase our efforts to fight violence against women in
Afghanistan through the Spotlight Initiative. When I
first arrived in Kabul, it was just after the murder of
Farkhunda Malikzada at the mosque, so it has very
much been on my mind as an issue that deserves
renewed efforts, notwithstanding the excellent work
that has been undertaken so far.
We in the United Kingdom have a Global Special
Envoy for Gender Equality, and she also went to Kabul
early this month to support women’s participation in
preliminary discussions and the peace process itself.
As others have mentioned, the recent intra-Afghan
dialogue in Doha, which Germany and Qatar
facilitated, was extremely good news. Nearly 25 per
cent of the non-Taliban participants were women. It is
clear that there is more that can be done, but that was an
encouraging start on which we can build.
We all know that we need a genuine political
process in Afghanistan to give all Afghans — and I
want stress the word “all” — the best chance to decide
the future of their country. We comprehensively support
the ongoing efforts of the Afghan Government and the
United States, and in particular Special Representative
Zalmay Khalilzad, who many of us remember from
when he was the Permanent Representative to the
United Nations.
I hope that the entire region, as well as the
international community, can lend support to inclusive
intra-Afghan peace negotiations, without delay and
with the full involvement of both sides to the conflict,
including, in particular, obviously, the legitimate
Government of Afghanistan. I also hope that whenever
we see attempts to roll back on women’s rights we can
speak up and challenge them. Any political settlement
needs to build on the progress made on human rights,
and that includes gender equality over the past 18
years. The Deputy Secretary-General set that point out
very eloquently.
Like many of the speakers this morning we too
have been following the elections. They are crucial for

S/PV. 8587

future political stability and inclusion. In a clear signal
of Afghan ownership, we welcome the Government’s
commitment to financing a significant portion of the
election budget. We also urge the Independent Election
Commission, with the support of the relevant Afghan
ministries, to continue its work to deliver timely,
inclusive and credible elections, working with the
Afghan National Defence and Security Forces, so that
the Afghan people can exercise their right to vote safely.
I know from first-hand experience how important
elections are to the Afghan people, and I hope that we
can give a lot of attention to ensuring the full, effective
and meaningful participation of women, as both voters
and candidates.
Elections are a civilian operation. They should not
be used as a target. Polling takes place in schools and
public places and involves ordinary citizens. An attack
on the elections would be an attack on the Afghan people
as a whole. We therefore hope that all political actors
will behave responsibly and constructively, so that the
elections can be peaceful and inclusive. In this regard,
I might note and welcome the Taliban’s commitment
made at the intra-Afghan dialogue in Doha to refraining
from targeting civilians. We hope that they will stand
by this promise to their fellow Afghans.
For the United Kingdom, we remain committed
to supporting inclusive peace in Afghanistan. In June,
the Afghan Ambassador and I announced the launch of
a group of friends of women in Afghanistan, and we
will have a formal launch in autumn. This initiative
is designed to complement the United Kingdom’s
regular engagement with women peacebuilders across
Afghanistan. We recently held consultations on what
the women and peace and security agenda means for
them and exploring how best to use the upcoming
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) to achieve their
goals. We are looking forward to taking the findings of
those consultations forward in the coming months, in
the context of the Afghanistan peace process.
To conclude, we remain steadfast in our
commitment to supporting the people and Government
of Afghanistan in achieving a peaceful, inclusive and
prosperous future, with equal rights and participation
as its core.
Mr. Moriko (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation welcomes the holding of this
briefing following the recent visit to Afghanistan of

19-2311111/22

S/PV.8587

The situation in Afghanistan

Ms. Amina Mohammed, Deputy Secretary-General of
the United Nations.
Côte d’Ivoire condemns in the strongest terms
the deadly attacks yesterday in Kabul and extends
its condolences to the Afghan Government and the
families in mourning.
My delegation thanks the Deputy Secretary-General
and Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General,
for their briefings, which inform the Security Council
of the lessons learned from their solidarity mission
on women and peace and security. We also thank
Ms. Jamila Afghani of the Afghanistan section of the
Women’s International League for Peace and Freedom
for her briefing. The high level of the United Nations
delegation for the visit — composed of Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, Ms. Natalia Kanem, Executive
Director of the United Nations Population Fund, and
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director
of UN-Women — reflects the importance of women’s
participation in the process of restoring peace and
security in Afghanistan.
In a context marked by many persistent social
obstacles, the visit of the Deputy Secretary-General is,
in our view, a strong message and encouragement to
the Afghan authorities to continue their efforts aimed
at increasing the participation of women in institutions
and the peace process, in keeping with the conclusions
of the national conference held on 12 December 2018
in Kabul. Despite the persistent challenges, the status
of Afghan women has made encouraging improvements
in recent years in terms of access to basic education,
health and employment. As a result, Afghan women
are increasingly contributing to the development of
their country.
Despite the limited funding, the efforts of Afghan
authorities to implement resolution 1325 (2000) have
resulted in, inter alia, the adoption of the National
Action Plan for the Women of Afghanistan, in the
interest of peace and security. This initiative strengthens
the role of women in negotiation and conflictresolution processes. However, although article 22 of
the Constitution guarantees gender equality, women’s
contribution to peace processes and their participation
in political life remain low, owing to the obstacles
related to gender inequality.
While ongoing negotiations are giving hope for
peace in Afghanistan, my delegation is hopeful that
12/22

26/07/2019

the current gains of Afghan women in the political and
economic fields will be consolidated. In this regard,
my delegation welcomes the gradual increase in the
number of women in education, the judiciary, the army
and the police. There are now more than 68,000 female
teachers, including 800 female university professors
in private and public institutions, as well as more
than 6,000 female judges, prosecutors, lawyers, police
officers and army personnel.
In conclusion, my delegation welcomes the
appointment of two women to head the Independent
Election Commission and the Electoral Complaints
Commission, two key institutions in the organization
of the presidential election to be held on 28 September.
The successful organization of these elections will be
proof of the indispensable contribution of women to
strengthening peace and stability in Afghanistan and in
the rest of the world.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, we thank Ms. Jamila Afghani
for her frank briefing. We would say to her that we
know very well that by helping women, we are helping
Afghanistan as a whole.
We also thank our brave United Nations women at
the very helm of the Organization — Deputy SecretaryGeneral Amina Mohammed and Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo — for their briefings. It
is very important that they visited Afghanistan and
received their information first hand. Their recent visit
to the country and the Council’s mission to Kabul in
January 2018 confirmed that the situation there is not
only difficult, but critical. The country continues to be
shaken by large-scale bloody terrorist acts, including
in Kabul. There has been an increase in civilian
casualties, including women and children, as well as
among Afghan military and police forces. We recognize
and appreciate their dedication to the fight against
terrorism. Coordinated action is needed to address this
harmful trend.
We are gravely concerned about the presence of
the terrorist organization the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) in Afghanistan. Afghan security
forces have had some success, but militants continue
to strengthen their positions and influence, including
in the north and south of the country, replenishing their
ranks with foreign terrorist fighters from Syria and
Iraq. We are also concerned about the diversification
of ISIL’s methods and channels of youth recruitment.
19-23111

26/07/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

The terrorist threat is inextricably linked to the drug
problem, which poses a serious threat to Afghanistan,
the region and the world. Drug dollars fuel terrorism.
We believe that it is essential to maintain and redouble
international efforts to combat this scourge. We wish
to draw attention to the professional operations and
measures undertaken by the Collective Security Treaty
Organization in the fight against drug trafficking.
Russia will facilitate Afghanistan’s establishment as a
peaceful, independent and flourishing State that will
generate neither terrorists nor drug threat. We intend to
continue to work with our Afghan friends to eradicate
security threats, primarily from ISIL and Al-Qaida,
and to strengthen the capacity of civilian, security and
anti-drug entities.
Despite the difficult military and political situation
in Afghanistan, we see a window of opportunity for
a peaceful settlement and national reconciliation,
with the participation of the broadest possible range
of social and political circles in the country. At this
stage, international cooperation is coalescing around
the settlement of the regional conflict in Afghanistan.
We believe that this is a step in the right direction.
We are convinced that this process should not be
turned into a vain and frivolous display or a political
competition. Our common objective is to preserve a
unified and indivisible ethnically diverse Afghan State
that provides equal opportunities in life for all groups
in the population, including women.
Russia has consistently supported the Afghan
people’s aspirations for lasting peace. We have a genuine
interest in promoting the Afghan-owned and Afghanled peace and reconciliation process and the subsequent
stabilization of the country. A peaceful, stable and
prosperous Afghanistan is our common objective.
We are ready to continue to provide assistance to that
end. It was this objective that guided our own efforts
in this area when we organized the second meeting of
the Moscow format of consultations in November 2018,
which brought together the broadest possible range of
stakeholders, and when, in May, we also provided a
forum for intra-Afghan discussions with the delegation
of the Taliban.
We highly appreciate our constructive and
honest relations with the people and political forces
of Afghanistan and we intend to develop them in
every way possible. We support the policy of making
the peace process in Afghanistan as inclusive as
possible and encourage the participation of all the

S/PV. 8587

country’s sociopolitical forces, including women. We
are convinced that broad discussions are the key to
achieving peace in Afghanistan.
We
are
pleased
that
the
inter-Afghan
dialogue — which was launched in Moscow on 5 and
6 February and brought women, leading politicians and
the Taliban around the same table for the first time — was
taken a step further in Doha on 7 and 8 July. We know
that the German Government contributed significantly
to the convening of this dialogue. It is all the more
encouraging that both rounds have confirmed the
sincere commitment of all Afghans to achieving peace
and reconciliation. We welcome the fact that, in both
Moscow and Doha, the participants adopted an outcome
document that reflected their intention to continue
moving consistently towards intra-Afghan peace.
We would like to highlight another successful
channel of cooperation on Afghanistan, namely,
the trilateral consultations at the level of special
representatives of Russia, the United States and China.
These meetings took place in Washington, D.C., in
March, in Moscow in April, and in Beijing in July.
It is important that a joint statement was issued after
the meetings in Moscow and Beijing, details of which
our colleague from China has just conveyed to us. We
welcome the inclusion of Pakistan in these consultations
with the troika, and we are confident that Iran can play
an important, constructive role.
On the whole, the inclusion of regional players
in this format would have a beneficial impact on the
development of solutions to the post-conflict order
in Afghanistan, as only an atmosphere of goodneighbourliness and cooperation will allow us to
solve the acute problems in Afghanistan today. We
are convinced that we need to move forward in
Afghanistan using tried and tested structures, and we
see great potential in the Contact Group of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization with Afghanistan, as well as
in the counter-terrorism and anti-drugs cooperation
between Afghanistan and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization.
Afghanistan is on the threshold of presidential
elections that are planned for September. We believe
that these elections should be a powerful consolidating
factor for Afghan society. On the whole, the criteria for
unification should be defined not only in the holding of
elections, but also through efforts to achieve national
reconciliation. It is that approach that will allow us to

19-2311113/22

S/PV.8587

The situation in Afghanistan

strengthen the dignified status of women, which has
always been and will remain not only a decoration
in modern Afghanistan, but an embodiment of the
bravery of the Afghan people as a whole in fighting
terrorism, in politics and diplomacy, in journalism, in
parliamentarianism, in national reconciliation and in the
social and economic reconstruction of the country. We
must not forget that very serious challenges lie ahead.
Therefore, any steps towards the future in Afghanistan
should be acceptable to all Afghans, including women.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Mr. President, for having called this meeting.
I thank Ms. Amina Mohammed, Deputy SecretaryGeneral; Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs; as well
as Ms. Jamila Afghani for their briefings. The briefings
follow their most recent visit to Afghanistan, where
they had important meetings. They have shared with us
their recommendations, which reflect the importance
of reaching agreements on very important issues in
Afghanistan, in particular a comprehensive, just and
sustainable peace process.
I join others in offering my condolences to the
Government and people of Afghanistan following the
terrorist attacks that happened yesterday in Kabul. We
condemn those attacks. We think they are reprehensible
and unjustifiable. We must bring the perpetrators of
those attacks to justice.
For more than 40 years, Afghanistan has been in an
unstable political and security situation. The Afghan
people suffer on a daily basis. The political authorities
in Afghanistan must make efforts to avoid partisan and
sectarian interests to provide the population with a safe
and dignified life.
For its part, the Security Council should intensify
its efforts to support the political process and to allow
for elections to be held in September, as planned and to
support the negotiations about a national reconciliation
that aim to make the political process in Afghanistan
a success.
We cannot talk about political reconciliation
without mentioning the essential role of Afghan
women. Indeed, women and mothers make up half
of society, and they are responsible for educating an
entire generation. Given the important role of women
in society, we must uphold their civil and political
rights. That is a prerequisite in all countries, including
Afghanistan, and the Government has taken measures to
14/22

26/07/2019

improve gender equality in a number of different areas.
We join others who have spoken before us in calling
for women’s participation in the political reconciliation
process in order to preserve the gains that have been
made in the past.
Kuwait firmly believes that there cannot be
sustainable peace and stability in Afghanistan and
within the region without negotiations at the diplomatic
level. Military solutions have never led to long-term,
sustainable peace. That is why we call on all parties
to participate constructively in the diplomatic efforts
to achieve peace and to preserve the interests of the
Afghan people. Although we understand that the path
to peace is strewn with difficulties, we know that the
starting point should be inclusive national reconciliation
in order to achieve the peace that is so desired. A
sustainable peace requires regional cooperation, given
the important role played by the countries of the region.
That is necessary to re-establish peace in Afghanistan.
We have taken note of the bilateral meetings held
between Afghanistan and other countries in the region
in an attempt to improve the situation in the country.
We welcome international efforts to facilitate political
reconciliation in Afghanistan, in particular those
of Mr. Zalmay Khalilzad, the United States Special
Representative for Afghanistan Reconciliation. We are
delighted to see the positive developments in that regard
following the intra-Afghan negotiations in Doha a few
days ago, as well as the communiqué signed by the
United States of America and Afghanistan yesterday to
deal with the Afghan crisis.
In conclusion, we reiterate that diplomatic efforts
in Afghanistan should be accompanied by significant
investment in education. We need to prioritize education
in order to build a society. Many peoples have seen
their societies fall because of war and conflict and have
been able to catch up only after investing in education,
without distinction between men and women. There
is no alternative for a comprehensive development
approach that focuses on building the capacities of
individuals, enhancing Government capabilities,
building infrastructure and accelerating economic
growth. Addressing these diverse challenges is the
only way to eliminate the deep-rooted causes of this
conflict, which has lasted so long.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): First of all, let me join other
delegations in condemning in the strongest terms the
recent terrorist attacks and in expressing our sincerest
19-23111

26/07/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

condolences to the families of victims. These heinous
acts must stop, and those responsible for these terrorist
attacks must be held accountable.
Let me also thank all briefers. We have heard
repeatedly that despite the many challenges that
Afghan women still face, the progress made in recent
years has been impressive. I wish to commend the
Afghan authorities and society, in particular Afghan
women, for that progress because we — the Security
Council, the international community and the United
Nations — are here simply to assist them in their efforts
to achieve a stable and prosperous Afghanistan.
As stressed in resolution 1325 (2000), the founding
resolution of the women and peace and security agenda,
women play an important role in conflict prevention
and resolution. As one of the World Bank’s reports on
the role of gender in the prevention of violent conflicts
assesses, women’s empowerment and gender equality
are strongly associated with more peaceful and stable
societies and with more effective and long-term
peacebuilding efforts. So we are more than happy to
see the progress made regarding the empowerment
of women in Afghanistan because no stable peace is
possible without women’s full participation in the
peace processes.
In that vein, we support all efforts to find a peaceful
settlement and we have heard about many efforts,
including by the members of the Security Council. It is
our view that it is crucial to ensure the full participation
of Afghan women in all peace talks. As was mentioned
by many colleagues, any peace agreement cannot
compromise the gains achieved by women over recent
years. I therefore fully concur with what UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo said about the fact that
women need to fully participate in the peace talks.
We are concerned about the violence still faced by
Afghan women. Ms. Afghani said that approximately
60 per cent of women are still affected by violence. In
that context, we see an important role for the security
and justice sector, which means that the security and
justice sector, supported by local communities, needs
to find an effective response to gender-based violence.
The culture of impunity must be eliminated for the
benefit of the whole of Afghan society.
In that regard, we welcome and strongly support
the increased efforts of the European Union and
the United Nations to fight violence against women
through the Spotlight Initiative. We also agree with

S/PV. 8587

Ms. Afghani that special attention should be paid to
women, in particular those in a vulnerable situation,
such as women with disabilities. We hope that the
recently adopted resolution 2475 (2019) on persons
with disabilities, initiated by the United Kingdom and
Poland, will strengthen the protection of rights and
improve the situation of women with disabilities.
I also wish to agree with the Ambassador of
Indonesia, Mr. Djani, about the positive role that can
also be played by religious leaders in the promotion of
women’s rights. I would also like to echo colleagues in
stressing the importance of fair and credible upcoming
presidential elections.
I wish to express our deep appreciation to the
United Nations, the Deputy Secretary-General and our
brave colleagues, United Nations personnel, working in
the challenging situation in Afghanistan.
Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America):
We also join colleagues today in expressing condolences
to the Government of Tunisia on the passing of its
President, as well as to the victims’ families for the
senseless attacks in Kabul yesterday.
It is good to see Deputy Secretary-General
Mohammed here in the Council. I thank her for her
briefing and for the continued hard work that the
United Nations undertakes to support peace, human
rights and economic development in Afghanistan. As
she noted in her remarks, women have a critical role to
play in supporting the development of a comprehensive
and sustainable peace agreement in Afghanistan. We
also appreciate the updates provided by Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, and the statement by Ms. Jamila
Afghani highlighting critical issues.
This week, President Trump reiterated that there
was no military solution to the decades-long war in
Afghanistan. Now is the time to seize the opportunity
to end the war. The United States efforts are focused
on achieving an inclusive political settlement that
ends the war in Afghanistan. As we seek a negotiated
political settlement to the Afghan conflict, the United
States continues to support bringing Afghans together
at the negotiating table to decide the future of their
own country — one that is inclusive of women,
representatives of opposition parties, civil society and
minority groups.

19-2311115/22

S/PV.8587

The situation in Afghanistan

Let me reaffirm that the United States does not seek
a withdrawal agreement. Rather, we are committed to
pursuing a comprehensive peace agreement that would
guarantee that Afghanistan never again becomes a
platform for transnational terrorism.
The United States and the Taliban reached
an agreement, in principle, in January that any
comprehensive peace agreement must address four
interconnected issues: counter-terrorism, foreign-troop
presence, intra-Afghan dialogue leading to intra-Afghan
negotiations, and a permanent and comprehensive
ceasefire. We have continued to talk in more detail
about those issues with the Taliban, most recently in
Doha last month. We have been clear that we are not
negotiating, nor will we negotiate, with the Taliban on
behalf of the Government or the people of Afghanistan.
While the negotiations with the Taliban continue,
we have been conducting parallel talks with the Afghan
Government. Our goal is to facilitate an intra-Afghan
negotiation so that the Afghans themselves can
reach a political settlement and chart a peaceful and
prosperous path for their country. In June, during his
visit to Kabul, Secretary Pompeo set an ambitious
target date of 1 September for the Taliban and the
Afghan Government to reach a framework agreement
through negotiations.
Peace is our priority and it must not wait for
the Afghan presidential election scheduled for
28 September. At the same time, we continue to press
the Afghan Government and electoral institutions
to take all steps necessary to be prepared to hold a
credible election.
Special Representative Khalilzad is currently in
Kabul for consultations with the Afghan Government
on next steps in the peace process, including identifying
a national negotiating team that can participate in
intra-Afghan negotiations. Special Representative
Khalilzad has continuously advocated for Afghan
women to be included in those negotiations.
Not only should Afghan women have a seat at
the negotiating table, they should have meaningful
participation and a role in decision-making, as has
been said by others this morning and reiterated by
Ms. Afghani. Special Representative Khalilzad is also
continuing his engagement with representatives of civil
society, including peace advocates and women’s rights
groups, to further encourage broad participation in the
peace process.
16/22

26/07/2019

Afghans — men and women — are already
coming together in support of peace. The Intra-Afghan
Conference for Peace, hosted in Doha, Qatar, from 7 to
8 July with the critical support of Germany, marked
a positive step forward towards an inclusive dialogue
among all Afghan national stakeholders. We were
encouraged that women made up nearly 25 per cent of
non-Taliban participants at that crucial conference.
The strong presence and engagement of Afghan
women at the recent talks reflect the gains that
Afghanistan has made in the past 18 years. In 2001,
conditions for women in Afghanistan were dire. Access
to education was limited, with fewer than 900,000
children in school and almost no girls registered.
Today 9 million children, including more than
3.5 million girls, attend primary and secondary school.
An additional 100,000 women also study at public and
private universities. Today women make up 27 per cent
of civil service employees in Afghanistan. They have
served in key Cabinet positions, including as Ministers
of Public Health, Women’s Affairs, Counter-narcotics
and Mining, and now here in New York as Permanent
Representative to the United Nations.
The United States shares the desire of Afghans
and the international community to protect those gains
and our shared investment. We remain committed to
all Afghans who support human rights, including the
rights of women, girls and ethnic minorities.
As Afghans continue to pursue peace, planning for
a timely and credible presidential election continues.
Preparation for the presidential elections, including
the publication of the final voter list, the printing of
ballots and the recruitment and training of poll workers
is continuing apace. Donors are also contributing
$59 million of the $149 million election budget,
including approximately $29 million from the United
States. We continue to urge the Afghan Government,
the Independent Election Commission and all political
stakeholders to take all necessary steps to ensure that
the elections are credible.
In closing, allow me to note that, in line with the
United States strategy on women, peace and security,
we will continue efforts to put women at the centre of
our diplomacy and development efforts in Afghanistan,
protecting women in conflict and supporting women’s
meaningful participation in the peace process. We
will do that because it has been proven that women’s
participation in peace processes result in more
19-23111

26/07/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

sustainable and long-lasting agreements. That effort is
supported by the historic legislation on women, peace
and security signed by President Trump in October
2017, making the United States the first country in the
world with a comprehensive law on this issue.
Let me again express our appreciation to the
United Nations and other international partners
for their support in strengthening the legitimacy
of Afghanistan’s electoral process and supporting
Afghanistan’s peace process.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): Let me too start, on
behalf of South Africa, by extending our condolences to
the Government and the people of Afghanistan on the
recent terrorist attacks in Kabul. We also wish to extend
our condolences to the Government and the people of
Tunisia on the passing of President Béji Caïd Essebsi.
My delegation wishes to thank Deputy SecretaryGeneral Amina Mohammed for her very insightful
briefing on her recent visit to Afghanistan. The visit by
such a high-powered delegation, including the UnderSecretaries-General of UN-Women, the United Nations
Population Fund and the Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, epitomizes mostly the solidarity
with and support of the international community, in
particular the United Nations, for Afghanistan. We
therefore also wish to thank Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo and Ms. Jamila Afghani for their
briefings earlier.
South Africa looks forward to the presidential
elections that will take place in September in
Afghanistan, and we encourage all parties to work
together to ensure that the elections commence as
planned and mandated by the Afghan Constitution.
Additionally, it is equally important that the upcoming
elections be credible, inclusive, free, fair, safe and
transparent. We wish to welcome the progress made by
Afghanistan in its efforts to achieve meaningful and
inclusive participation in the peace process.
The convening at the beginning of this year of the
national conference of Afghan women for peace, which
was organized by the Office of the First Lady, with
support from the High Peace Council, the Ministry of
Women’s Affairs, the Afghan Women’s Network and
other civil society organizations, was a noteworthy
initiative in advancing the women and peace and
security agenda.

S/PV. 8587

Such activities by Afghan women across all levels
and sectors of society create a conducive environment
for women to continue to play an instrumental role in
the peace process and beyond. A 15-point declaration
on the role of women was developed by the conference
and submitted to President Ashraf Ghani. We welcome
the undertaking by President Ashraf Ghani to have its
provisions considered at the consultative loya jirga and
peace talks. Those are positive steps towards ensuring
the full and inclusive participation of women in the
peace process in Afghanistan.
We also wish to commend the Afghan Government
for the development of a second phase of the National
Action Plan for the Women of Afghanistan and
encourage its comprehensive implementation. It is
commendable that Afghanistan has made significant
strides to implement the aspirations of resolution 1325
(2000) by ensuring the meaningful role of women in the
peace process.
Sustainable peace in Afghanistan is dependent
upon broad consensus whereby women, as well as
young people, fully participate in the peace process.
That should include their participation at all levels of
local and national Government. South Africa therefore
encourages the further incorporation of gender
perspectives and the concerns of women in enhancing
the sustainability of peace and security in Afghanistan.
In conclusion, we remain convinced that the only
long-term solution to the situation in Afghanistan is a
comprehensive and inclusive Afghan-led and Afghanowned political process leading to the peaceful resolution
of conflict and an inclusive political settlement.
Mr. Sipaco Ribala (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, allow me to offer my
condolences to Tunisia on the death of its President and
to thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed,
not only for her excellent informative briefing but also
for the outstanding work that she has been doing and
her continued commitment to achieving international
peace and security.
I also thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, UnderSecretary-General for Peacebuilding and Political
Affairs, for her informative briefing. I also thank
Ms. Jamila Afghani, President of the Afghan section
of the Women’s International League for Peace and
Freedom, for her valuable contribution.

19-2311117/22

S/PV.8587

The situation in Afghanistan

Last but not least, I commend the President of
the Security Council, Ambassador Gustavo MezaCuadra, and the delegations of Germany and Indonesia
for convening this meeting. This briefing, as we
shall see, will enlighten us on various aspects related
to the woman and peace and security agenda, the
reconciliation process and the inclusive participation in
the upcoming elections in Afghanistan. Those issues
are of vital importance to achieving lasting peace and a
truly inclusive political process.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea has
consistently accorded great attention to the political
and reconstruction process in Afghanistan, especially
now as work is under way on the upcoming presidential
elections, scheduled for September, and on sensitive
peace talks. We are confident that, despite the
difficulties that their country has experienced, the
Afghan people will maintain their resolve to elect their
political leaders, based on universal suffrage, and we
hope that the State institutions responsible for holding
elections, political parties and international partners
will ensure that the elections are credible and inclusive
and that their outcome is accepted by all Afghan parties
so as to ensure the success of the reconstruction process.
At such a critical time — as we have stressed in this
Chamber time and again — during the period leading
up to the presidential elections, women must play not
only a significant, but also a leading role. While we
acknowledge that significant progress has been made
in that regard, we encourage the Afghan Government to
continue to include women at all stages of negotiations
and decision-making in the peace and reconciliation
processes. It is clear that we must ensure that the rights
of women are always guaranteed at all levels of the
peace talks. In that regard, we echo and support the
message conveyed by the Deputy Secretary-General
that women must be at the centre of efforts to achieve
lasting peace and security in the country.
We listened attentively to the information provided
by the briefers, and we are certain that the various
meetings held with political and religious leaders, as
well as with various women’s groups, during the visit by
the high-level United Nations delegation last weekend
will undoubtedly strengthen the Afghan peace process.
We must all promote the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda and build peace
through the political and economic empowerment of
women. In that context, we echo the recommendations
18/22

26/07/2019

of today’s briefers, as well as those of those of
Informal Expert Group on Women, Peace and Security,
established pursuant to resolution 2242 (2015), at its
10 July meeting, namely, for the purpose of resolving
the conflict, to include support for the meaningful
participation of women in any peace talks with
members of the Taliban, as well as decision-making
bodies involved in the peace process, including
during informal and formal peace negotiations, while
calling on the Government and international partners
to dedicate the resources necessary to implement the
national action plan on women, peace and security,
demanding the protection of women human rights
defenders and calling on the Afghan Government to
sign the Arms Trade Treaty and to take meaningful
steps to stop the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons in the country.
Our delegation supports a policy aimed at ensuring
that the upcoming peace process in Afghanistan is
as inclusive as possible by incorporating all social
and political stakeholders in the country, including
the opposition. That is why we welcome the fact that
political leaders met with Taliban representatives
in Qatar. We hope that the parties will respect their
international obligations and protect civilians, among
others, as an outcome of the talks. In that regard, we
also believe that the peace process will be strengthened
not only by the support of the United Nations, but also
through partnerships with the international community
and, in particular, countries of the region.
In conclusion, we would like to stress our concern
about the ongoing attacks on civilians and the level of
sexual and gender-based violence that continue to occur
in Afghanistan. In that regard, we join delegations in
condemning yesterday’s terrorist attack in the country.
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
The plight of women in Afghanistan deserves our full
attention. We welcome the recent visit to Afghanistan
of the Deputy Secretary-General and Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo to address the subject, as well as this
opportunity today to share ideas and recommendations
with Ms. Afghani. It is important that the Council, as
our briefers have just done, send a clear sign of support
to women in Afghanistan, in particular in the light of
the crucial months ahead.
Today I will address four points: the role of women
in the peace process, their role in the elections, the
protection of civilians and, lastly, support for the
19-23111

26/07/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

National Action Plan on Resolution 1325 (2000):
Women, peace and security.
The recent intra-Afghan dialogue facilitated by
Qatar and Germany is an important step, but the road
ahead remains long. We welcome the presence of 10
women around the table and encourage increased
participation in the future. We reiterate the importance
of promoting the meaningful and equal participation
of women at all stages of the peace process. We fully
support national and international efforts towards
a peace that is Afghan-owned and Afghan-led. As
the Deputy Secretary-General and Ms. Afghani
underscored, no future peace agreement can allow the
situation faced by women to deteriorate. We recall the
universality of human rights in that respect. After 19
years of armed conflict, it would be deeply unfair for
women to pay the price of peace. Just and lasting peace
is not possible if half the population is excluded.
The presidential elections in October will be another
step towards building a democratic Afghanistan. They
must be safe, fair and free. All political parties and
electoral institutions must contribute to a peaceful
process and avoid polarization. It is essential that
women throughout Afghanistan be able to stand as
candidates in the elections, be represented in electoral
institutions and vote in complete security. It would be
a good idea for all candidates to address the issue of
women’s rights during the campaign. We acknowledge
the important role of including civil society and, in
particular, women’s organizations in that regard.
The conflict in Afghanistan is one of the
deadliest in the world and requires special efforts to
protect civilians. The protection of civilians is an
important priority. All parties must respect the rules
of international humanitarian law. Women are all too
often the victims of attacks against civilians, as we
saw recently in the attacks in Ghazni and Kabul. We
condemn the attack in Kabul on 25 July against State
employees, which killed seven, including five women.
We expect all parties to make every effort to prevent
civilian casualties and ensure accountability in the
event of non-compliance. Our message to the Taliban is
clear — condemn terrorism, abandon the military path,
choose the political path and invest in the negotiation
process. There is no other alternative.
Belgium is fully committed to the plight of
women and girls in Afghanistan. In December, we
made a voluntary contribution of €2 million to UN

S/PV. 8587

Women, which supports Afghan authorities in rolling
out the National Action Plan to implement resolution
1325 (2000) in the country. We now await the launch
of the second phase of the Action Plan, based on
lessons learned, in particular with regard to the role of
civil society.
We acknowledge the important role played by the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) to support the country in the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda, as
demonstrated during the recently held meeting of
the Informal Expert Group on Women, Peace and
Security on Afghanistan. Belgium supports and agrees
with the recommendations made by the Group. The
next UNAMA mandate-renewal must highlight those
efforts. Belgium will pay special attention to that issue
during the negotiations.
Mr. Beras Hernández (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we extend our
condolences to the people of Tunisia following the
death of their President. We would also like to extend
our sympathy to the Afghan family following the recent
attacks in Kabul.
I thank Ms. Mohammed, Ms. DiCarlo and
Ms. Afghani for their briefings.
In a timely and hopeful rapprochement exercise,
Afghan and Taliban political leaders met in Qatar a
few days ago and called for a reduction in violence. We
welcome that peace initiative by international actors.
We are encouraged by the positive feedback from
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo about her visit to
Afghanistan. The fact that she has seen progress in
the level of women’s participation and leadership
they have assumed in decision-making processes is a
source of satisfaction. In addition, the Informal Expert
Group on Women, Peace and Security recently met
to discuss the situation of women, together with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan and the United Nations country team,
which allowed us to reaffirm that it is vital to guarantee
women’s participation in the September elections and at
the negotiating table to address the future of the country.
We highlight the resilience of Afghan women, who,
even in a hostile environment plagued by inequality,
have advanced and overcome significant obstacles.
We believe that it is urgent to put an end to sexual and
gender-based violence in Afghanistan, as it affects

19-2311119/22

S/PV.8587

The situation in Afghanistan

the dignity, health and well-being of Afghan women.
We encourage the authorities to promote substantive
actions that prohibit it and to independently investigate
and bring to justice those responsible.
We applaud the development of the second phase of
the 2019-2022 National Action Plan on Resolution 1325
(2000): Women, peace and security and eagerly await
its early completion. We urge the Government and the
Taliban to integrate the meaningful participation of
Afghan women into the dialogue for peace.
Afghanistan is at a turning point with its elections
and peace negotiations. All efforts to enable the
Afghan people to escape instability and violence must
be exhausted. It is our duty to help them in a process
that must be Afghan-owned and Afghan-led, with
the participation of all actors in society, in particular
women and young people.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Peru.
We too would like to begin by expressing our
gratitude to Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed,
Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary
DiCarlo, and Ms. Jamila Afghani for the valuable and
detailing information they have provided us with today.
We also join others in offering our condolences to
the people of Tunisia following the passing of President
Essebsi, as well as to the Government and people of
Afghanistan in the wake of yesterday’s attacks, whose
many victims included women and children.
We wish to commend Ms. Mohammed’s leadership
in making the journey to bear witness to the situation
of women in Afghanistan in situ. We welcome the fact
that she was accompanied by Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo,
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka and Ms. Natalia Kanem,
which enabled a comprehensive approach to be taken.
We believe that the visit was particularly significant
in the light of the presidential elections to be held in
Afghanistan in September. These must be held on the
basis of a spirit of dialogue, tolerance, inclusion and
mutual respect.
In that connection, we welcome the historic
appointment of two women as respective heads of the
Independent Election Commission and the Electoral
Complaints Commission. This constitutes a crucial step
forward for the involvement of women in the political
life of the country, which will undoubtedly contribute
20/22

26/07/2019

to strengthening governance and the legitimacy of the
Afghan political system.
Moreover, we consider it essential to promote
the participation of women in the implementation
processes and mechanisms of the peace and
reconciliation process. Based on reports on the ground,
Peru is convinced that women’s participation is a vital
element of conflict resolution, peacebuilding and
peacekeeping. In addition, the greater involvement of
women in decision-making must be promoted through
the creation of employment opportunities and the
establishment of quotas in Government positions.
We hope that the Afghan Government will continue
to work on the implementation of its National Action
Plan on Resolution 1325 (2000): Women, peace and
security, as well as on its programme for the economic
empowerment of women.
At the same time, it is necessary to strengthen
access to justice and the fight against impunity so that
victims are able to trust their institutions and that those
responsible for acts of violence are held accountable. We
must bear in mind that, in the majority of cases, women
and girls affected by so many years of conflict do not
have access to protection services or legal assistance.
In order to contribute to that cause, the Council
should maintain and strengthen its gender perspective
and the women and peace and security agenda,
particularly in the development of mandates, as well
as in following up on the recommendations made. In
this connection, we believe it important to further
synthesize the work of women’s organizations and that
of the Informal Expert Group on Women, Peace and
Security — which Peru has the honour to co-chair with
Germany — in terms of their approach to the various
cases that form part of their agenda. We discussed the
situation in Afghanistan, for example, as recently as
10 July.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Afghanistan.
Mr. Naeemi (Afghanistan): At the outset, I would
like to highlight three very important main issues that I
have been raised during the course of the meeting today.
First of all, let me thank all members of the Council
for condemning the terrorist attacks that took place
yesterday. That reflects the Council’s unanimous
support for the people of Afghanistan, particularly
19-23111

26/07/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

those who lost their loved ones. I wish to share that the
majority of those affected were civilians.
Secondly, I refer to the issue of women. Today’s
women are totally different to those of yesterday. The
situation of women in Afghanistan today cannot be
compared, at any level, with that of the past. I really
appreciate and support the statement delivered by the
Deputy Secretary-General and the work of her team.
Thirdly, I shall turn to the matter of elections. I
wish to strongly state that the Government and His
Excellency President Ashraf Ghani are committed to
organizing free and fair elections. The most important
point I would like to highlight is the violation of women’s
rights, on which President Ashraf Ghani has a zerotolerance policy. Regardless of what we have heard,
President Ashraf Ghani is personally working on this
issue at the Government level and at the national level.
I thank the Permanent Mission of Peru for
convening this briefing on the occasion of the visit of
Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed and her
high-level delegation to Afghanistan, in the context of
women and peace and security, as well as development.
I also welcome Ms. Jamila Afghani’s participation in
this meeting via video-teleconference.
A visit of this kind truly underlines the commitment
of the United Nations to continuing its support and
bringing its agenda to the most relevant stakeholders:
the people on the ground. The United Nations has
always been an engaged partner for the benefit of our
country, and we are thankful that Ms. Mohammed and
her delegation chose to travel to Afghanistan at a time
when a vital process for the achievement of lasting and
comprehensive peace is taking place.
The momentum for peace continues to grow
stronger and the Government of Afghanistan is
determined to bring the decades-long conflict to an
end. As Ms. Mohammed highlighted during her visit,
however, a comprehensive settlement must have women
at the very centre of its agenda and must recognize their
role as leaders and agents of change, willing and able
to delineate what peace means to them. Their rights
and the institutional gains of the past 18 years must
be preserved and protected. From the Government’s
side, we will continue our commitment to ensuring the
inclusive role of women in peace and in development
as we move forward in our efforts towards building a
stable and self-sustaining Afghanistan.

S/PV. 8587

Regarding other ongoing processes in the country,
allow me to once again reiterate the Government’s
commitment to the holding of firm, transparent,
free and secure elections on 28 September, the date
selected by the Independent Election Commission
of Afghanistan. Holding these elections will assert
the will of the people of Afghanistan to reaffirm our
commitment to democracy and the rule of law in our
country. Furthermore, a joint security plan has been
finalized to ensure that the presidential elections are
held in a secure environment.
More broadly, our security forces have kept terrorist
groups from making any major gains in the country
and operating with great confidence and efficiency.
The effort will continue, prioritizing the defence of
our people and our country’s territorial integrity, in
parallel with the ongoing peace negotiations. In that
regard, we reiterate our call on the Taliban to honour
its commitment to peace through deeds and not words,
particularly in the aftermath of yesterday’s deadly
blasts in Kabul, which once again claimed the lives
of innocent civilians. We maintain our belief that
only a dual-track approach of pressure and incentives
can ensure a conducive environment for a successful
comprehensive agreement with the Taliban.
Despite the challenges that remain, the past 18
years have seen the emergence of a new democratic and
developing Afghanistan. Reforms in the security and
civilian sectors, as well as in the rule of governance,
have allowed us to continue with strong determination
the implementation of the Afghanistan National Peace
and Development Framework and the national priority
programmes and to follow a steady path towards
stability and self-reliance through the fight against
corruption, the empowerment of youth and women, the
promotion of economic growth and the development of
stronger and more efficient public institutions. Those
efforts, coupled with particular and tangible regional
steps within the Afghan-led platforms, the Regional
Economic Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan and
the Heart of Asia process, have allowed us to also emerge
as a catalyst for economic and regional cooperation.
Allow me to reiterate Afghanistan’s gratitude
and support for the work of the United Nations in our
country. We further hope that the visit was able to
provide Deputy Secretary-General Mohammed and her
delegation with valuable perspectives and input on the
importance of a thorough renewal of the mandate of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.

19-2311121/22

S/PV.8587

The situation in Afghanistan

We look forward to the discussion of that matter
in September, in the hope that the United Nations
Assistance Mission will be renewed for a period of one
year, at the minimum, and that the renewal document
will retain core priority issues for Afghanistan and
incorporate new developments, including the upcoming
elections and the peace process. The commitment of the
international community and the United Nations to the
people of Afghanistan is instrumental in protecting

22/22

26/07/2019

and preserving the gains achieved in these years of
partnership and transformation.
In closing, allow me to once again thank the Deputy
Secretary-General and her high-level delegation
for their visit, which truly symbolizes the strong
commitment between the United Nations and the people
of Afghanistan. We look forward to continuing to work
together towards a stable and prosperous Afghanistan.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

19-23111
