A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/77
9 January 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 64
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the First Committee (A/49/701)]
49/77.

Review of the implementation of the
recommendations and decisions adopted by
the General Assembly at its tenth special
session
A
Report of the Disarmament Commission

The General Assembly,
Having considered the annual report of the Disarmament Commission, 1/
Recalling its resolutions 47/54 A of 9 December 1992, 47/54 G of 8 April
1993 and 48/77 A of 16 December 1993,
Considering the role that the Disarmament Commission has been called
upon to play and the contribution that it should make in examining and
submitting recommendations on various problems in the field of disarmament and
in the promotion of the implementation of the relevant decisions adopted by
the General Assembly at its tenth special session,
Noting the various suggestions for possible consideration by the
Disarmament Commission, at an appropriate future date, including in particular

1/
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-ninth Session,
Supplement No. 42 (A/49/42).

95-76051
/...

A/RES/49/77
Page 2

the one for reconsideration of the subject "The role of science and technology
in the context of international security, disarmament and other related
fields",
1.

Takes note of the annual report of the Disarmament Commission; 1/

2.
Notes with regret that the Disarmament Commission was unable to
achieve agreement on guidelines and recommendations under its the agenda item
entitled "The role of science and technology in the context of international
security, disarmament and other related fields", consideration of which was
concluded in 1994;
3.
Notes the continuing consideration by the Disarmament Commission
of its agenda item entitled "Process of nuclear disarmament in the framework
of international peace and security, with the objective of the elimination of
nuclear weapons", which is to be concluded in 1995;
4.
Notes also that the Disarmament Commission held a preliminary
exchange of views on its agenda item entitled "International arms transfers,
with particular reference to General Assembly resolution 46/36 H of 6 December
1991";
5.
Reaffirms the importance of further enhancing the dialogue and
cooperation among the First Committee, the Disarmament Commission and the
Conference on Disarmament;
6.
Reaffirms also the role of the Disarmament Commission as the
specialized, deliberative body within the United Nations multilateral
disarmament machinery that allows for in-depth deliberations on specific
disarmament issues, leading to the submission of concrete recommendations on
those issues;
7.
Encourages the Disarmament Commission to continue to make every
effort to enhance its working methods so as to enable it to give focused
consideration to a limited number of priority issues in the field of
disarmament, bearing in mind the decision it has taken to move its agenda
towards a three-item phased approach;
8.
Requests the Disarmament Commission to continue its work in
accordance with its mandate, as set forth in paragraph 118 of the Final
Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 2/ and with
paragraph 3 of resolution 37/78 H of 9 December 1982, and to that end to make
every effort to achieve specific recommendations on the items of its agenda,
taking into account the adopted "Ways and means to enhance the functioning of
the Disarmament Commission"; 3/
9.
Recommends that the Disarmament Commission, at its 1994
organizational session, adopt the following items for consideration at its
1995 substantive session:

2/

Resolution S-10/2.

3/

A/CN.10/137 of 27 April 1990.
/...

A/RES/49/77
Page 3

(a)
Process of nuclear disarmament in the framework of international
peace and security, with the objective of the elimination of nuclear weapons;
(b)
International arms transfers, with particular reference to General
Assembly resolution 46/36 H of 6 December 1991;
10.
Also recommends that, pursuant to the adopted three-item phased
approach, the Disarmament Commission, at its 1994 organizational session,
consider including in the agenda of its 1995 substantive session a new third
item and, in this context, notes, inter alia, the following proposals:
"General guidelines for non-proliferation, with special emphasis on weapons of
mass destruction" and "Review of the Declaration of the 1990s as the Third
Disarmament Decade";
11.
Requests the Disarmament Commission to meet for a period not
exceeding four weeks during 1995 and to submit a substantive report to the
General Assembly at its fiftieth session;
12.
Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the Disarmament
Commission the annual report of the Conference on Disarmament, 4/ together
with all the official records of the forty-ninth session of the General
Assembly relating to disarmament matters, and to render all assistance that
the Commission may require for implementing the present resolution;
13.
Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure full provision to
the Commission and its subsidiary bodies of interpretation and translation
facilities in the official languages and to assign, as a matter of priority,
all the necessary resources and services, including verbatim records, to that
end;
14.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fiftieth
session the item entitled "Report of the Disarmament Commission".
90th plenary meeting
15 December 1994
B
Expansion of the membership of the Conference on Disarmament
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Conference on Disarmament, 4/
Conscious of the need for a comprehensive approach to the disarmament
process and for improved functioning and efficiency of the multilateral arms
control and disarmament machinery, as also envisaged in the report of the
Secretary-General on new dimensions of arms regulation and disarmament in the
post-cold-war era, 5/

4/
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-ninth Session,
Supplement No. 27 (A/49/27).
5/

A/C.1/47/7.
/...

A/RES/49/77
Page 4

Recalling its relevant resolutions, in particular resolution 48/77 B of
16 December 1993, concerning, inter alia, the ongoing review by the Conference
on Disarmament of its agenda, composition and methods of work, which
highlighted the need for substantial enlargement of the present membership of
the Conference,
Fully convinced that an enlarged membership is desirable in order to
take advantage of the current propitious international climate to negotiate,
on the solid basis of a more representative participation, a comprehensive
test-ban treaty and other important agreements requiring universal adherence,
Recalling that the Conference on Disarmament, which is funded from the
regular budget, was granted, pursuant to resolution 48/77 B, supplementary
administrative, substantive and conference support services, inter alia, in
anticipation of its expansion,
Recalling also its resolution 1722 (XVI) of 20 December 1961 regarding
the establishment of the Conference on Disarmament, then the Eighteen-Nation
Committee on Disarmament,
Emphasizing the fact that, notwithstanding dramatic changes in the
international situation and continuous consultations, there has been no
expansion of the membership of the Conference during the last fifteen years,
Welcoming the fact that the annual report of the Conference on
Disarmament reflects the intention of the Conference to reinstate its own
procedures providing for periodic review of its composition,
Regretting, however, that the Conference on Disarmament did not reach a
consensus that would result in the expansion of its membership before the
start of the 1994 session of the Conference, as urged by the General Assembly
in its resolution 48/77 B, nor was it able to resolve this question
thereafter, in spite of intensive efforts by the Friend of the Chair,
1.
Recognizes the legitimate aspirations of the candidate countries
to participate fully in the work of the Conference on Disarmament;
2.
Recalls the report of 12 August 1993 of the Special Coordinator
for membership designated by the Conference on Disarmament 6/ and the
subsequent statement made by the Special Coordinator on 26 August 1993, 7/
recommending a dynamic solution to the question of membership, as well as the
report of the Conference on Disarmament on its 1994 session;
3.
Urges the Conference on Disarmament to make every effort to reach
a solution resulting, by the beginning of 1995, in a significant expansion of
its composition, which would then include at least sixty countries.
90th plenary meeting
15 December 1994
C

6/
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-eighth Session,
Supplement No. 27 (A/48/27), para. 13 (incorporating document CD/1214).
7/

Ibid., para. 14.

A/RES/49/77
Page 5

Report of the Conference on Disarmament
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Conference on Disarmament, 4/
Convinced that the Conference on Disarmament, as the single multilateral
disarmament negotiating forum of the international community, has the primary
role in substantive negotiations on priority questions of disarmament,
Considering, in this respect, that the present international climate
should give additional impetus to multilateral negotiations with the aim of
reaching concrete agreements,
Welcoming the ongoing negotiations of the Conference on Disarmament on a
comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty,
Noting with satisfaction the results achieved so far on the subject of
improved and effective functioning of the Conference on Disarmament, as well
as the decision to carry out consultations with a view to achieving consensus
on the issue of its membership by the beginning of its 1995 session and the
decision to continue consultations on the issue of the agenda at its 1995
session,
Recognizing that the Conference on Disarmament has a number of urgent
and important areas for negotiations,
1.
Reaffirms the role of the Conference on Disarmament as the single
multilateral disarmament negotiating forum of the international community;
2.
Welcomes the determination of the Conference on Disarmament to
fulfil that role in the light of the evolving international situation, with a
view to making early substantive progress on priority items of its agenda;
3.
Urges the Conference on Disarmament to continue as a priority task
its negotiations to conclude a comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty;
4.
Notes the recommendation of the Conference on Disarmament that the
balance of its future work be considered more fully by the Conference before
it decides which ad hoc committees, besides the Ad Hoc Committee on a Nuclear
Test Ban, should be established in 1995;
5.
Urges the Conference on Disarmament to make every effort to reach
a solution on the expansion of its membership by the beginning of its 1995
session;
6.
Encourages the ongoing review of the agenda, membership and
methods of work of the Conference on Disarmament;
7.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure the
provision, to the Conference on Disarmament, of adequate administrative,
substantive and conference support services;
8.
Requests the Conference on Disarmament to submit a report on its
work to the General Assembly at its fiftieth session;

/...

A/RES/49/77
Page 6

9.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fiftieth
session the item entitled "Report of the Conference on Disarmament".
90th plenary meeting
15 December 1994
D
Implementation of the guidelines for appropriate types of
confidence-building measures
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 43/78 H of 7 December 1988, in which it
endorsed the guidelines for appropriate types of confidence-building measures
and for the implementation of such measures on a global or regional level, and
its resolution 47/54 D, adopted without a vote on 9 December 1992,
Noting that since then national reports on the implementation of the
guidelines for appropriate types of confidence-building measures have been
submitted by a number of Member States belonging to different geographic
regions,
Reconfirming its support for the guidelines for appropriate types of
confidence-building measures and for the implementation of such measures on a
global or regional level,
Recalling that the guidelines and recommendations for regional
approaches to disarmament within the context of global security, as endorsed
by the General Assembly at its forty-eighth session, refer, inter alia, to
confidence- and security-building measures in the context of maintaining and
enhancing regional peace and security,
Welcoming progress at the global level in the promotion of transparency
in the military field as a cornerstone for confidence-building, through the
United Nations system for the standardized reporting of military expenditures,
introduced by its resolution 35/142 B of 12 December 1980, the endorsement of
the guidelines and recommendations for objective information on military
matters, contained in its resolution 47/54 B of 9 December 1992, and the
establishment of the Register of Conventional Arms under its resolution 46/36
L of 9 December 1991,
Noting with satisfaction the encouraging results of specific confidencebuilding measures agreed upon and implemented in some regions which foster
mutual trust and understanding, defuse tensions and promote friendly relations
among States,
Welcoming, in particular, the establishment of regional mechanisms,
institutions or forums entrusted with the prevention and peaceful settlement
of conflicts, and the development of confidence-building measures,
Recognizing the value of regional workshops, seminars and conferences on
regional confidence-building and security, contributing to regional
disarmament and security,
/...

A/RES/49/77
Page 7

Reaffirming the great importance of increasing security and stability in
all regions through appropriate measures to strengthen international peace and
security,
Realizing with deep concern, however, that tensions in some regions rise
and that even violent armed conflicts have erupted and continue, in some
cases, despite all peacemaking and peace-keeping efforts,
Emphasizing that confidence-building measures, especially when applied
in a comprehensive manner, can be conducive to achieving structures of
security based on cooperation and openness and thus contribute to the wider
objective of the renunciation of the threat or use of force,
1.
Stresses the need for the development and implementation of
confidence-building measures as a concrete means to facilitate the disarmament
and arms limitation process and to improve the prospects for the peaceful
settlement of disputes, thus contributing to maintaining and enhancing
regional and international peace and security;
2.
Recommends the guidelines for appropriate types of confidencebuilding measures to all States for implementation, taking fully into account
the specific political, military and other conditions prevailing in a region;
3.
Also recommends to all States and regions that have already
started to implement confidence-building measures to pursue further and
strengthen this process;
4.
Appeals to all States to consider the widest possible use of
confidence-building measures in their international relations, including
bilateral, regional and global activities, as an important step towards
prevention of conflict and, in times of political tension and crisis, as an
instrument for peaceful settlement of conflicts;
5.
Calls upon, in particular, all States in whose regions military
tensions exist, or armed conflicts occur, to make the best possible use of
confidence-building measures, among other appropriate activities and if needed
in cooperation with other States, to ease tensions and to contribute to
peacemaking and peace-building;
6.
Invites the Secretary-General to continue to collect relevant
information from all Member States;
7.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-first
session an item entitled "Confidence-building measures".
90th plenary meeting
15 December 1994
