VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Regretting that, notwithstanding the indication of a
greater willingness to co-operate with the Special Representative, a state of full co-operation has yet to be
achieved,
Noting the recent contacts between the Special Representative and the Government of the Islamic Republic of
Iran, which it is hoped will lead to a state of full cooperation between the Special Representative and that
Government, including a visit to the Islamic Republic of
Iran, so that he can fulfil his mandate,
Noting that the Baha'is in the Islamic Republic of Iran
continue to be subjected to various forms of harassment
and discrimination, although there are indications that the
intensity of the campaign of persecution against the
Baha'is has diminished somewhat in recent months and
that a number of them have been released from prison,
l. Takes note with appreciation ofthe interim report of
the Special Representative 140 and the considerations and
observations contained therein;
2. Once again urges the Government of the Islamic
Republic of Iran to extend its full co-operation to the Special Representative of the Commission on Human Rights
and, in particular, to permit him to visit that country;
3. Calls upan the Government of the Islamic Republic
of Iran to give immediate effect to its undertaking to provide detailed information concerning the allegations ofhuman rights violations that have been brought to its attention;
4. Expresses once more its deep concern about the numerous and detailed allegations of grave human rights vioIations in the Islamic Republic of Iran to which the Special
Representative has referred in his report, namely, those related to the right to life, the right to freedom from torture
or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
the right to Iiberty and security of person, the right to a
fair tria! and the right to freedom of thought, conscience
and religion;
5. Expresses its grave concern that, although the Special Representative observes that the number of alleged violations of the right to life continued to decrease during
1987, the information available to him indicates that there
was a renewed wave of executions in the period JulySeptember 1988 whereby a large number of persons died
because of their political convictions;
6. Expresses its deep concern at allegations that illtreatment and torture, both physical and psychological,
continued to be common practice in Iranian prisons, especially during interrogation but also immediately after arrest and before and after the final verdict;
7. Expresses its deep concern a/so at the existen ce of extremely summary, informal and irregular proceedings,
failure to inform defendants of specific accusations against
them, lack of legal counsel, absence of an appropriate instance for appeal and other irregularities that contravene
international standards on fair tria!;
8. Shares the opinion of the Special Representative regarding the importance of prompt investigation into ali allegations of irregularities in the treatment of political prisoners and other persons in custody, as well as the necessity
of adequate redress for those whose human rights have
been violated;
9. Welcomes the intention of the Special Representative to consider in his report to the Commission on Human Rights at its forty-fifth session severa! issues pertaining to the legal system applicable in the Islamic Republic
of Iran;

211

1O. Endorses the conclusion of the Special Representative that acts continue to occur in the Islamic Republic of
lran that are inconsistent with the provisions of international instruments by which that country is bound and
that the persistence of alleged violations of human rights
continues to justify continuing international concern and
continued monitoring by the U nited Nations of the situation in that country;
11. Urges the Government of the Islamic Republic of
Iran, as a State party to the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, 20 to respect and ensure the
rights recognized in that Covenant to all individuals
within its territory and subject to its jurisdiction;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to give ali necessary assistance to the Special Representative;
13. Decides to keep under consideration the situation
of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran, including
the situation of minority groups such as the Baha'is, during its forty-fourth session in order to re-examine it in the
light of additional elements provided by the Commission
on Human Rights and the Economic and Social Council.
75th plenary meeting
8 December 1988
43/138.

Status of the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 40/142 of 13 December 1985,
41/147 of 4 December 1986 and 42/133 of 7 December
1987,
Recalling a/so Commission on Human Rights resolutions 1986/18 of 10 March 1986, 60 1987/25 of 10 March
1987 61 and 1988/28 of 7 March 1988,2 7
Recallingits resolution 260 A (111) of9 December 1948,
by which it approved and proposed for signature, ratification or accession the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide,
Reaffirming once again its conviction that genocide is a
crime under international law, contrary to the spirit and
aims of the United Nations,
Convinced that international co-operation is necessary
in order to liberate mankind from such an odious crime,
Recognizing that crimes of genocide have caused great
losses to mankind,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,1 41
1. Once again strong/y condemns the crime of genocide;
2. Reaffirms the necessity of international cooperation in order to liberate mankind from such an odious crime;
3. Notes with satisfaction that many States have ratified
the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide or have acceded thereto;
4. Expresses its conviction that implementation of the
provisions of the Convention by ali States is necessary for
the prevention and punishment of the crime of genocide;
5. Urges those States which have not yet become parties to the Convention to ratify it or accede thereto without further delay;

141

A/43/478

212

General Assembly-Forty-third Session

6. Invites the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its forty-fourth session a report on the
status of the Convention.
75th plenary meeting
8 December 1988
43/139.

Situation of human rights in Afghanistan

The General Assembly,
Guided by the principies embodied in the Charter of the
United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, 2 the International Covenants on Human Rights 20
and the humanitarian rules set out in the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, 14 2
Aware of its responsibility to promote and encourage respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for ali
and resolved to remain vigilant with regard to violations of
human rights wherever they occur,
Emphasizing the obligations of ali Governments to respect and protect human rights and to fulfil the responsibilities they have assumed under various international
instruments,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1984/37 of 24 May 1984, in which the Council requested
the Chairman ofthe Commission on Human Rights to appoint a special rapporteur to examine the situation of human rights in Afghanistan, with a view to formulating
proposals that could contribute to ensuring full protection
of the human rights of ali residents of the country before,
during and after the withdrawal of ali foreign forces,
Recalling ali other relevant resolutions, in particular its
resolution 42/135 of 7 December 1987,
Taking note of Commission on Human Rights resolution 1988/67 of 10 March 1988 27 and Economic and Social Council decision 1988/136 of 27 May 1988,
Welcoming the Agreements on the Settlement of the
Situation Relating to Afghanistan 143 signed at Geneva on
14 April 1988 as a positive development, which, when
fully implemented, should contribute to the creation of a
situation that will permit the full enjoyment of human
rights, including the right to self-determination, by ali the
people of Afghanistan,
Welcoming the co-operation that the Afghan authorities
have extended to international organizations, in particular
to the specialized agencies of the United Nations, to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and to the International Committee of the
Red Cross,
Having carefully examined the interim report of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Afghanistan, 144 in which, while it is recognized that there
have been sorne improvements in the human rights situation in the area controlled by the Afghan authorities, continuing violations of fundamental human rights within the
country are revealed,
Recognizing that a sitllation of armed conflict continues
to exist in Afghanistan, leaving large numbers of victims
without protection or assistance and contributing to violatim,:· of human rights and humanitarian law throughout
the country,

142 Uníted Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75. Nos. 970-973.
143 Official Records of the Security Council. hmy-third

Year.
Sufllement far April, May and June J98íi. documenl S/19835, annex l.
A/43/742, annex.

Regretting that the Special Rapporteur was unable to
visit areas not under the control ofthe Afghan authorities,
1. Commends the efforts of the Special Rapporteur to
fulfil his mandate and takes note of his interim report on
the situation of human rights in Afghanistan;
2. Welcomesthe co-operation that the Afghan authorities extended to the Commission on Human Rights by permitting its Special Rapporteur to visit Afghanistan from
11 to 19 September 1988;
3. Expresses its serious concern that, in spite of improvements identified by the Special Rapporteur, acts of
war continue and violations of human rights persist with
the same frequency as in the past, especially affecting the
civilian population and threatening the life and security of
innocent men, women and children;
4. Expresses its concern that, despite the significant reduction in the numbers of political prisoners as a result of
various measures, over two thousand persons are still in
prison for political reasons, and urges the Afghan authorities to pursue the policy of amnesty and to guarantee that
released prisoners are not placed under surveillance or
harassed following their release;
5. Notes with grave concern the continuing allegations
of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners on remand and
política! prisoners;
6. Notes with equal concern the reports of disappearances and urges the Afghan authorities to investigate the
fate of ali missing persons;
7. Notes a/so with concern indications that the economic, social and cultural situation in Afghanistan has
deteriorated over the years of conflict and has now become
critica!;
8. Expresses its great concern that more than five million refugees remain outside the country because they fear
the climate of insecurity in Afghanistan, the extensive
presence of mines and explosives, and the continued bombardments of the civilian population;
9. Calls once again upon all the parties to the conflict,
in order to alleviate the suffering of the people of Afghanistan, to apply fully the principies and rules ofinternational
humanitarian law and to co-operate fully and effectively
with international humanitarian organizations, in particular to facilitate the protection activities of the International Committee of the Red Cross;
10. Underlines that in post-war Afghanistan it will be
essential to adopt concrete measures aimed at securing the
observance of human rights;
11. Urges the authorities in Afghanistan to continue to
co-operate with the Commission on Human Rights and its
Special Rapporteur:
12. Requests the Secretary-General to give ali necessary assistance to the Special Rapporteur;
13. Decides to keep under consideration, during its
forty-fourth session, the question ofhuman rights and fundamental freedoms in Afghanistan in order to re-examine
this question in the light of additional elements provided
by the Commission on Human Rights and the Economic
and Social Council.
75th plenary meeting
8 December 1988
