S/PV.6078

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 January 2009
Original: English

Official communiqué of the 6078th (closed) meeting of the
Security Council
Held in private at Headquarters, New York, on Thursday,
29 January 2009, at 10 a.m.
In accordance with rule 55 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Security
Council, the following communiqué was issued through the Secretary-General in
place of a verbatim record:
“At its 6078th meeting, held in private on 29 January 2009, the Security
Council considered the item entitled ‘Maintenance of international peace and
security: respect for international humanitarian law’.
“The President, with the consent of the Council, invited the
representatives of Australia, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Burundi, Canada, Cuba, the
Czech Republic, Egypt, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, Germany, Greece,
Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, Morocco, New Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, Poland, Portugal,
Romania, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland and Ukraine, to
participate in the consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
“In accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice, the President, with the consent of the Council, invited the Permanent
Observer of Palestine to the United Nations to participate in the meeting.
“In accordance with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, the President, with the consent of the Council, extended an
invitation under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure to the
Permanent Observer of the Holy See to the United Nations.
“In accordance with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, the President, with the consent of the Council, extended
invitations under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure to
Ms. Patricia O’Brien, Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs and United
Nations Legal Counsel; Mr. Pierre Bertrand, Director, United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees Office in New York; Ms. Jessica Neuwirth,
Director, New York Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights; and

09-22334 (E) 290109

*0922334*

S/PV.6078

Mr. Hansjoerg Strohmeyer, Chief of the Policy Development and Studies
Branch, United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
“In accordance with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, the President, with the consent of the Council, extended an
invitation under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Dominique Buff, Head of Delegation, International Committee of the Red
Cross.
“Members of the Council, Ms. O’Brien, Mr. Buff, Mr. Bertrand,
Ms. Neuwirth and Mr. Strohmeyer had an exchange of views.”

2

09-22334
