United Nations

A/RES/63/243

General Assembly

Distr.: General
22 January 2009

Sixty-third session
Agenda item 62 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 24 December 2008
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/63/428)]

63/243. International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Racial Discrimination
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 1 most recently resolution 61/148
of 19 December 2006,
0F

Bearing in mind the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by
the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993, 2 in particular section II.B
of the Declaration, relating to equality, dignity and tolerance,
1F

Reiterating the need to intensify the struggle to eliminate all forms of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance throughout the world,
Reiterating also the importance of the Convention, which is one of the most
widely accepted human rights instruments adopted under the auspices of the United
Nations,
Reaffirming that universal adherence to and full implementation of the
Convention are of paramount importance for promoting equality and
non-discrimination in the world, as stated in the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action adopted by the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination,
Xenophobia and Related Intolerance on 8 September 2001, 3
2F

Mindful of the importance of the contributions of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination to the effective implementation of the
Convention and to the efforts of the United Nations to combat racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance,
Emphasizing the obligation of all States parties to the Convention to take
legislative, judicial and other measures to secure full implementation of the
provisions of the Convention,

_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 660, No. 9464.
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
3
See A/CONF.189/12 and Corr.1, chap. I.
2

08-48537

A/RES/63/243

Recalling its resolution 47/111 of 16 December 1992, in which it welcomed
the decision, taken on 15 January 1992 by the Fourteenth Meeting of States Parties
to the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination, to amend paragraph 6 of article 8 of the Convention and to add a
new paragraph, as paragraph 7 of article 8, with a view to providing for the
financing of the Committee from the regular budget of the United Nations, 4 and
reiterating its deep concern that the amendment to the Convention has not yet
entered into force,
3F

Stressing the importance of enabling the Committee to function smoothly and
to have all necessary facilities for the effective performance of its functions under
the Convention,
I
Reports of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
1.
Takes note of the reports of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination on its seventieth and seventy-first 5 and its seventy-second and
seventy-third 6 sessions;
4F

5F

2.
Commends the Committee for its contributions to the effective
implementation of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination,1 especially through the examination of reports under article 9
of the Convention, action on communications under article 14 of the Convention
and thematic discussions, which contribute to the prevention and elimination of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
Calls upon States parties to fulfil their obligation, under article 9,
3.
paragraph 1, of the Convention, to submit their periodic reports on measures taken
to implement the Convention in due time;
Expresses its concern at the fact that a great number of reports are
4.
overdue and continue to be overdue, in particular initial reports, which constitutes
an obstacle to the full implementation of the Convention;
Encourages States parties to the Convention whose reports are seriously
5.
overdue to avail themselves of the advisory services and technical assistance that
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights can provide,
upon their request, for the preparation of the reports;
Encourages the Committee to continue to cooperate and exchange
6.
information with United Nations bodies and mechanisms, in particular with the
Human Rights Council, its Advisory Committee and the Special Rapporteur on
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance, and with intergovernmental organizations, as well as with
non-governmental organizations;
Encourages States parties to the Convention to continue to include a
7.
gender perspective in their reports to the Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination, and invites the Committee to take into account a gender perspective
in the implementation of its mandate;
_______________
4

See CERD/SP/45, annex.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/62/18).
6
Ibid., Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/63/18).
5

2

A/RES/63/243

8.
Notes with appreciation the engagement of the Committee in the followup to the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action;3
9.
Expresses its appreciation for the efforts made so far by the Committee
to improve the efficiency of its working methods, including with a view to further
harmonizing the working methods of the treaty bodies, and encourages the
Committee to continue its activities in this regard;
10. Welcomes, in this regard, measures taken by the Committee to follow up
on its concluding observations and recommendations, such as the appointment of a
follow-up coordinator 7 and the adoption of the guidelines on follow-up; 8
6F

7F

11. Encourages the continued participation of members of the Committee in
the annual inter-committee meetings and meetings of chairpersons of the human
rights treaty bodies, especially with a view to a more coordinated approach to the
activities of the treaty body system and standardized reporting as well as to solving
the problem of the backlog of reports of States parties in an effective manner,
including by identifying efficiencies and maximizing the use of their resources as
well as learning and sharing best practices and experiences in this regard;
12. Notes the persistent backlog of reports of States parties awaiting
consideration, which prevents the Committee from considering the periodic reports
of States parties in a timely manner and without undue delay, as well as the request
of the Committee that the General Assembly authorize an extension of its meeting
time, which is currently only six weeks per year;
13. Decides to authorize the Committee to meet for an additional week per
session, as a temporary measure, with effect from August 2009, until 2011;
14. Also decides to assess the situation regarding the meeting time of the
Committee at its sixty-fifth session on the basis of an evaluation made by the Office
of the High Commissioner, taking into account a more comprehensive approach to
the backlog of human rights treaty bodies and the increasing number of reports of
States parties to the human rights conventions;
II
Financial situation of the Committee on the Elimination
of Racial Discrimination
15. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial
situation of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination; 9
8F

16. Expresses its profound concern at the fact that a number of States parties
to the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination1 have still not fulfilled their financial obligations, as shown in the
report of the Secretary-General, and strongly appeals to all States parties that are in
arrears to fulfil their outstanding financial obligations under article 8, paragraph 6,
of the Convention;
17. Strongly urges States parties to the Convention to accelerate their
domestic ratification procedures with regard to the amendment to the Convention
concerning the financing of the Committee and to notify the Secretary-General
_______________
7

Ibid., Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/60/18), annex IV.
Ibid., Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/61/18), annex VI.
9
A/63/306.
8

3

A/RES/63/243

expeditiously in writing of their agreement to the amendment, as decided upon at
the Fourteenth Meeting of States Parties to the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination on 15 January 1992,4 endorsed
by the General Assembly in its resolution 47/111 and further reiterated at the
Sixteenth Meeting of States Parties on 16 January 1996;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure adequate financial
arrangements and to provide the necessary support, including an adequate level of
Secretariat assistance, in order to ensure the functioning of the Committee and to
enable it to cope with its increasing amount of work;
19. Also requests the Secretary-General to invite those States parties to the
Convention that are in arrears to pay the amounts in arrears, and to report thereon to
the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session;
III
Status of the International Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
20. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the status of the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination; 10
9F

21. Expresses its satisfaction at the number of States that have ratified or
acceded to the Convention, which now stands at one hundred and seventy-three;
22. Urges States parties to comply fully with their obligations under the
Convention and to take into consideration the concluding observations and general
recommendations of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination;
23. Reaffirms its conviction that ratification of or accession to the
Convention on a universal basis and the implementation of its provisions are
necessary for the effectiveness of the fight against racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance and for the implementation of the commitments
undertaken under the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action,3 and expresses
its disappointment that universal ratification of the Convention was not achieved by
the targeted date of 2005;
24. Urges all States that have not yet become parties to the Convention to
ratify or accede to it as a matter of urgency;
25. Urges States to limit the extent of any reservation they lodge to the
Convention and to formulate any reservation as precisely and as narrowly as
possible in order to ensure that no reservation is incompatible with the object and
purpose of the Convention, to review their reservations on a regular basis with a
view to withdrawing them, and to withdraw reservations that are contrary to the
object and purpose of the Convention;
26. Notes that the number of States parties to the Convention that have made
the declaration provided for in article 14 of the Convention now stands at fiftythree, and requests States parties that have not yet done so to consider making that
declaration;

_______________
10

4

A/63/473.

A/RES/63/243

27. Invites the Chairperson of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination to present an oral report on the work of the Committee and to engage
in an interactive dialogue with the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session under
the item entitled “Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance”;
28. Decides to consider, at its sixty-fifth session, under the item entitled
“Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance”,
the reports of the Committee on its seventy-fourth and seventy-fifth and its seventysixth and seventy-seventh sessions, the report of the Secretary-General on the
financial situation of the Committee and the report of the Secretary-General on the
status of the Convention.
74th plenary meeting
24 December 2008

5
