S/PV.7925

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7925th meeting

Thursday, 13 April 2017, 10.55 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Sison. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Fernández Revollo
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Fesko
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Briefing by the Chair of the Security Council Committee pursuant to
resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-10049 (E)
*1710049*

S/PV.7925

The situation in Somalia

The meeting was called to order at 10.55 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Briefing by the Chair of the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992)
and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Djibouti, Eritrea and Somalia to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
a briefing by His Excellency Mr. Kairat Umarov,
Permanent Representative of Kazakhstan, in his
capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009)
concerning Somalia and Eritrea.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Kairat Umarov.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): As mandated by
paragraph 11 (g) of resolution 1844 (2008), I have the
honour to brief the Security Council in my capacity as
the Chair of the Security Council Committee pursuant
to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning
Somalia and Eritrea, covering the period from
November 2016 to February 2017.
I would like to take this opportunity to most
sincerely thank my predecessor Ambassador Ramírez
Carreño of Venezuela for his able leadership and hard
work during the past two years. Today, my briefing will
focus on the activities of the Committee and on the
assessment of recent developments, based on the most
recent reports of the Monitoring Group on Somalia
and Eritrea.
During the reporting period, with regard to the
arms embargo on Somalia, the Committee received
two notifications pursuant to paragraph 11 (a) of
resolution 2111 (2013) and two notifications pursuant
to paragraph 10 (g) of resolution 2111 (2013). The
Committee also held three informal consultations.
On 16 December 2016, the Committee was briefed
by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) on transnational terrorist threats in the IGAD
2/17

13/04/2017

region. On 20 January, the Chair introduced the seven
newly appointed members of the Monitoring Group to
the Committee. The members presented their plan of
activities for the new mandate. In particular, the Group
intends to focus its efforts on investigating violations
of the arms embargoes and to expand its reporting on
the strength, structure and financing of armed groups
in the region. The coordinator of the Monitoring Group
indicated the Group’s intention to maintain its close
working relationship with the newly elected federal
Government of Somalia.
According to the latest update of the Monitoring
Group to the Committee, Al-Shabaab remains the most
significant threat to peace and security in Somalia.
Despite the successful eviction of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)/Da’esh faction from the
port town of Qandala by the Puntland security forces in
December 2016, the Group reported that this terrorist
organization continues to maintain its presence in the
surrounding mountainside.
The assessment of the Monitoring Group that
Al-Shabaab is a very critical threat to the stability of
the region was also confirmed by representatives of
IGAD during the briefing on 16 December 2016. They
also stated that no ideological rapprochement between
ISIL/Da’esh and Al-Shabaab has been observed.
With regard to the arms embargo, the Monitoring
Group reported that the interim Juba administration
and African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
contingents discovered approximately 25,000 blankfiring pistols on board the SJ African vessel, docked in
the port of Kismayo. With full coordination between the
interim Juba administration, AMISOM and Monitoring
Group arms experts, the Group is continuing its
investigation in order to establish the origin of the
cargo and its intended destination.
In the light of the ongoing drought, the Monitoring
Group reported that the hindering of humanitarian
assistance can result in additional threats to the
peace, security and stability of Somalia. The Federal
Government of Somalia pledged to ensure the removal
of all impediments to the delivery of assistance. The
willingness of federal and regional leaders to uphold their
commitments as well as the international community’s
determination to implement the operational plan for
a pre-famine scale-up of humanitarian assistance in
January-June 2017 will be vital for saving lives and
preserving stability and security in Somalia.
17-10049

13/04/2017

The situation in Somalia

The Group also remains concerned about the threat
to peace and security posed by illegal, unreported
and unregulated fishing in Somalia. With respect to
the charcoal ban, it remained unclear to what extent
Al-Shabaab was involved in the illicit export of
charcoal from Somalia. However, the Monitoring group
noted a possible tactical shift away from Al-Shabaab’s
self-declared ban on trading in charcoal while taking
note of significant activity at the charcoal stockpiles in
Kismayo and Bur Gabo.
Furthermore, I would like to acknowledge the
timely receipt of the letter dated 30 March 2017 from
the Permanent Mission of Somalia transmitting the
report of the Federal Government of Somalia pursuant
to paragraph 7 of resolution 2317 (2016), on the
structure, composition, strength and disposition of its
security forces, including the status of regional and
militia forces.
Turning to Eritrea, pursuant to the Monitoring
Group’s final report of October 2016 that it had found no
conclusive evidence of Eritrean support for Al-Shabaab,
the Group reported on ongoing investigations into
support for armed groups as well as into potential
breaches of the arms embargo. Additionally, the Group
continues to seek clarification on combatants missing
in action since the Djibouti-Eritrean border clashes.
With regard to the upcoming review of sanctions
on Eritrea, the Monitoring Group intends to prioritize
investigations on Eritrea in its midterm update in
order to provide the Committee and the Council with
a comprehensive account of Eritrea’s compliance with
the Council’s measures, which would then feed into
the review. The Coordinator will present the Group’s
midterm update to the Committee on 21 April.
Achieving sustainable global peace is impossible
without achieving full peace and security in Africa
and the Horn of Africa in particular. Severely affected
by conflict, the region demands a high proportion of
United Nations peacekeeping resources. In this vein,
during the reporting period, the Chair has been engaged
with members of the Committee as well as concerned
Member States on a possible visit of the Chair to the
Horn of Africa.
Finally, as the new Chair of the Somalia and Eritrea
sanctions Committee, I am committed to working
on an open, transparent and objective basis with all
the members of the Committee and beyond towards

S/PV.7925

national reconciliation and the restoration of peace in
the Horn of Africa.
The President: I thank Ambassador Umarov for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I wish to thank
you, Madam President, for having convened this
meeting and for maintaining the Security Council’s
focus on preventing conflict in Africa. I also thank
Kairat for his comprehensive briefing as Chair of the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and
Eritrea, and for his tireless efforts to advance the work
of the Committee since he took on the role.
As he has reminded us, Al-Shabaab remains a
vicious threat to security in Somalia and indeed to
the region. The sanctions regime remains in place
to reduce that threat from Al-Shabaab and to tackle
threats to peace and security. It does so first through
the arms embargo. The regime makes it harder for
illicit weapons to flow into Somalia, and it supports
the Federal Government of Somalia to establish robust
arms and ammunition management, accountability
and transparency.
These are key elements in wider security-sector
reform, which is both essential and urgent to help make
progress on this vital issue. In May, the United Kingdom
will host the London Somalia conference, co-chaired
by the Secretary-General and the Federal Government
of Somalia. We will accelerate progress of security
and agree the new international partnership needed
to keep Somalia on track towards increased peace and
prosperity by 2020. Central to this is continuing the
battle against Al-Shabaab.
But as several Security Council members said
during the peacekeeping debate convened by the
United States presidency last week (see S/PV.7918), we
cannot defeat armed groups through military means
alone. The political progress made by Somalia in 2017
has laid the essential foundations for peace, stability
and growth, which will be so vital to ensuring that
Al-Shabaab’s support is choked off at the political and
economic levels, as well as through the restrictions
of the sanctions regime, which denies Al-Shabaab its
revenue streams.

17-100493/17

S/PV.7925

The situation in Somalia

The sanctions regime cuts off Al-Shabaab’s funding.
It preserves Somalia’s natural resources for the benefit
of its people and Somalia’s economic empowerment, it
tackles spoilers to Somalia’s political progress, and it
helps to support the development of Somalia’s security
forces. In this way, this regime supports the Federal
Government of Somalia’s fight against Al-Shabaab
alongside the bravery and sacrifice of the troops of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
Now more than ever, Somalia needs our continued
support. The consequences of the drought in Somalia are
far-reaching, and we must all take action now to address
the humanitarian crisis and preserve the political and
security gains that have been made since 2012.
Turning to Eritrea, I would like to commend the
Chair for his great efforts and those of his team for their
work to engage with the Government of Eritrea since
assuming the role. The United Kingdom continues
to urge the Government of Eritrea to comply with its
international obligations, including compliance with the
Chapter VII resolutions of the Council. We welcome the
increased engagement by Eritrea with United Nations
human rights mechanisms, and we continue to urge
Eritrea to engage with the Committee, its Monitoring
Group and the Council.
We should also recall that some serious outstanding
issues remain. First, the ongoing mediation by Qatar is
vital to ensuring that all Djiboutian combatants missing
as a result of the 2008 conflict, including the bodies of
any who have died, are accounted for and their families
given all the information available.
Secondly, the ongoing refusal by the Government
of Eritrea to cooperate with the Monitoring Group,
including by allowing them to visit Eritrea, means
that we have no way of verifying the Group’s lack of
evidence for Eritrean support for Al-Shabaab or of
understanding the concerns about support for other
regional armed groups. We hope that, by the time of the
review of the sanctions on Eritrea, due following the
midterm report of the Monitoring Group, the Council
will have some positive momentum to reflect on. To that
end, we encourage Eritrea to take the opportunity for
engagement, which the Council is once again offering.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking, Ambassador Umarov, Chair
of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992)
and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea,
for his statement and, through him, the Somalia and
4/17

13/04/2017

Eritrea Monitoring Group for its latest report and
investigative work. In all their aspects, sanctions help
support our political goals, and it is therefore our view
that they are an important and necessary tool for the
Security Council.
With regard to Somalia, I will address three points.
First, I would like to underscore that the fight against
the terrorist groups in Somalia, Al-Shabaab and Da’esh,
remains a priority and must involve more Somali and
local forces. We welcome the work, achievements and
territory won by the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) since 2007, and take note of the Mission’s
desire for a planned and coordinated withdrawal. It is
now important that the Somali authorities quickly adopt
a national security architecture that reflects the Federal
structure in Somalia.
The development of a Somali security solution
is our priority. The goal is to establish Somali armed
forces and police capable of progressively taking charge
of the struggle against Al-Shabaab and stabilizing
the territories that have been retaken, thereby taking
over from the AMISOM. That is the rational of the
ongoing reviews, which we support. In that effort,
the involvement of regional forces is crucial. We are
encouraged by the success of the Puntland forces against
Da’esh. The misappropriation of funds and corruption
within the Somali army and the non-payment of troops
highlighted by the report of the Monitoring Group must
spur us to remain demanding with regard to such issues
and strengthen the training and professionalization of
the Somali security forces.
Secondly, in Somalia as elsewhere the numerous
violations of human rights and of international
humanitarian law are unacceptable. All those violations
are equally reprehensible, particularly so in the case
of human rights violations committed by the Somali
security forces and the international forces that enjoy
international support. If combating terrorism is our
priority, it must be done while respecting human rights.
It is a matter of principle, but it is also a question of
effectiveness, because a military response by the
authorities, with AMISOM’s support, will succeed
only if it enjoys the support of the Somali population.
That is why we support the recommendations of the
Monitoring Group aimed at promoting better respect
for human rights and international humanitarian law by
all stakeholders.
17-10049

13/04/2017

The situation in Somalia

Finally, I would like to underline that the ongoing
drought in the region, which is threatening millions of
lives, calls for an urgent and determined humanitarian
response. France has voluntarily contributed an
additional €1.6 million to support the work of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees for the benefit of people in situations of forced
displacement, of which €1 million is earmarked for food
aid. Obstacles to the distribution of humanitarian aid,
some of which are the responsibility of United Nations
partners, especially at the local level, must cease
immediately, as the Chair of the Committee said earlier.
Turning to Eritrea, we welcome the apparent lack
of support for Al-Shabaab, but it is now incumbent
on Eritrea to increase cooperation with the Security
Council in line with the principle of cooperation with
all United Nations mechanisms, including in particular
by inviting the United Nations Monitoring Group to
visit and confirm the lack of support for Al-Shabaab
starting from Asmara. Such a step would be a sign of a
clear desire on the part of Eritrea to move forward and
be released from the embargo regime that it has known
for eight years.
We must not forget that the embargo regime is
also a response to the unresolved issue of Djiboutian
prisoners. France welcomes the release of four military
Djiboutian prisoners who had been detained in Eritrea
since 2008. It is now time to clarify the fate of the other
Djiboutian soldiers who remain missing, according to
authorities in Djibouti, and address the border issue.
With regard to those issues, the Eritrean authorities
have everything to gain in providing comprehensive
clarifications so as to normalize relations with Djibouti.
Today, 13 April, also marks the fifteenth
anniversary of the decision of the Eritrea-Ethiopia
Boundary Commission regarding the delimitation
of the border between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Like
the European Union, France is committed to that
decision and encourages all measures that will make it
possible to move forward on demarcating the border in
compliance with the 2002 decision. France, along with
the European Union, is ready to support such a process
so as to establish conditions for peaceful relations
between neighbouring countries.
In conclusion, the Chair of the Committee can count
on France’s continued support. I would like once again
to commend his work and the Monitoring Group for its

S/PV.7925

periodic and quality reports, and to reiterate France’s
confidence in the usefulness of his mandate.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): First and
foremost, the Senegalese delegation would like to thank
Ambassador Kairat Umarov, Chair of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009)
concerning Somalia and Eritrea, for his briefing and
congratulate him on the outstanding manner in which
he is coordinating the work of the Committee.
My delegation would also like to congratulate the
new members of the Somalia and Eritrea Monitoring
Group, whose high-quality monthly updates enable us
to better understand the situation in Somalia and Eritrea.
With regard to Somalia, the persistent concerns
raised in the successive reports of the Monitoring Group
illustrate the considerable challenges that the security
situation in Somalia continues to pose. Through its
presence and harmful actions, Al-Shabaab continues to
pose a threat in its continued occupation of large parts
of the territory and in carrying out attacks, thereby
rendering the country’s security situation even more
complex — following the satisfactory conclusion of an
electoral process last February with the election of His
Excellency Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo as
the new President of the Federal Government.
The attacks carried out on 9 and 10 April in
Mogadishu attest to the difficult security situation.
One of those attacks targeted the head of the Somali
National Army and resulted in several deaths and
injuries. Through me, Senegal once again condemns
those acts, offers its condolences to the Somali people
and the bereaved families, and wishes a speedy recovery
to the wounded. My delegation takes this opportunity
to congratulate once again the Somali National Army
and the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
whose tireless vigilance enabled the Chief of the Army
to escape the attack.
Senegal is also concerned about the threat posed by
the growing presence of the Islamic State in the region
as illustrated by the 8 February operation carried out
against a hotel by the small faction led by Sheikh
Abdulqadir Mumin, which has claimed allegiance to the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). It is worth
noting that despite the successful ouster by the Puntland
forces of the ISIL faction in Qandala in December 2016,
the group continues to maintain a strong presence in the
surrounding mountains. Accordingly, the Senegalese
delegation would like to reiterate its conviction that

17-100495/17

S/PV.7925

The situation in Somalia

only the full cooperation of the States of the region,
through the regional frameworks and mechanisms
established for this purpose, can enable a coordinated,
and therefore lasting, response to the problem of
Al-Shabaab and other terrorist groups that undermine
the region.
With regard to the arms embargo, the Monitoring
Group reported on the discovery on 23 January of
approximately 25,000 blank firing pistols by the Interim
Jubba Administration and contingents of AMISOM on
board the vessel the SJ African in Kismayo. We welcome
the cooperation of those responsible from the Interim
Jubba Administration and AMISOM and the weapons
experts of the Monitoring Group who were able to gain
access the container and who are working to determine
the origin and destination of these weapons. We also
note that the Group expressed concern about the threat
to peace and security posed by illegal, unreported and
unregulated fishing in Somalia, as reflected in its latest
report, the presence of seven trawlers near Bosaso,
which provoked demonstrations by local fishermen
in February.
With respect to the attacks on humanitarian
workers, the hijacking of aid and the obstacles to its
delivery, we firmly condemn all of them, whoever the
perpetrators might be. My delegation therefore calls
for a substantial reform of security in the country and
the eradication of corruption that can be found in many
sectors of activity.
With regard to the ban on the sale of charcoal,
we note with satisfaction the progress made in the
implementation by Member States of the measures
taken to this end. However, illegal export of charcoal
continues, unfortunately, with the use of different
methods to facilitate evasion, in particular, the
counterfeiting of customs documentation. It should also
be noted that although Al-Shabaab is no longer involved
in the charcoal trade, it nevertheless continues to levy
taxes on its production and transport. It is therefore
appropriate to ask AMISOM to redouble its efforts
to help the Somali Federal Government to prevent
the export of charcoal and facilitate the Monitoring
Group’s access to the coal-export ports, including, if
necessary, the provision of means of transport and any
other appropriate security measures.
Regarding Eritrea, the delegation of Senegal
would like to once again invite the country to work
6/17

13/04/2017

more closely with the Monitoring Group to create the
conditions that could lead to the lifting of sanctions.
In conclusion, we reiterate our encouragement to
the State of Qatar, which, in its capacity as mediator,
spares no effort to resolve the differences between
Djibouti and Eritrea, particularly with regard to the
latent question of the remaining missing persons.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We listened very carefully to the briefing
by the Permanent Representative of Kazakhstan,
Mr. Kairat Umarov, on the activities carried out by the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea. We thank him
for his very skilful leadership of this subsidiary body of
the Security Council.
We share the view that the situation in the area of
security on Somalia remains difficult. In this regard,
we note the decision made by the President of Somalia,
Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed, to call, on 6 April,
a state of emergency and a 60-day amnesty for the
Al-Shabaab fighters who agree to lay down their
weapons. The reason for taking these initiatives was a
number of terrorist acts in the capital and in the region,
as well as the renewal of pirate attacks on foreign
merchant ships off the shores of the country. We are
also concerned by the fact that peaceful civilians are
increasingly becoming the victims of terrorist attacks.
In this regard, we note with satisfaction that, in the
context of the yearly rotation of military personnel in
Somalia, on 8 April, a new contingent, consisting of
5,700 troops, arrived from Uganda to ensure security
in the country.
We are in favour of ensuring that the international
community continues to take measures to increase the
fighting capacity of the Somali National Army and the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), because
they bear the main burden of fighting Al-Shabaab. We
need to react to and follow very closely the humanitarian
situation in Somalia, which has become very difficult.
We know that a few regions are now facing the threat
of famine. At the same time, we must also note that
the successful election in Somalia is a very important
milestone on the path towards national reconciliation,
rebuilding Government institutions and creating
democratic institutions. We expect that the Federal
Government will work actively to settle the domestic
political situation and develop the country socially
and economically.
17-10049

13/04/2017

The situation in Somalia

We are in favour of strengthening the sanctions
regime in Somalia, strictly adhering in particular
to the arms and charcoal embargoes, including the
monitoring of areas off the shores of Somalia and
extending assistance to the authorities by AMISOM in
this sphere, as provided for in resolution 2317 (2016).
We believe that such an embargo is a key instrument
for ensuring that the extremist forces in the country
do not receive additional assistance. We have had good
experience with the practice of partially lifting the
embargo on providing weapons to the Somali armed
forces at the request of the Federal Government.
With regard to the international restrictions on
Eritrea, we think that what we should be discussing
is not lifting but rather optimizing the sanctions that
would be helped bythe development of a relevant
road map, especially since the criteria for introducing
sanctions cannot be confirmed by the Monitoring
Group. We note that the Group is discussing Asmara’s
alleged interference in the internal affairs of
Djibouti and Ethiopia. This information needs to be
carefully checked.
In conclusion, we would like to point out that
any sanctions regime is not a dogma but something
that needs to be adapted to changing realities and
periodically reconsidered to see whether it is still in
line with the reasons that created it initially.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to express my sincere thanks to
the Permanent Representative of Kazakhstan for
his comprehensive briefing on the activities of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea. I would also
like to express our appreciation to him for his objective
and professional leadership of the Committee. He
has sought to be effective in promoting stability and
security in the Horn of Africa. Egypt expresses its full
support for such efforts, as well as for the Monitoring
Group. It is important to expand international and
regional efforts to confront the threats the countries of
the region are currently facing.
As for the situation in Somalia, despite the positive
developments in the recent period, including successful
parliamentary and presidential elections and the peaceful
transfer of power to the new President, the activities
of Al-Shabaab and other terrorist groups continue to
be a major obstacle on the road to building peace and
completing the rebuilding of State institutions. Efforts

S/PV.7925

must be at made to confront these groups in order to
reveal the sources of their arms financing. These groups
must also be challenged through a strict implementation
of the arms embargo imposed by the Security Council.
The Monitoring Group must inquire into any breaches
of the embargo. At the same time, the reform of the
Somali national security forces must continue apace
and not be impeded.
As for the sanctions on Eritrea, I should like to
pay tribute to the successive reports of the Monitoring
Group to the effect that there is no evidence of Eritrean
support for Al-Shabaab. Egypt has a principled position
on sanctions. Sanctions are not an end in themselves
but a measure to be resorted to in exceptional
circumstances for a specific period of time in order to
achieve particular political objectives. It is therefore
important to periodically review such sanctions so as
to ensure that they are commensurate with the situation
on the ground. Sanctions may be lifted as long as the
conditions imposed by the Security Council are met.
Egypt looks forward to the midterm report of the
Monitoring Group, in accordance with resolution 2317
(2016) concerning sanctions against Eritrea. There
must be better cooperation between Eritrea and the
Monitoring Group. Constructive dialogue among
all regional parties is important in order to reach
solutions to the region’s conflicts. Let me also stress
the importance of a speedy and final settlement of
the issue of Djibouti’s missing personnel, which has
humanitarian dimensions that cannot be ignored. Egypt
therefore stresses the need for the parties to step up
their efforts to that end.
We express our support for the Monitoring Group,
whose members must be objective and professional
in seeking the truth regarding the implementation of
the sanctions regime. Furthermore, the principle of
equitable regional representation must be respected
in the establishment of such groups. There must be an
appropriate African presence in the Group of highly
qualified experts with skills and an understanding of
the situation in the region.
Finally, we support Kazakhstan’s chairmanship
of the Committee and thank it for its efforts to attain
peace and security in the Horn of Africa.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank the United States for convening
this meeting. I would also like to congratulate
Ambassador Umarov on assuming the chairmanship of

17-100497/17

S/PV.7925

The situation in Somalia

the Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and
1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea. China
will actively support his work.
At present, the situation in Somalia is seeing
positive developments. The Federal Government
of Somalia is committed to advancing the political
process and national reconstruction, and has achieved
positive results. China commends the African Union
and countries of the region for their contributions to
combatting Al-Shabaab. We call on the international
community to help Somalia’s statebuilding and support
the efforts of the African Union Mission to Somalia
(AMISOM) and the Somali National Army to counter
terrorism in order to achieve peace and stability in the
Horn of Africa as soon as possible.
The Horn of Africa has great geopolitical
significance. The countries of the region have
interconnected interests and are all tasked with
attaining economic development and achieving better
livelihoods for their people. Those goals require a
peaceful and stable regional environment. China
hopes that the countries of the region will promote the
overall peace and stability of the Horn of Africa, as
well as the fundamental interests of its peoples. They
should strengthen good-neighbourly and friendly
relations, conduct pragmatic cooperation, resolve
disputes through dialogue and consultations and jointly
address the threat of terrorism, in line with their
common interests.
It has always been China’s position that sanctions
are not an end in themselves but contribute to the process
of achieving a political solution. Sanctions should be
adjusted based on developments on the ground. China
hopes that the Somalia-Eritrea Monitoring Group
will strictly adhere to its mandate bestowed to it by
the Council. We hope that it conducts its work in an
objective and impartial manner. The Group should
strengthen its communication with all parties and issue
a report based on solid, credible information in order to
play a constructive role in achieving peace and stability
in the Horn of Africa.
China firmly supports Somalia’s peace process and
has provided the best possible assistance to AMISOM
and the countries of the Horn of Africa in their peace
processes. We are ready to work with the international
community in order to continue making our due
contributions to peace, stability and development in the
Horn of Africa.
8/17

13/04/2017

Mr. Skoog (Sweden): Let me begin by thanking
the Ambassador of Kazakhstan, Mr. Umarov, for his
briefing and the excellent work he is doing in his capacity
as Chair of the Committee pursuant to resolutions
751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and
Eritrea. We highly value the work done by the Chair,
the Committee and the Somalia-Eritrea Monitoring
Group. This is part of our wider effort to bring peace,
stability and prosperity to the Horn of Africa.
As the Chair has pointed out, global peace and
security cannot be achieved without resolving the
disputes and conflicts in the Horn of Africa. In this
regard, we would like to draw attention to the statement
issued today by the European Union on the 15-year
anniversary of the decision by the Eritrea-Ethiopia
Boundary Commission on the delineation of the border
between the two countries.
We had the opportunity last month to welcome
the successful conclusion of the electoral process in
Somalia and to hear directly from President Farmajo (see
S/PV.7905). We acknowledged then that strengthening
the national security sector must now be a top priority
for the new President and Government. Sweden
shares the assessment of the Monitoring Group that
Al-Shabaab remains the most significant threat to
security in Somalia. If we are to build on recent
progress, sustained engagement by the Council will be
vital. As the Government of Somalia turns its attention
to building a credible and effective national security
sector, the Monitoring Group will be an essential tool
for our support to these efforts, and to the Government,
in particular with regard to the partial lifting of the
arms embargo.
We remain deeply concerned about the severe
humanitarian situation caused by the drought in
Somalia and the region. In addition to the direct
human impact, the effects of the drought have potential
negative implications for peace and security. In order to
respond to the needs of the five million people already
suffering from acute food shortages, immediate safe
and unhindered humanitarian access to effectively
support the relief effort is essential. The reports of the
Monitoring Group on humanitarian access contribute
to keeping the Council informed of the situation on
the ground, as does its accounts of violations and
abuses of international humanitarian law and human
rights law. We particularly welcome the Monitoring
Group’s reporting on sexual and gender-based violence,
including on steps taken to end impunity.
17-10049

13/04/2017

The situation in Somalia

We note the report of a possible breach of the arms
embargo. It is important that this incident be thoroughly
investigated. We would also note the need for continued
vigilance regarding any possible exploitation of natural
resources by Al-Shabaab.
Turning to Eritrea, we are encouraged by the fact
that the Monitoring Group, in consecutive reports, has
found no evidence of Eritrean support for Al-Shabaab.
It is essential that Eritrea cooperate in a constructive
manner with the Monitoring Group in order to allow
them to verify this finding conclusively. Sweden
supports the efforts of the Chair to facilitate a way
forward regarding access for the members of the
Monitoring Group to Asmara, and believe a visit by the
Chair could be a helpful step. We hope that 2017 can be
a positive year for engagement between the Monitoring
Group and Eritrea. Constructive engagement with
the Monitoring Group is in everyone’s interest. We
encourage the Somali and Eritrean authorities to
strengthen relations with the Group, which can help
reinforce a positive trajectory for the Horn of Africa.
Sweden will continue to give its full support to the
group’s work in the year ahead.
Mr. Fesko (Ukraine): Let me begin by expressing
Ukraine’s deep and sincere condolences to the families
of the victims, as well as to the Federal Government
of Somalia, regarding recent terrorist attacks carried
out by Al-Shabaab that resulted in numerous casualties
among the civilian population, including women
and children. This is just another confirmation that
Al-Shabaab remains the most significant threat to
peace and security in Somalia, as was characterized
in Ambassador’s Umarov’s briefing, for which we
are thankful.
In the context of an ongoing drought, Al-Shabaab
activities hamper joint efforts to provide the muchneeded humanitarian response. In that regard we
welcome the plan of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and the Federal Government
of Somalia to secure main supply roads and to help
facilitate the delivery of humanitarian aid to droughtstricken communities in the country. We also support
cooperation between the Somali National Army and
AMISOM troop-contributing countries in the fight
against terrorism. In that respect we would like to
commend the Kenya Defence Forces for their successful
operations on 2 and 26 March, in which a total of
84 Al-Shabaab militants were eliminated.

S/PV.7925

We note that some progress has been made by the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and
Eritrea, as well as by the Monitoring Group on Somalia
and Eritrea, to ensure the goals set out in their respective
mandates led to a significant improvement in arms and
ammunition management in the country and a decrease
in illicit exports of charcoal from Somalia. Bettercoordinated cooperation in that regard by the Federal
Government of Somalia, including through its timely
and comprehensive notifications to the Committee, has
been an important factor, contributing to the effective
implementation of the sanctions regime in Somalia.
We believe that additional joint efforts to ensure
the full and effective implementation and enforcement
of the arms embargo and charcoal ban will substantially
limit illegal arms trafficking within and outside of the
country, and will curb the illicit charcoal trade, thus
depriving terrorist groups of potential revenues and
weapons. We welcome the active involvement of all
international partners, Member States and international
and regional organizations in providing relevant
support to that end. African Union cooperation has
been remarkable in that regard, particularly through
AMISOM’s documentation and registry of all military
equipment discovered and captured, as well as through
its assistance to the Somali federal authorities in
implementing the charcoal ban.
Another issue of concern for us is the spate of
attacks on commercial vessels off the coast of Somalia,
which highlights an increase in pirate activity in the
Gulf of Aden. There are signs that the emergence of
piracy could be the result of the financing of pirates
by entities from countries in the region. In that regard,
we would like to ask the Monitoring Group to follow
up on that information and to provide the findings in
the midterm update to the Committee. We consider that
information crucial to the prevention and countering of
piracy and armed robbery at sea. Furthermore, detailed
information on illegal, unreported and unregulated
fishing should be included in the next report of the
Monitoring Group.
We cannot fail to mention the recent positive changes
in the Somali State- and peacebuilding processes. The
peaceful elections of the President and of the speakers
of both Houses of the Somali Parliament, followed by
the unanimous endorsement of the country’s new Prime
Minister, all resulting in an unprecedented cross-clan
support and community reconciliation, were important

17-100499/17

S/PV.7925

The situation in Somalia

steps towards Somalia’s recovery and stabilization. We
hope that the newly appointed Council of Ministers
of Somalia will succeed in fulfilling its pledges to
rebuild the security forces and State institutions, tackle
corruption and unify the country.
With regard to Eritrea, we take note that no evidence
of Eritrean support for Al-Shabaab was reported. At
the same time, we are perplexed that in some reports
of the Monitoring Group, information about Eritrea’s
implementation of Council measures is limited to only
sentence. In that regard, we look forward to seeing a
comprehensive overview of this matter in the midterm
update. We proceed from the understanding that
constructive cooperation of the Eritrean Government
would contribute to effective implementation of the
Group’s mandate, which is a precondition for any
changes to the sanctions regime. In that regard we
support the work of the Chair of the Committee to
prepare a possible visit to the Horn of Africa and
underline the importance of including the Coordinator
of the Monitoring Group in such a delegation, with a
view to strengthening the result-oriented nature of
the visit.
Mr. Kawamura (Japan): Japan deeply appreciates
Kazakhstan’s active leadership as the Chair of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and
1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea. Japan
also commends the work of the Monitoring Group on
Somalia and Eritrea.
Japan extends its full support to President Farmajo
as Somalia charts a new course towards peace and
prosperity. Many challenges lie ahead, including
the need for a national security framework and a
representative Somali National Army. There is also the
importance of combating Al-Shabaab, building a solid
budgetary base through federal State mechanisms and
facilitating universal suffrage in 2020. Al-Shabaab, in
particular, continues to pose a grave threat to the peace
and security of Somalia. The sanctions regime, which
includes an exception for the Government of Somalia,
remains an effective measure. The African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) has also been key in
combating extremist groups, including Al-Shabaab.
Japan looks forward to the Somali National Army taking
responsibility for the security of the country, including
through agreement on the security framework among
regional leaders. The London Somalia conference in
May would be a perfect opportunity to build political
10/17

13/04/2017

will among Somali leaders, as well as among the
international community.
The ongoing famine poses an imminent threat to
progress in State-building since the establishment
of the Government in 2012. Since January, Japan has
provided more than $30 million in humanitarian and
security assistance. Japan welcomes the willingness
of the Federal and regional Governments to remove all
impediments to humanitarian access and hopes that
such commitments are implemented fully.
In addition, recent reports of the hijacking of
commercial vessels off the coast of Somalia highlight
the need for continued international counterpiracy
efforts in the region. Japan will continue its warning
and surveillance activities and escort operations,
while also supporting social services and economic
development in the coastal regions. The international
community should also bolster its support to the
Government of Somalia to address illegal, unreported
and unregulated fishing.
Concerning Eritrea, we hope to see progress
in locating combatants missing in action since the
Djibouti-Eritrean border clashes.
Also, Japan attaches importance to the visits by the
Chair of the Sanctions Committee and the coordinator
of the Monitoring Group to Eritrea. We strongly hope
that the Eritrean Government will accept such a visit
in the near future. Japan looks forward to the midterm
update by the Monitoring Group to review measures
on Eritrea.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay thanks Ambassador Kairat Umarov, Chair
of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992)
and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea, for
his briefing. My Government appreciates the work
carried out by the Committee, as well as its assessment
of recent developments, based on the reports of the
Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea. Somalia is
at a decisive and historic moment on the path towards
the consolidation of a democratic, inclusive, stable
State with full powers.
According to the information provided by the
Monitoring Group, the terrorist group Al-Shabaab
constitutes the main threat to peace and security in
Somalia and the region. That is why strengthening the
security sector in Somalia is both vital and urgent; it
would allow the country to fight effectively against
17-10049

13/04/2017

The situation in Somalia

that threat. The Government of Somalia and the
international community should work more closely and
in a more coordinated manner, prioritizing capacitybuilding for Government consolidation and creating the
basic conditions of governance, security and services
for local populations. In addition, the Government
should seek to maintain a closer work relationship with
the Monitoring Group. The intention of the Group is to
maximize efforts to investigate violations of the arms
embargo and to expand its capacity to report on the
structure, strength and financing of armed groups in
the region.
Another urgent issue is responding to the worsening
humanitarian crisis and the famine in Somalia, which
could roll back recent political achievements. Uruguay
therefore welcomes the Somalia Operational Plan for
pre-Famine Scale-up of Humanitarian Assistance,
promoted by the Secretary-General, to mitigate
the effects of the extreme drought that is ravaging
the country.
At the same time, Uruguay urges President Mohamed
Abdullahi Farmajo to fulfil his promise to remove
obstacles to the provision of assistance, the import
and export of food and vital critical supplies, and the
sending of remittances, and to suspend new bureaucratic
requirements at the sub-federal level imposed on aid
providers. The Federal Government must make this
effort in a sustained way in order to preserve stability
and security in Somalia.
The plight of women and children is a source of
deep concern to us, given their extreme vulnerability
to the humanitarian crisis affecting the country. The
Government bears the chief responsibility for ending
impunity for crimes of sexual and gender-based
violence. According to UNICEF and the World Health
Organization, 98 per cent of women and girls in
Somalia have suffered female genital mutilation, which
is the highest rate in the world, despite the fact that the
practice is prohibited by the Constitution of Somalia
and is defined as torture. We also draw the attention
to the issue of child marriage, which is still a common
practice in Somalia. The Government should promote
the investigation of complaints and the reintegration of
victims into their communities.
With regard to Eritrea, Uruguay notes that the
complete report of the Monitoring Group on Somalia
and Eritrea will be submitted in the next few days,
with a focus on investigations in Eritrea. We hope that

S/PV.7925

the report will enlighten the Council members and
provide key elements for assessing the relevance of the
sanctions imposed on that country.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank Ambassador
Kairat Umarov for his briefing on the activities of
the Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and
1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea, which
we found extremely useful and very well balanced.
We would like to take this opportunity to congratulate
him on his assumption of the chairmanship of the
Committee and assure him of our full support in the
effective discharge of his responsibilities. He has, in
fact, already made a difference in bringing seriousness
to the work and in being non-ideological. We highly
appreciate his commitment to working in an open,
transparent and objective manner with all the members
of the Committee.
The 751 and 1907 sanctions regime has great
significance for regional peace and security in the
Horn of Africa, and we attach importance to its full and
effective implementation. In that regard, we appreciate
the fact that the Committee held a briefing session with
representatives of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development on transnational terrorist threats in
the region. We believe that such briefings have a lot
of relevance to the work of the Committee, and we
encourage the Chair to continue this good practice,
in line with the mandate of the Committee, in order
to create a better understanding of the challenges and
threats facing the region.
No doubt, Al-Shabaab remains a potent force
capable of launching asymmetrical attacks, although
its conventional capabilities have been significantly
weakened. Its possible links with the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh) will have enormous
implications for peace and stability in the region.
Therefore, this is certainly something that needs to be
followed up very closely and very seriously.
We welcome the appointment of the new members
of the Monitoring Group, whose work is critical to
ensuring the implementation of the sanctions regime.
We have been cooperating with the Group outside the
Council, and we are now ready to do so in our capacity
as a member of the Council and with a great sense
of responsibility. We understand that the work of the
Group is dependent on the relevance and quality of
information gathered, and the cooperation of countries
in the region and others remains very important in that

17-1004911/17

S/PV.7925

The situation in Somalia

regard. We hope and expect that in the three months
since they started their work, members of the Group
have undertaken the necessary examination of existing
and new information gathered in the course of their new
mandate. In the light of reports of possible violations of
the arms embargo in particular, we will wait for the
Monitoring Group to inform us of the outcome of its
investigation in its midterm report. Of course, forging
the necessary horizontal cooperation with other
panels of experts is important during the process of
investigating those reports, and we trust that this has
already been done in the course of the investigation.
The cooperation of Somalia, Eritrea and countries
of the region is absolutely necessary to facilitating
the work of the Monitoring Group and the Sanctions
Committee. In that regard, we appreciate the willingness
of the Federal and regional Governments in Somalia to
cooperate with the Monitoring Group. We also note the
submission by the Federal Government of Somalia of
its report, in line with paragraph 7 of resolution 2317
(2016), on the structure, composition, strength and
disposition of its security forces, including the status of
regional and militia forces.
In the same vein, it is incumbent on the Ethiopian
Government to render the necessary cooperation to the
Monitoring Group and the Sanctions Committee based
on its obligations, in line with the relevant Security
Council resolutions. As the Monitoring Group has
stated, for instance, it is important that Eritrea clarify
the situation of the remaining soldiers identified by
Djibouti as still missing in action as a result of the
conflict of June 2008, in line with its treaty obligations
and as directed by the Council.
We note the intention of the Chair to undertake
a visit to the region, which is long overdue. It will
certainly help in developing a better appreciation of
regional dynamics. We hope that the visit will take
place in accordance with existing practice. We want to
make it clear that putting preconditions on the visit to
enlist concessions from the Council should by no means
be entertained, as it would set a dangerous precedent.
We are confident that the Chair will handle this matter
very carefully.
But the visit is important because, among other
things, it would allow the Chair to appreciate the existing
hubris and arrogance that have been such a problem in
our region, masked behind a veneer of victimhood that
may deceive many. That is the context within which the
12/17

13/04/2017

issue of the boundary demarcation should be looked at
since, seen alongside other matters, it pales enormously
by comparison. Delimitation having been completed,
what remains is demarcation, regarding which Ethiopia
cannot be expected to applaud with one hand.
Given the geopolitical situation in our region,
this matter and the issue of sanctions can easily be
politicized. That is why the Chair must be wise and
perceptive, which we have no doubt he is. That is why
we trust that he cannot determine that the link between
Eritrea and Al-Shabaab has conclusively proven to be
non-existent. The Monitoring Group has never made
such a claim. Given the mortal danger that Al-Shabaab
represents, this is not a joke. It is a serious matter.
Lastly, Ethiopia unquestionably considers this
issue extremely important, and we are committed to
engaging actively and constructively to support the
Committee’s work.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Like my colleagues
before me, I would like to thank Ambassador Kairat
Umarov warmly for his thorough briefing today and
congratulate him on his assumption of the chairship of
the Committee established pursuant to resolutions 751
(1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea.
I do not need to elaborate here on why that Committee
has so much importance for my country.
Today’s briefing is taking place at a critical time for
the stability of the whole of North Africa. The regional
scenario is making progress, while Somalia and Eritrea
remain key actors in its balance. The Security Council
is called on to help realize its potential by promoting
the factors that can lead to peace and stability in the
region. On the fifteenth anniversary of the EritreaEthiopia Boundary Commission’s decision on the
border delimitation between the two countries, we
would like to note today’s declaration by the European
Union on the subject.
Starting with their very first statements, President
Farmajo and Prime Minister Khaire have established
Somalia’s political priorities, all of which are relevant to
the sanctions regime: national reconciliation; fighting
Al-Shabaab; strengthening the capacity of the country’s
security forces, including the police; implementing
a national plan for security strategies for preventing
violent extremism; improving the management of arms
and ammunition; and combating corruption.
17-10049

13/04/2017

The situation in Somalia

Somalia is at a decisive crossroads on its path to
reconstruction. Italy supports its legitimate aspiration
to guide that reconstruction and shore up its ownership
of the process, which is the cornerstone of the principle
of sustaining peace endorsed by the Council last year.
The Secretary-General’s review of the future presence
of the United Nations in the country, the joint United
Nations and African Union review of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the upcoming
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia represent an important opportunity
for the Council to consolidate its path in the region.
When we look at the chief concerns of the Federal
Government of Somalia about the current sanctions
regime, we realize that they are largely triggered
by external factors — the threat of Al-Shabaab and
the related obstacles to humanitarian access in order
to fight drought and famine; the presence of Da’esh;
the alleged violations of the arms embargo by third
States; and the alleged illegal exploitation of Somalia’s
fisheries and charcoal resources. On the other hand, the
Somalia and Eritrea Monitoring Group has recognized
that the Federal Government of Somalia has cooperated
fully in the implementation of the sanctions regime
and that the Somali regional authorities are improving
their cooperation with the Monitoring Group and
AMISOM, as was apparent in the case of the interim
Juba administration in January. The Security Council
can now combine Mogadishu’s effort to beef up reliable
security forces with benchmarks as the sanctions
burden is gradually lifted. Any further progress by the
Somali leadership in controlling and managing arms
and ammunition should be taken into account in relation
to any possible reconfiguration of the sanctions regime.
Turning to Eritrea, our position is equally clear. The
Security Council will be making a holistic assessment
based on the Monitoring Group’s recent reports and
progress updates, as required by the relevant Council
resolutions. Over the past three years, the Monitoring
Group has said that it has not found any evidence of
Eritrea’s support to Al-Shabaab. At the same time,
however, the information alleging that Eritrea has
supported other armed groups in the region is cause for
concern. In the dispute about prisoners of war between
Eritrea and Djibouti, mediated by Qatar, we saw
conflicting claims about the fate of missing combatants.
It is our hope that the Monitoring Group will be able to
help to clarify their effective status so that the Council
can reach well-grounded conclusions.

S/PV.7925

Lastly, pending the report on recommendations for
a possible review of the sanctions regime on Eritrea,
we expect the Monitoring Group’s observations to be
fair, impartial and evidence-based. To that end, we
encourage Eritrea to cooperate with the Monitoring
Group in order to help the Security Council make an
unbiased decision on a basis of established facts.
Mr. Fernández Revollo (Plurinational State
of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank
Ambassador Umarov, Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea, and Permanent
Representative of Kazakhstan, for his briefing and for
his work on the Committee. We greatly value the efforts
of the Somalia and Eritrea Monitoring Group, which
was established to support the Committee’s work. It
is an essential tool for keeping the Security Council
informed about the situation on the ground. It should
operate with complete impartiality and respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of both countries.
The sanctions regime on Somalia and Eritrea is
one of the Council’s longest-running such regimes.
The modifications that have been made to it have not
necessarily resulted in any marked progress. In our
view, the time has come to consider the effectiveness
of the sanctions and whether they are worth continuing.
We would like to emphasize the political advances
in Somalia, of which this year’s elections are proof
positive of the progress that it has made in the past
four years. It is vital that efforts continue to ensure that
elections will also be conducted beyond the capital and
that by 2020 the country will be able to count on having
a one-person, one-vote system.
We continue to be very concerned about the
presence of Al-Shabaab, which is still a threat to peace
and security in Somalia. According to the Monitoring
Group’s report, that terrorist organization continues
to maintain a presence in some of the most remote
areas of Puntland. It is a threat not only to Somalia
but to the stability of the entire region. Its presence
has also been confirmed by representatives of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development. We
would like to emphasize that Al-Shabaab’s presence
is also a threat to all the organizations that are
providing humanitarian assistance in the area, thanks
to the obstacles it presents to their efforts. We urge the
Government of Somalia, the African Union Mission in
Somalia and all international stakeholders to provide
the protection that those humanitarian efforts need and

17-1004913/17

S/PV.7925

The situation in Somalia

ensure that the international embargo on the export of
charcoal is respected.
With regard to Eritrea, we are pleased that once
again there has been no proof that its Government has
given support to the terrorist group Al-Shabaab. The
Security Council should take note of that and respond
accordingly. As for the regional and border issues,
the countries concerned should end all support to any
armed or rebel groups that undermine their internal
stability. We welcome Eritrea’s release of four prisoners
of war to Djibouti and urge both parties to continue to
work through Qatar’s mediation efforts to resolve their
existing problems.
Bolivia hopes sincerely that the countries of the
region can continue to keep in mind the overarching
goal of peace and stability in the Horn of Africa and
their peoples’ fundamental interests. We hope they can
strengthen their good-neighbourly relations, promote
unity and cooperation and settle their differences
through dialogue and consultation, benefiting the
common interests of every country in the region.
We hope that the Security Council will take into
consideration the changes that have occurred on the
ground, continually review the relevant provisions of
its resolutions and make appropriate adjustments.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the United States.
I would like to thank Ambassador Umarov for
his briefing. We warmly welcome him in his new role
as Chair of the Committee pursuant to resolutions
751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and
Eritrea, and have full confidence in his ability to lead
the Committee as it oversees the important role these
sanctions play in advancing peace and security in the
Horn of Africa.
I would also like to thank the Somalia-Eritrea
Monitoring Group for its efforts to report on the
implementation of the sanctions and to keep the
Council and the Sanctions Committee informed on a
range of issues affecting the Horn of Africa, including
counter-Al-Shabaab efforts, corruption, piracy,
international human rights and humanitarian law
violations, and violations of the sanctions measures.
Turning first to Somalia, the Chairman’s briefing
highlighted many of the ongoing reasons why the
Council must remain committed to supporting Somali
efforts to pave the way towards a stable, prosperous
14/17

13/04/2017

and peaceful future. We share Ambassador Umarov’s
concern about the ongoing threat Al-Shabaab poses
to Somalia and the region. Today, we are witnessing
increasing depravity from Al-Shabaab as it intensifies
its asymmetric attacks against civilian targets,
security services and Government officials. We must
maintain robust counter-Al-Shabaab efforts to prevent
backsliding on the tentative security gains achieved in
recent years.
The cycle of violence in Somalia and the region
cannot be broken without good governance. We
strongly support President Farmajo’s and Prime
Minister Khayre’s focus on combatting corruption, and
welcome the new Federal Government of Somalia’s
financial disclosure and code of conduct requirements
for ministers. We are ready to lend greater support
to strengthen the Federal Government’s fiscal
transparency and oversight efforts. We support the use
of sanctions as a tool and as part of a comprehensive
United Nations strategy to deter violence and corrupt
activities. We welcome President Farmajo’s call for
security sector reform and encourage improved,
transparent and inclusive governance. It is imperative
that Somali resources benefit all Somalis, that Somali
security services be well trained and adequately
compensated, and that security forces respect human
rights and be held to high standards of accountability.
On the arms embargo, we urge the Federal
Government of Somalia and Member States to increase
their efforts to comply with existing measures and
to notify the Committee promptly when making use
of the relevant exemptions when supporting Somali
security sector institutions. We are particularly keen
to understand more about the potential plans of a
Member State to build a military base in Berbera and
the discovery of 25,000 blank-firing pistols in the port
of Kismaayo. We urge the Federal Government of
Somalia and Member States to redouble their efforts to
implement the embargo and share information in order
to ensure that weapons do not fall into the hands of
Al-Shabaab or others with malicious intent.
We also encourage the Joint Verification Team
to continue to make progress on its important goal
of improving the Federal Government of Somalia’s
management of weapons and ammunition. Illegal
activities such as illegal, unreported and unregulated
fishing and illicit trade in charcoal contribute to
corruption and instability in Somalia and the region.
As the Chair raised in his briefing, we continue to
17-10049

13/04/2017

The situation in Somalia

express our concern over illicit, unreported and
unregulated fishing in Somali waters, which poses a
threat to coastal communities’ livelihood and food
security. We welcome any Somalia-Eritrea Monitoring
Group reporting on the recent uptick in piracy activity,
as well as on the nexus between illicit, unreported and
unregulated fishing and piracy.
On the illicit charcoal trade, while the SomaliaEritrea Monitoring Group has reported some indication
that Al-Shabaab may be shifting away from this trade,
we still believe that the group is attracted to this kind
of financing. Member States should remain vigilant and
cooperative, and actively share information as it relates
to the charcoal ban in order to more robustly enforce it.
Turning to Eritrea, the Council will have a number
of serious issues on its agenda to consider as it prepares
for the upcoming review of United Nations sanctions on
Eritrea. These include the need for a full and transparent
accounting of the whereabouts of remaining Djiboutian
prisoners of war, assessing the extent of Eritrea’s arms
embargo violations, Eritrea’s support for armed groups
that seek to destabilize the region, and the extent to
which Eritrea is willing to cooperate with the SomaliaEritrea Monitoring Group.
Related to cooperation between the Somalia-Eritrea
Monitoring Group and the Government of Eritrea, it
will be important for the Monitoring Group to travel to
Eritrea with the Chair during his proposed visit to the
region. Without Eritrea’s engagement with the SomaliaEritrea Monitoring Group, including by allowing the
Monitoring Group to visit Asmara, the Council will
not be able to make a fully informed decision about
the future of these sanctions. We believe that it is only
through open dialogue here and in Asmara that we can
address remaining peace and security challenges. We
sincerely hope that the Government of Eritrea will seize
the opportunity to take a first step towards improving
engagement with the Somalia-Eritrea Monitoring
Group through this proposed visit.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Djibouti.
Mr. Doualeh (Djibouti): At the outset, Djibouti
wishes to express its gratitude to the President of the
Security Council for this month, the United States,
and the members of the Council for this opportunity to
address the Council.

S/PV.7925

Furthermore, we wish to thank Ambassador Umarov,
Chairman of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 751
(1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea,
for his briefing to the Security Council.
With respect to Somalia, we share the Chair’s
assessment that Al-Shabaab continues to pose a serious
threat to peace and security in Somalia. It has been
ramping up attacks after rejecting President Farmajo’s
amnesty offer. In light of the gravity and viciousness
of the threat, we support the request of the Head of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
for a surge in troops to enable AMISOM forces and
the Somali National Army to decisively degrade and
defeat Al-Shabaab.
Likewise, we echo the call made by SecretaryGeneral António Guterres to provide enhanced logistical
support for under-equipped African Union forces in
Somalia, in particular force enablers and multipliers,
including helicopters. We are indeed confident that with
the enhanced, sustained and coordinated support of the
international community, the new Somali leadership
will be able to deliver significant peace dividends to the
population and improve security and access to justice.
Turning to Eritrea, we are deeply troubled and
concerned by the fact that the distinct lack of cooperation
that characterized previous mandates continues to date.
Eritrea has deliberately chosen to obstruct the work of
the Monitoring Group. It has consistently and arrogantly
refused to allow the Monitoring Group to verify the
facts. Instead of openly and transparently cooperating,
as directed by the Council, it has slammed the door on
the Group and denied it any access to the information
it needs to determine whether or not Eritrea was in
compliance with the Council’s resolutions. In other
words, Eritrea cynically seeks to be rewarded for its
defiance of Security Council resolutions. It seeks just
to stonewall, refuse to cooperate, prevent the missions
from finding the facts and hold on until the Council is
sufficiently frustrated by the failure of its actions and
sufficiently troubled by the impact of its sanctions to
throw up its hands in surrender.
In support of that strategy, it has formulated a
victimhood narrative that may sound appealing to
those who do not know the facts of the situation in
the region. The facts have nevertheless come to the
surface, as highlighted both in numerous Security
Council monitoring reports and the report of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)

17-1004915/17

S/PV.7925

The situation in Somalia

on transnational threats in the IGAD region. Conversely,
Djibouti has twice welcomed experts of the Monitoring
Group to Djibouti this year and has been able to share
valuable information.
On Eritrea’s support to Al-Shabaab, Djibouti is of
the view that Eritrea continues to provide support to
Al-Shabaab. It has shared information that it deems
credible and verifiable with the members of the
Monitoring Group.
On the prisoners of war, Eritrea should be urged
to clarify the situation of 13 remaining Djiboutian
prisoners of war still unaccounted for. Not only is that
a requirement of the Security Council, but it is also
required by the international treaty and customary law
by which Eritrea is bound.
On Eritrea’s compliance with the 2010 Qatar
mediation agreement, the Security Council has
determined that the border dispute between Djibouti and
Eritrea continues to constitute a threat to international
peace and security in the region. It has urged Eritrea to
implement in good faith the dispositions of the accord
and enter into talks with Djibouti with the ultimate
objective of reaching a final and binding agreement on
the border dispute, in accordance with international law.
Djibouti promptly submitted to His Royal Highness the
Emir of Qatar a comprehensive statement of pertinent
facts and legal principles applicable to this matter. To
date, seven days later, Eritrea continues to refuse to
comply with the provisions of the agreement.
On Eritrea’s support to armed groups, Eritrea
continues to harbour, train, equip and provide logistical
support to armed groups seeking to overthrow and
destabilize the Government of Djibouti. It continues
to do so, without an ounce of remorse, in violation
of its obligations under Article 2 of the Charter of
the United Nations, customary international law and
its obligations under Security Council resolutions.
Djibouti urges Eritrea to permanently cease and desist
from such activities.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate our profound
gratitude to the members of the Council for their
continued vigilance and support. Indeed, no country can
continuously defy the Security Council’s resolutions
and expect not to face the consequences of its actions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Eritrea.
16/17

13/04/2017

Mr. Giorgio (Eritrea): I would like to begin by
congratulating you, Madam, on the United States
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of April. I would like to thank the Chair of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea, His Excellency
Ambassador Kairat Umarov, for his briefing and for his
efforts to enhance constructive and genuine dialogue.
I would like to assure the Chair of my delegation’s full
cooperation in the discharge of his responsibilities.
As a matter of coincidence, this open briefing of
the Security Council is taking place on the very date the
Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary Commission gave its final
and binding ruling 15 years ago, on 13 April 2002. To
the regret of many who worked hard to realize peace,
Ethiopia to this date continues to occupy sovereign
Eritrean territory, including the town of Badme, in
violation of its treaty obligation and international law.
The hope of achieving peace and security for the people
of the region has been dashed, and the opportunity to
build a common front for common challenges has been
postponed indefinitely.
It would indeed be remiss of its duty in the
maintenance of international peace and security for
the Security Council to ignore the failure and refusal
by one of the parties to implement a mutual agreement
that it had solemnly signed, particularly when we recall
that the agreement was guaranteed and witnessed by
the United Nations, the African Union, the European
Union, the United States and Algeria.
The Security Council is actively seized at the
present time of all regional issues — including
the Sudan, South Sudan, Somalia, Yemen and so
on — where intra-State or inter-State conflicts have or
continue to rage. But it continues to studiously avoid
the Eritrea/Ethiopia conflict. The Security Council
cannot continue its 15 years of inaction in the face of
destabilizing acts of occupation and aggression that
threaten regional peace and stability. This is not only
morally and legally unacceptable, but it is increasingly
evident that the simmering tension is untenable and
fraught with perilous escalation.
The sanctions regime that has been imposed on
Eritrea has entered its eigthth year. Its negative impact
on Eritrea and the Horn of Africa region cannot in any
way be minimized. Clearly, the time has come — in
fact, it is long overdue — to lift the sanctions on Eritrea.
17-10049

13/04/2017

The situation in Somalia

S/PV.7925

In this regard, I would like to take this opportunity to
highlight few a facts:

Eritrea is committed to resolving any outstanding issue
with Djibouti under the mediation of Qatar.

First, the sanctions on Eritrea have never been
justified or motivated by a genuine desire to promote
regional peace and security. While their imposition
was unjustified, their continuation can be viewed only
as a desire to spread crises in a region that is already
suffering from conflicts. We need fewer conflicts,
not more.

Fourthly, failing to find substantive evidence to
continue the sanctions, some countries have resorted
to procedural pretexts by singularly and inordinately
focusing on the inability of the Monitoring Group to
visit Eritrea. It must be recalled here that the Monitoring
Group has actually visited Eritrea twice on previous
occasions. The Monitoring Group also maintains,
without any hindrance, extensive meetings and contacts
with relevant Eritrean officials. As Council members
are aware, the Monitoring Group has itself ascertained
the absence of any indication of Eritrea’s support to
Al-Shabaab. In the circumstances, Eritrea does not see
any added value in a visit by the Monitoring Group to
the country. Eritrea’s primary preoccupation is in fact
the public stance of certain countries that have openly
stated that they would not support the lifting of the
sanctions even if the Group were to visit Eritrea.

Secondly, the two justifications for the imposition
of sanctions were Eritrea’s alleged support to
Al-Shabaab in Somalia and its alleged refusal to resolve
its dispute with Djibouti. For four years, the SomaliaEritrea Monitoring Group has found no evidence of any
Eritrean wrongdoing in Somalia.
Thirdly, with respect to Djibouti, Eritrea remains
committed to the mediation of the State of Qatar, which
has resulted in the release of all Djiboutian prisoners
of war. The latest monitoring report made it clear that
all interlocutors only mention seven prisoners of war in
Eritrea. These are all accounted for — two escapees,
one who passed away and four who were released
through the efforts of Qatar. Eritrea has confirmed that
there are no more Djiboutian prisoners in its hands.
Moreover, Eritrea cannot be asked to second-guess the
whereabouts of persons missing in action, as claimed
by Djibouti. The burden of proof lies squarely on the
accuser, the Government of Djibouti. On its part,

Eritrea wishes once again to reaffirm its commitment
to sustainable peace and cooperation in the region.
Eritrea will continue to make its positive contribution
to regional peace, stability and security in the Horn of
Africa and the Red Sea area. In that connection, Eritrea
reiterates call on the Security Council to contribute
to regional peace, cooperation and amity by lifting
the unjustified sanctions and by ensuring Ethiopia’s
withdrawal from sovereign Eritrean territory.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

17-1004917/17
