United Nations

S/PV.9224

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9224

th meeting
Monday, 19 December 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Kamboj. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Olmedo
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Mythen
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Wood

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-75843 (E)
*2275843*

S/PV.9224

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

They undermine the prospect of achieving a two-State
solution by systematically eroding the possibility of
establishing a contiguous, independent, viable and
sovereign Palestinian State.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Tor
Wennesland, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Wennesland.
Mr. Wennesland: I devote my regular briefing
on the situation in the Middle East to the twentyfourth report on the implementation of resolution 2334
(2016). The Secretary-General’s written report, which
members have already received, covers the period
between 21 September to 7 December 2022.
Before turning to developments subsequent to the
written report, I would like to reiterate my deep concern
over the high levels of violence we have witnessed in
the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
and in Israel over the past several months. Clashes,
protests attacks, Israeli security operations, including
in Area A, and settler-related violence have continued.
To date in 2022, over 150 Palestinians and more than 20
Israelis have been killed in the West Bank and Israel,
the highest numbers of fatalities in years.
Regrettably, in the period following the submission
of the written report, violence has continued throughout
the occupied Palestinian territory. Since 8 December,
six Palestinians, including two children, have been
killed by Israeli security forces. Of those, four were
killed during search-and-arrest operations in Jenin,
one during an exchange of fire following an alleged
shooting attack near Ofra settlement and one was killed
in the context of alleged stone-throwing.
I will now turn to several observations concerning
the implementation of the provisions of resolution 2334
(2016) during the reporting period.
Israeli settlement expansion in the occupied West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, remains deeply
concerning. Settlements constitute a flagrant violation
of United Nations resolutions and international law.
2/16

19/12/2022

While the reporting period saw no advancements
of housing units in the occupied West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, the total number of settlement housing
units advanced in 2022 remains high, albeit slightly
lower than in 2021. Overall, during the year, in Area
C some 4,800 units were advanced, as compared with
5,400 in 2021, while tenders dropped from 1,800 in 2021
to 150 in 2022. Moreover, in occupied East Jerusalem,
the number of housing units advanced more than tripled
from the previous year — from 900 units in 2021 to
3,100 units in 2022, with tenders doubling from 200
to 400. I call on the Government of Israel to cease the
advancement of all settlement activities immediately.
I am also deeply concerned by the continued
demolitions and seizures of Palestinian structures. I
am alarmed in particular by the demolition of a donorfunded school in Masafer Yatta and the stated intention
of Israeli authorities to demolish additional structures
in the herding communities of that area, which would
have a significant humanitarian toll if implemented. I
call upon the Government of Israel to end the demolition
of Palestinian-owned property, prevent the possible
displacement and eviction of Palestinians, in line with
its obligations under international humanitarian law
and international human rights law, and approve plans
that would enable Palestinians to build legally and
address their development needs.
I am gravely concerned by the sharp increase
in violence against civilians on both sides, which
exacerbates mistrust and undermines a peaceful
resolution to the conflict.
I am particularly appalled that children continue
to be victims of violence. The year 2022 has tragically
witnessed the killing of 44 Palestinian children and
one Israeli child. Those include the killing by Israeli
security forces of a 16-year-old boy in the context of
alleged stone-throwing in the Aboud community,
near Ramallah, on 8 December, and of a 15-year-old
Palestinian girl in the context of a search-and-arrest
operation in Jenin on 11 December that involved an
exchange of fire between Israeli security forces and
Palestinians. According to an initial Israel Defense
Forces investigation, the girl was shot unintentionally
and was not involved in hostilities. Children must never
22-75843

19/12/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

be the target of violence, used or put in harm’s way. Also
disturbing are the continued killings of Palestinians by
Israeli security forces in incidents in which they did not
appear to present an imminent threat to life. I reiterate
that security forces must exercise maximum restraint
and use lethal force only when it is strictly unavoidable
in order to protect life.
The increase in the number of Israelis killed or
injured by Palestinians, including in bombings and
shooting attacks, is also alarming. The violence must
stop, and all perpetrators must be held accountable. I
condemn all acts of terrorism, which must be rejected
and condemned by all. I call on political, religious and
community leaders on all sides to help to calm the
situation, avoid spreading inflammatory rhetoric and
speak up against those seeking to incite and escalate
the situation.
I am increasingly concerned by the fragility of the
current political and security dynamics, particularly
in the occupied West Bank, including in Jerusalem.
The deepening occupation, the increase in violence,
including terrorism, and the absence of a political
horizon have empowered extremists and are eroding
hope among Palestinians and Israelis alike that a
resolution of the conflict is achievable.
Simultaneously, the Palestinian Authority is facing
mounting economic and institutional challenges,
compounded by the constraints of the occupation, the
absence of serious reforms and unclear prospects for
donor support.
In Gaza, the situation remains fragile, and the risk
of escalation persists. Efforts by the United Nations and
regional and international partners, including Egypt
and Qatar, to improve Palestinian lives, as well as
measures by Israel to ease some movement and access
restrictions and facilitate more economic activity, have
enabled the ceasefire to hold. There are currently more
than 18,000 permits for Palestinian residents of Gaza
to work or do business in Israel, the highest number
since 2007. The volume of goods exiting Gaza via
the Kerem Shalom crossing with Israel increased by
nearly 50 per cent in 2022. While progress has been
made, restrictions and delays continue to negatively
affect humanitarian and development efforts, as well
as important sectors of the economy. More needs to be
done to alleviate the humanitarian situation and enable
the economy to grow.

S/PV.9224

Ultimately, solving Gaza’s challenges will require
political solutions, including a return of the legitimate
Palestinian Government to the Strip, a full lifting of
Israeli closures, in line with resolution 1860 (2009), and
an end to the militant build-up.
As commodity prices spike, humanitarian needs
and costs are rising across the occupied Palestinian
territories. The World Food Programme (WFP) in
particular is facing a significant decline in bilateral
financial support, putting at risk its ability to maintain
critical food and cash assistance to more than 400,000
of the most vulnerable food-insecure people across
the occupied Palestinian territories. The WFP needs
$35 million over the next six months to be able to
continue its ongoing support.
I also remain seriously concerned about the
financial situation of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), which is putting at risk the delivery of
essential services to Palestine refugees in the occupied
Palestinian territory and in the region. As the West
Bank has witnessed the highest level of violence in
years, UNRWA remains one of the most significant
stabilizing elements in the lives of thousands of
Palestinians. I reiterate my urgent call to provide
UNRWA with the funds needed to fully deliver on its
General Assembly mandate.
As I told the Council in my briefing last month
(see S/PV.9203), seeking to freeze this conflict or
manage it in perpetuity are not viable options. There
is no substitute for a legitimate political process that
will resolve the core issues driving the conflict. In line
with the recommendation that I made to the Council
in November, I urge the parties, along with States of
the region and the broader international community,
to take concrete steps that will change the negative
trajectory on the ground and have an immediate impact
on Palestinian and Israeli lives, while ensuring that
those steps are anchored in a political framework that
moves the parties forward towards the establishment of
two States.
The United Nations remains actively engaged in
advancing those efforts with all relevant parties and is
committed to supporting Palestinians and Israelis to
resolve the conflict and end the occupation. The United
Nations is committed to achieving a two-State solution,
in line with relevant United Nations resolutions,
international law and bilateral agreements.

22-758433/16

S/PV.9224

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The President: I thank Mr. Wennesland for
his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank
Special Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing.
The United States applauds the difficult but important
role the international community plays in the pursuit
of peace and stability throughout the Middle East. At
the outset, we would like to extend our condolences
to the family of the Irish peacekeeper killed and wish
a speedy recovery to the three injured in the attack
on a United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon patrol.
The United States strongly supports the vital work of
peacekeepers. That incident is a reminder of the cost
we all bear in the pursuit of peace and the responsibility
we have to those lost in its noble pursuit to make all
efforts to arrest the violence — not just in Lebanon.
The United States is deeply concerned by the
sustained escalation of violence in the West Bank. The
heartbreaking death of a 16-year-old, Jana Zakarneh,
is yet another tragic reminder of the human cost of this
conflict and the importance of all parties to work to bring
about an end to the conflict. In this regard, it is imperative
that the parties take urgent action to reduce the troubling
levels of extremist violence fuelling instability in the West
Bank. The United States expects to see equal treatment of
extremists — whether Israeli or Palestinian — in arrests,
convictions and punishments, as well as equal allocation
of resources to prevent and investigate violent attacks.
It is also vital for Israeli and Palestinian leaders to
both condemn all forms of violence irrespective of the
nationality of the perpetrator. Both parties must remain
committed to the idea that each people deserves to have
equal measures of security, stability, justice, dignity
and democracy.
Unilateral actions and unhelpful rhetoric by the
parties only serve to escalate tensions, fuel violence
and undermine the prospects of a negotiated two-State
solution. Those actions must stop.
The United States was deeply disappointed in the
Palestinian-led initiative in the General Assembly to
request an advisory opinion from the International Court
of Justice against Israel. This action is counterproductive
and will only take the parties further away from the
objective we all share of a negotiated two-State solution.
4/16

19/12/2022

We also underscore the imperative of maintaining
the historic status quo at the Haram Al-Sharif/Temple
Mount and condemn provocative actions and rhetoric
related to the holy site.
We urge all sides to take further steps to improve
the situation to the benefit of the Israeli and Palestinian
people alike. Steps — however small — are badly
needed from both Israelis and Palestinians to begin
to re-establish the confidence required to live side by
side. We call on the international community to support
such steps.
However, amid the tension and anguish over the
current situation, we must also look forward. I just
returned from a trip to the United Arab Emirates and
Israel led by my friends Ambassador Gilad Erdan and
Ambassador Lana Nusseibeh. Along with a group of
other ambassadors, I had the opportunity to see firsthand the vast potential for Israel’s normalization with
Arab countries. The Abrahama Accords have the
potential to bring tremendous benefits to the region, and
the United States will continue to be a strong advocate
of the Accords as a way to further trade, innovation,
partnerships and people-to-people exchanges in the
Middle East.
While normatization between Israel and its
neighbours is not a substitute for building peace between
Israelis and Palestinians, it provides new avenues for
pursuing the same and creating new opportunities to
benefit the lives of Palestinians. This Administration
strongly believes in the value of normalization in
harnessing its potential to create a more stable, secure
and prosperous Middle East for the benefit of all.
Mr. Olmedo (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Tor Wennesland for his briefing, which
gives us a sense of the gravity of the situation on the
ground. The very worrying level of violence increases
the risk of further escalation. We share the concern
expressed by the Secretary-General in his report.
The year 2022 was the deadliest year for Palestinians
in the West Bank since 2005. In this context, we call on
all actors to remain calm. France calls on the Israeli
authorities to use force in a proportionate manner.
We are deeply shocked by the murder of a Palestinian
teenager in Jenin on 11 December. This attack must be
investigated. We recall that the protection of civilians
is an obligation under international humanitarian law.
22-75843

19/12/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

France condemns the violence of settlers who
attack Palestinian civilians as well as members of
Israeli civil society. All this only increases the risk of
spiralling provocations and reprisals. Those responsible
for this violence must answer for their actions before
the competent authorities. At the same time, France
condemns all terrorist attacks against Israelis, which are
unacceptable and which we have strongly condemned.
We reaffirm our commitment to the security of Israel.
In this context, the priority today is to put an end
to the Israeli policy of colonization in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem.
France condemns this policy of colonization.
Demolitions of Palestinian structures are intensifying
in the West Bank, particularly in Area C, most recently
of a school financed by the international community
on 23 November. Like all children, Palestinian children
have a right to education.
We are also very concerned about the continuing
evictions of Palestinians. We are worried about
the continued construction of outposts and the
announcements that promise their legalization. We call
on the next Israeli Government not to implement these
decisions, and, with our main partners, we will remain
vigilant on this issue. In the Palestinian territories,
as elsewhere, France will never recognize the illegal
annexation of territories.
All these unilateral measures, in violation of
international law, are pushing away the prospect
of direct talks between the parties, and in the long
term, the prospect of a two-State solution. They also
contribute to the dynamic of annexation and therefore
to further destabilization. To preserve the two-State
solution, it is more necessary than ever to continue
the implementation of the policy of differentiation,
in accordance with resolution 2334 (2016), that is, to
legally formalize the distinction between the territory
of Israel and the Palestinian territories occupied
since 1967.
We also recall the importance of respecting the
historical status quo of the holy sites in Jerusalem. In the
current context, we must avoid any act of provocation.
Finally, the Security Council has a duty to preserve
the Oslo Accords and defend the two-State solution.
At a time when violations of the Oslo Accords are
multiplying, particularly violations of the provisions
relating to Area C, the Security Council has a
responsibility to the parties. Past agreements must

S/PV.9224

be respected. The policy of fait accompli must not
undermine the solution of two States living side by side
in peace and security, with Jerusalem as the capitals of
both States. Israelis and Palestinians deserve a just and
lasting peace.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Special Coordinator
Wennesland for his briefing and for the written report.
Like others, we are concerned about the continued
high level of violence and unrest in the West Bank,
which is at its most deadly since 2005. The killing of
a 16-year-old girl last week during an Israeli military
operation in Jenin is another tragic example of the
consequences for Palestinian civilians. We once again
urge Israeli security forces to exercise the utmost
restraint in its use of force.
The current situation is in no way sustainable. In
the long run, it is in neither party’s interest to keep this
conflict unresolved. The deteriorating situation on the
ground is a symptom of the lack of a political solution.
It is leading the parties further away from peace and
undermining the two-State solution.
We are seeing continued settlement expansion,
house demolitions, evictions and settler violence.
Not only are the Israeli settlements illegal under
international law, they also undermine prospects for an
independent and contiguous Palestinian State. They are
also fuelling distrust and despair.
Furthermore, Israeli security operations in the
West Bank have, during past months, led to many
civilian casualties among Palestinians, including
children and youth. Provocations and incitement to
violence are contributing to increasing tensions. The
status quo of the holy sites in Jerusalem must be upheld
and respected.
Violence against civilians, including terror attacks,
are totally unacceptable and cannot be justified.
Norway also calls on all parties to always keep schools
and children safe. The inviolability of United Nations
premises, including at schools operating under the
auspices of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, must
be respected by all.
The lack of political progress towards a sustainable
solution has led many, both Israelis and Palestinians,
to lose faith in the two-State solution. Let me reiterate
Norway’s clear position 75 years after the partition plan
was approved by the United Nations: we believe that a

22-758435/16

S/PV.9224

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

negotiated two-State solution based on the 1967 borders,
relevant United Nations resolutions and international
parameters is the best way to achieve lasting peace
and ensure the rights, safety and independence of both
Palestinians and Israelis.
Norway supports the United Nations Special
Coordinator’s approach. Direct negotiations between
Israelis and Palestinians must be taken up as soon as
possible. At the same time, the situation on the ground
must be improved, and a minimum of trust rebuilt.
Measures are also needed to reduce tensions in the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem. In the short term,
it is also crucial to continue to bolster the ceasefire
in Gaza and strengthen the Palestinian Authority, its
institutions and the Palestinian economy. Palestinians
must be allowed to generate income from their land and
resources, including in Area C in the West Bank.
The work of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for
the Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians donor group and the continued support for
Palestinian institution-building remain important in
this situation. The political division between Gaza and
the West Bank complicates efforts to find a political
solution. A strong and unified Palestinian leadership,
with renewed democratic legitimacy, is necessary.

19/12/2022

agree to disagree on the past, but also to agree on a way
forward towards a two-State solution based on United
Nations resolutions. That proves that it is possible to
bring archenemies together around the negotiating table
if there is political will and brave political leadership.
We should never lose hope that this can be possible
again. And we as a Council should unite and redouble
our efforts to push for a two-State solution, which we
all agree on.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank Special Coordinator Wennesland
for his briefing, and we want to take this opportunity to
reiterate Mexico’s full support to him. He has once again
presented us with a worrisome picture that reflects a
fragile situation on the ground. In the two years during
which Mexico has been an elected member of the
Security Council, we have witnessed growing tensions
and a continued stalemate in the political process. I
would like to share some reflections in that regard.

Not only is the stalled peace process negatively
affecting the people who live there — and who pay
the highest price for the lack of a political solution and
fundamental rights — it also affects the whole region.
Long-term stability in the region requires achieving
a mutually acceptable solution to the question of
Palestine that will bring freedom, justice and security
to everyone. The normalization of relations between
countries is creating new opportunities and dynamics
in the Middle East. Progress in the Israeli-Palestinian
peace process would open up many more possibilities.

Concerning the implementation of resolution 2334
(2016), we deplore the numerous actions that have
violated the resolution’s provisions and created an
atmosphere that is not conducive to a resolution of the
conflict. We would like to underscore the following.
First, despite the fact that the construction of
settlements is illegal under international law, more than
14,000 housing units have been built in the past two
years. Secondly, at least 1,800 demolitions have been
recorded, resulting in the displacement of more than
2,000 Palestinians, half of them minors. Thirdly, there
has been an increase in attacks on civilians, in violation
of international humanitarian law. Furthermore, rocket
attacks from Gaza have continued. In the past two
years, 517 Palestinians and 30 Israelis have been killed
and nearly 30,000 people wounded. Fourthly, it has not
been possible to dismantle the terrorists’ capacities,
the settler violence has increased, and the use of
inflammatory rhetoric by both sides has continued
unabated. Fifthly, there have been repeated attempts
to change the status quo of holy sites in Jerusalem,
undermining Jordan’s role as their custodian.

As this is my last statement during our current term
on the Council, I would like to bring representatives
back 30 years ago to Oslo. At the time, courageous
negotiators from the Palestine Liberation Organization
and the State of Israel, one of which considered the
other a terrorist organization while being itself viewed
by that other as an illegitimate State, came together to

Despite all of that, there have been some positive
steps, such as the easing of the movement of people
and goods to and from Gaza, an increase in permits for
Palestinian workers, continued civil, fiscal and security
cooperation between Israel and the Palestinian Authority,
and a commitment to intra-Palestinian reconciliation in
accordance with the Algiers declaration.

Norway urges Israelis and Palestinians to work
constructively with the United Nations Special
Coordinator to lay the groundwork for peace, and we
call upon all States, including the members of the
Security Council, to contribute to this work.

6/16

22-75843

19/12/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

It is clear that it has not been possible to break
the cycle of violence, as the confrontations of May
2021 and August 2022 showed. As the diagnosis we
have just heard confirmed, a viable political solution
for addressing the structural causes of the conflict
is essential. The responsibility for resuming the
peace process unquestionably falls on the parties
to the conflict. However, it is also incumbent on the
international community and the Security Council to
sponsor a political process aimed at promoting a just
and sustainable peace in the region. After adopting
dozens of resolutions over the past decades, the Council
cannot remain mired in its inability to achieve the peace
and security that millions of Palestinian and Israeli
children deserve. The right to prosperity and security
for Palestinians and Israelis cannot be subject to
conditions. The right moment will be fostered through
a confluence of the good offices of regional actors,
bilateral initiatives and back channels in parallel with
multilateral dialogue.
Over the past 24 months, my country has tried
to contribute to a comprehensive solution of the
conflict based on the premise of two States, Israel and
Palestine, in a solution that both addresses Israel’s
legitimate security concerns and creates a politically
and economically viable Palestinian State, coexisting
in peace within secure and internationally recognized
borders, with Jerusalem as the capital of both States, in
accordance with international law and United Nations
resolutions. As a country that is committed to the
peaceful settlement of disputes, Mexico will continue
to support all efforts aimed at establishing lasting
peace in the region, based on mutual respect and full
adherence to the rule of law.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing.
China has always attached great importance to the
question of Palestine, which is critical to peace and
stability in the Middle East, as well as international
fairness and justice. President Xi Jinping has put
forward initiatives to resolve the Palestinian question
on many occasions, and he has sent a congratulatory
message to the United Nations commemorative
meeting on the International Day of Solidarity with
the Palestinian People every year for the past 10 years.
A short while ago, while attending the China-Arab
summit and meeting with Arab leaders, President Xi
reiterated China’s unwavering support to the just cause
of the Palestinian people in restoring their legitimate

S/PV.9224

national right to an independent Palestinian State and
Palestine’s full membership in the United Nations, as
well as China’s willingness to continue its unremitting
efforts to promote a speedy, just and lasting solution to
the Palestinian question.
China supports the full implementation of a twoState solution. The historical injustices suffered by the
Palestinian people cannot be prolonged indefinitely,
their legitimate national rights cannot be traded away
and their demand for independent statehood cannot
be vetoed. The international community should stay
committed and work together to translate the concept
of a two-State solution from consensus into action and
from vision into reality.
China advocates strengthening the authority of the
Palestinian National Authority, supports greater unity
among Palestinian factions and welcomes the important
progress made by various Arab countries in promoting
intra-Palestinian reconciliation. We advocate placing
the Palestinian question high on the international
agenda, supporting a resumption of peace talks between
Palestine and Israel as soon as possible on the basis of
a two-State solution, and calling for the convening of
a larger-scale, more authoritative and more influential
international peace conference.
China encourages Palestine and Israel to pursue
common security. This year has been the deadliest since
2005 for Palestinians in the West Bank, with more than
half of the deaths there occurring during Israeli military
or search-and-arrest operations. Attacks on Israeli
civilians have also hit a record high since 2015. China
condemns all indiscriminate attacks against civilians
and serious violations against children, opposes the
excessive use of force by security forces and calls for
investigations into the violence in question in order to
ensure accountability. The occupying Power should
also effectively fulfil its obligations under international
law to ensure the security of the population in the
occupied territories.
Palestine and Israel are inseparable neighbours
with indivisible security. The international community
should pay equal attention to the legitimate security
concerns of both sides, encourage cooperation between
them, achieve common security through political
dialogue and peace talks, put an end to violence
begetting violence and break the vicious cycle.

22-758437/16

S/PV.9224

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

19/12/2022

China urges compliance with the international rule
of law. Six years have passed since the adoption of
resolution 2334 (2016), which has yet to be effectively
implemented. Israel’s settlement activity continues to
expand, encroaching on Palestinian land and resources,
squeezing the living space of the Palestinian people,
violating the Palestinians’ right to self-determination
and making a contiguous, independent and sovereign
Palestinian State even more elusive.

people in favour of independent statehood. I must
therefore ask the following question: what is stopping
the Palestinian people from achieving that legitimate
right? We must point out that every day of inaction by
the international community is a disservice to peace, a
betrayal of justice and a failure to the next generation.
We call on all parties to use their conscience in
order to uphold justice and take action to fulfil
their commitments.

The Riyadh declaration of the China-Arab States
summit stresses that settlement activity in the occupied
territories is illegal and that the unilateral practices
to change the status quo in Jerusalem are null and
void. We urge Israel to comply with its obligations
under the resolutions of the Security Council, to cease
all settlement activity, including the demolition of
Palestinian homes and the threat of eviction for the
population of Masafer Yatta and other areas, to stop
making unilateral changes to the status quo in the
occupied territories and to return the right track of the
two-State solution.

We hope that the United Nations and the Security
Council will take substantive steps to advance the
two-State solution and support the Palestinian people
in restoring and exercising their inalienable rights, so
that Palestine and Israel can coexist in peace, the two
peoples — Arabs and Jews — can live in harmony and
lasting peace can be achieved in the Middle East. The
new year is upon us. We hope the new year will bring
new hope to the Palestinian people.

China supports the improvement of the Palestinian
economy and people’s livelihoods. The 55-yearlong occupation and frequent conflict and turmoil
have severely constrained Palestinian economic and
social development and continue to worsen the plight
of the Palestinian people. We call on Israel to ease
unreasonable restrictions on the movement of people
and goods and the use of land in the occupied territories,
create conditions for development in Palestinian
communities in the West Bank and lift the blockade of
Gaza as soon as possible. The international community
should provide assistance to Palestine through multiple
channels in order to help to ease its financial crisis and
guarantee public services.
China has always cared about the Palestinian people.
We will continue to provide them with humanitarian
assistance, support the implementation of livelihood
projects on the ground and increase our contribution
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
The Palestinian-Israeli question has been on the
United Nations agenda for more than seven decades.
During that time, generations of Palestinians have seen
their hair go grey, their childhoods lost in tears and
their hopes dashed in waiting. In today’s meeting, we
have once again heard the overwhelming majority of
countries support the strong voice of the Palestinian
8/16

Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening today’s important meeting. I
would like to begin by conveying our appreciation to
Mr. Wennesland for his relentless efforts as Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
for the timely and detailed updates he brought to our
attention today.
The latest report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016)
paints a worrisome picture to all of us who aspire to
achieve a two-State solution and a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace for both Israel and Palestine. The
continuation of settlement activities, as cited in the
report, does not contribute to our endeavours towards
peace in the region. Brazil is appalled by the surge
in violence against civilians, including a significant
number of children. As pointed out in the report, 2022
has been the year with the highest number of civilian
fatalities in the West Bank since 2005, when the United
Nations started tracking them. We call on the parties
to exercise maximum restraint and to refrain from any
actions that could further escalate tensions and cause
more violence and suffering. All obligations under
international humanitarian law and human rights law
must be strictly observed, and the most vulnerable, in
particular children, must never be targeted by attacks
of any sort.
In reference to that disturbing trend, we agree with
the report’s assessment that the violence must stop
and that all perpetrators must be held accountable.
22-75843

19/12/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Brazil also echoes its call on the leaders of all sides
to contribute towards calming the situation. That
includes halting provocative actions and inf lammatory
rhetoric. Moreover, in indicating the fragility of the
current political and security dynamics, the report
underscores that “The increase in violence and
terrorism and the absence of a political horizon have
empowered extremists and are eroding hope among
Palestinians and Israelis that a resolution of the conflict
is achievable.”
It is therefore urgent that we make progress towards
addressing the conflict’s driving forces with a view to
securing a just and sustainable political solution. Brazil
reiterates its understanding that simply continuing
to manage this conflict with no end in sight is not an
option. Let us renew our collective resolve to seek
flexibility and engagement from Israeli and Palestinian
authorities alike. Taking efforts to resume meaningful
negotiations is a matter of urgency.
Finally, we take this opportunity to express our
concern about the lack of funding for the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East and the World Food Programme. The regular
flow of aid and humanitarian resources is crucial to
preventing further destabilization. We hope that donors
will respond to both agencies’ fundraising efforts to
support their life-saving activities.
Let me conclude by reiterating Brazil’s longstanding commitment to a just and sustainable peace
in the Middle East, with Israelis and Palestinians living
side by side in security, in two democratic, prosperous
and sovereign States, within secure and internationally
recognized borders.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank the Special Coordinator, Mr. Tor Wennesland,
for his informative briefing on the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016).
The twenty-fourth quarterly report of the SecretaryGeneral is shocking. Six years after the adoption of
resolution 2334 (2016), it is clear that its implementation
has fallen well short of our expectations. The settlement
activities, the seizures and demolitions of property and
the expropriations of Palestinians have continued. The
violations and violence against civilians and acts of
terror have intensified, while their perpetrators have not
been held to account. The clashes between Palestinians
and the Israeli security forces have continued with an
unprecedented of level of violence, making 2022 the

S/PV.9224

deadliest year since the intifada of 2005. The cycle of
violence and bloodshed is untenable. It is imperative
that the Council strive to put an end to that cycle and
create the conditions for a lasting peace in the region.
In Gaza, despite the ongoing risk of escalation, we
note the prevailing fragile calm with the maintenance of
the ceasefire, thanks to the efforts of the United Nations
and regional partners, as well as the measures taken
by Israel to alleviate pressures and further facilitate
economic activities. The fragility of the political and
security dynamics, particularly in the occupied West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, remains concerning.
We therefore call on the parties to exercise restraint
and refrain from any belligerent rhetoric that would
undermine the quest for peace, and instead to commit
to holding a frank and constructive dialogue for the
benefit of both the Israeli and the Palestinian peoples.
Gabon reaffirms its commitment to a two-State
solution, with Israel and Palestine living side by side in
peace and security within the recognized 1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as the capital of Palestine.
We call on the international community to mobilize
to fund bodies such as the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East and the World Food Programme so as to tackle
the Palestinian people’s growing humanitarian needs.
On the sensitive issue of the return of human remains
to their families in Israel and Palestine, we call on the
parties to prioritize the matter and to create a climate of
trust in favour of a lasting peace.
In conclusion, we welcome the efforts of Special
Coordinator Wennesland for peace in the Middle East,
particularly the ongoing dialogue that he is conducting
with various Israeli and Palestinian leaders, and with
regional and international partners, to address the
dangerous trends in the occupied West Bank, including
East Jerusalem.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Tor Wennesland for his report
on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016).
We note the alarming frequency of the spiking
violence that is recurring in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including the West Bank and Gaza. We
believe firmly that the situation will remain volatile until
the parties reach mutually acceptable agreements on all
final-status issues based on the generally recognized
international legal framework for the Middle East
peace process, with a two-State solution — which we
have always supported — as a central element.

22-758439/16

S/PV.9224

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In the context of the information provided by
the Special Coordinator on the progress made in the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), we reaffirm
our principled position whereby the establishment
of Israeli settlements in the Palestinian territories
occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem,
constitutes a violation of international law and one
of the main obstacles to resolving the conflict. Mass
arbitrary arrests of Palestinians occur on a daily basis.
In the West Bank, the Israelis continue to conduct
disproportionately violent raids, while there are also
regular outbreaks of violence around the Gaza Strip.
According to available statistics, since the beginning
of the year 158 people have been killed in the West
Bank and 52 in Gaza. In yet another tragic incident,
a young girl named Jana Zakarneh was killed in Jenin
last week. Meanwhile, the expropriation and demolition
of Palestinian property continue, along with systematic
violations of the status quo of Jerusalem’s holy sites.
Besides that, Israel’s arbitrary illegal actions go
beyond the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, affecting
neighbouring Arab countries with numerous violations
of their sovereignty, including attacks on Syrian and
Lebanese territory.
Against that backdrop, the United States, on
fabricated pretexts, has withdrawn from participating
the Middle East Quartet of international mediators,
whose other participants are Russia, the European
Union and the United Nations. That decision has
essentially blocked the work of that multilateral
mechanism endorsed by many Security Council
resolutions. The Russian Federation is committed to
resolving the conflict in the Middle East in line with the
provisions of international law and supports resuming
the Quartet’s activities as soon as possible. History
has shown more than once that the United States’
efforts to monopolize the Middle East peace process
are untenable and doomed to failure, serving only to
exacerbate the antagonism between Palestinians and
Israelis. Suffice it to say that Washington’s attempts to
single-handedly resolve the conflict in 2014 took the
peace process to a particularly low point of stagnation,
where it remains to this day. For our part, we continue
to advocate for meeting the Palestinian people’s
legitimate aspirations for their own independent State,
based on the universally recognized international legal
framework. We believe there is no alternative to direct
negotiations between the Palestinians and Israelis
on all the parameters for a final settlement. In that
connection, we support the package of resolutions on
10/16

19/12/2022

the Middle East peace process adopted by the General
Assembly last week (resolutions 77/123, 77/124, 77/125
and 77/126).
We believe that the international community has
its own constructive role to play, both in the settlement
of the Palestinian-Israeli issue and in alleviating the
acute humanitarian and socioeconomic situations in the
occupied territories, especially Gaza. We attach great
importance to continuing the effective work of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, which provides support
to Palestinians both in the occupied territories and in
neighbouring Arab countries.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I thank Special Coordinator
Wennesland for his presentation of the SecretaryGeneral’s report and his continued engagement with
both Israeli and Palestinian officials. Our delegation
has taken note of the report’s summation of efforts by
the parties and the international community to advance
peace efforts. We welcome all the affirmative steps
taken at the grass-roots and regional levels aimed at
improving the current conditions in Gaza, the West
Bank and East Jerusalem. Nevertheless, we can all
agree that there is much more that needs to be done
to bridge the gap between the current engagement and
the situation on the ground, and to bring the Council’s
decisions closer to the aspiration of two States for the
two peoples. In recognition of the absence of a genuine
Israeli-Palestinian peace process underpinned by direct
dialogue, we must sustain the urgency and continued
engagement, commitment and focus on this issue.
Efforts to create conditions conducive to negotiating
all the final-status issues in a manner that takes into
account the legitimate concerns of both the Palestinian
and Israeli sides must be more robust.
Like its predecessors in past decades, the
report points to the lack of meaningful progress on
the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016). Its
implementation requires the political will of both the
Israeli and Palestinian authorities. Our delegation
continues to urge that reporting from the good offices
of the Secretary-General be undergirded by an
emphasis on paragraph 11 of the resolution, which calls
for presenting clear objectives, timelines and feasible
solutions to resolve the pending issues. That way the
Council will be better positioned to examine practical
ways and means to secure the full implementation of its
relevant resolutions.
22-75843

19/12/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The Council must remain seized of the issue and
take urgent action on the objectives of resolution 2334
(2016). They speak to the vital importance of stabilizing
the situation and reversing the negative trends on the
ground, which are undermining the prospects of a twoState solution along the 1967 lines, with an independent
and viable State of Palestine living side by side in peace
and security with the State of Israel.
The statistics relating to violent incidents, arrests,
and fatalities reflected in the barely three months of
the reporting period are alarming and unacceptable.
In particular, all effort must be expended to ensure the
protection of children.
In line with resolution 2334 (2016), there is a need
to strengthen efforts to prevent, ensure accountability
for and address violence against civilians, including
acts of terrorism perpetrated by Hamas, the Palestinian
Islamic Jihad and other militant groups in Israel. The
indiscriminate launching of rockets, including from
residential neighbourhoods in Gaza, towards Israeli
civilian population centres must stop.
Our delegation is concerned about the report of the
presence of a man-made cavity underneath the grounds
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East school in Gaza.
That poses security and safety risks to the children
and staff and is a serious violation of the Agency’s
neutrality and a breach of international law. The
neutrality and inviolability of United Nations premises
must be protected.
The report also indicates that settlements, as well
as demolitions, including the recent demolition of the
school in Masafer Yatta, and evictions continue to
increase in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, in violation of international law. Kenya
calls on all parties concerned, including communal,
political and religious leaders, to stop the inflammatory
rhetoric in the interest of the promotion of peace and
security. They should speak up against incitement and
support the daily dividends of constructive grassroots
efforts in mitigating the cycles of conflict.
In conclusion, and considering that this is Kenya’s
last engagement on this file before the end of our twoyear tenure, I wish to thank the Special Coordinator
and his team for their continued tireless engagement
with both Israeli and Palestinian officials. The Council
can continue to count on Kenya’s support. I reaffirm
Kenya’s commitment to the two-State solution, along

S/PV.9224

the 1967 lines, with an independent and viable State of
Palestine, living side by side in peace and security with
the State of Israel.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): I thank Mr. Wennesland for
his briefing. He can be assured of our full and continued
support for his work.
Today’s meeting is Ireland’s last on the situation in
the Middle East during our current term on the Security
Council. While we would have liked to acknowledge
progress on that file, the reality is that the prospects of
reopening a political horizon and achieving the twoState solution are as remote today as when we joined the
Council two years ago. The consequences of this have
never been more stark.
This month, we marked a tragic milestone — 2022
has become the deadliest year for Palestinians living in
the West Bank since the United Nations began recording
fatalities in 2005. Today we want to focus on three issues
that are central to putting us back on the path to peace: first,
the need to halt Israeli settlement activity; secondly, the
need to protect civilians and ensure accountability; and
thirdly, the need to rekindle hope through de-escalation,
the restoration of a political horizon and support for civil
society and humanitarian actors.
Six years ago, the Council adopted resolution 2334
(2016), reiterating its demand that Israel immediately and
completely cease all settlement activity in the occupied
Palestinian territory. Israel has ignored the Council’s
demand. As Mr. Wennesland’s briefing today highlights,
Israel continues to establish and expand settlements in
flagrant violation of international law. That is simply
unacceptable. As we have repeatedly stated in the
Council, settlements undermine prospects for the twoState solution and are a major obstacle to a just, lasting
and comprehensive peace. We repeat our call on Israel to
immediately cease all settlement activity and to comply
fully with resolution 2334 (2016).
There has also been a sharp rise in settler violence,
with Israeli forces consistently failing to prevent settlers
from harming Palestinians. It is imperative that Israel
act urgently to prevent such incidents. We also wish to
reiterate the importance of protecting the holy sites in
Jerusalem, and our full respect for Jordan’s custodial role.
As highlighted in Mr. Wennesland’s briefing, the
level of violence against civilians we have witnessed
this year is deeply alarming. Ireland is particularly
concerned about the plight of children. Forty-two

22-7584311/16

S/PV.9224

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestinian children and one Israeli child have been
killed in 2022. That is more than double the number
killed last year. Moreover, we share Mr. Wennesland’s
deep concern about Israel’s widespread use of the
administrative detention of minors. Ireland condemns
in the strongest of terms the killing of 16-year-old Jana
Zakarneh, who was shot dead on the roof of her own
home during an Israel Defense Forces operation in
Jenin. We reiterate our call for accountability in respect
of all civilian deaths. Accountability is the cornerstone
of a political horizon and a meaningful peace process.
In Ireland’s first address to the Council on this
issue in January 2021 (see S/2021/91), Minister Simon
Coveney recalled that, during the lowest moments of
our own peace process in Ireland, we never lost sight
of the need for what we called then the “duty of hope”.
Such hope requires all sides to exercise restraint and
take steps towards de-escalation. We must urgently
break the current cycle of violence.
It requires us to redouble our efforts to deliver a
political horizon, addressing the root causes and drivers
of conflict. It also requires us to protect and empower
those who contribute to peacebuilding and the delivery
of essential services to Palestinians in the occupied
Palestinian territory and in the region. In that regard,
we are alarmed about the reduced space for civil society
in the occupied Palestinian territory, which is likely
to come under further threat in the coming months.
We reiterate our call on Israel to reverse its decision
on the designation of human rights non-governmental
organizations as terrorist entities.
We are deeply concerned about reports that Salah
Hammouri, a Palestinian-French lawyer and human
rights defender, has been forcibly deported from the
occupied Palestinian territory by the Israeli authorities.
Mr. Hammouri’s deportation is a breach of international
law, particularly the Fourth Geneva Convention.
We condemn this action by the Israeli authorities.
Mr. Hammouri must be allowed to return home.
We acknowledge the vital role of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East for stability in the region and welcome the
extension of its mandate for a further three years. We
are particularly concerned about the situation in the
Gaza Strip, where a vast majority of the population
continue to depend on humanitarian assistance.
Finally, let me assure members that even as our term
on the Council concludes, Ireland will remain closely
engaged on this conflict and will continue to monitor
12/16

19/12/2022

the situation very closely and intensively. Ireland
remains committed to supporting all efforts aimed at
achieving a just and lasting two-State solution, at the
United Nations and beyond. We continue to believe
that, with sustained political will, progress is possible,
and that is now more important than ever.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Special Coordinator
Wennesland for the updated information he provided.
The mood in the room, including ours, is not much
different from that of the last time we met on the matter
(see S/PV.9203). We express disappointment and regret
that the situation on the ground continues to be affected
by heightened risks and threats for further escalation,
especially in the West Bank and East Jerusalem.
As we all know, unilateral steps and actions in the
Middle East are always problematic. However, they
become dangerous in the current fragile, complex and
persistently hostile environment. They fuel tensions
and most often lead to violence — pervasive endless
violence with unfortunate consequences that we have
powerlessly witnessed so many times. As a result, those
who suffer and end up paying the price are innocent
civilians and the peace process.
This year, the detrimental impact on civilians has
worsened. The number of casualties has increased
rapidly and worryingly, and has affected mostly
children — young girls and boys. In that respect,
the tragic killing of a 16-year-old in Jenin is deeply
troubling. We call on both sides to exercise maximum
restraint and spare no effort in finding ways to ease
the situation on the ground, while bearing in mind
that the proliferation of violence will do no good to
anyone. It will only harm the people, civilians, rather
than to those who are responsible. We call for the full
investigation of all the acts with fatal consequences for
civilians on both sides and for those responsible to be
held accountable.
We have expressed and reiterate our full support
for the full implementation of resolution 2601 (2021),
on safeguarding the right to education in conflict.
Educational institutions, like United Nations premises,
cannot and must be not used for military purposes — even
less so for terrorist acts. Children cannot and must not
be used as human shields. We have said it many times
and reiterate our full and unreserved condemnation of
any acts of terror against Israel and its people. Terror
cannot be justified and should only be condemned by all.
Albania stands with Israel, as it stands with any other
22-75843

19/12/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

country in such a situation, in support of the legitimate
right to self-defence through proportionate measures.
We deplore the shooting and killing of a United Nations
personnel member in Lebanon. The protection of
peacekeepers is a must. They represent the Organization
and are there to implement mandates approved by the
Security Council. A full investigation of that tragic
incident should therefore be conducted without delay.
International law and international humanitarian
law are not optional and must be fully observed in
any conflict by all. We reiterate our concern about
the fact that the growing numbers of demolitions and
evictions, as well as the advancement of settlements,
do not comply with international law, are contrary to
resolution 2334 (2016) and do not contribute to creating
the conditions necessary for a peaceful resolution of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Nor do the inflammatory
rhetoric and incitements to violence, whatever their
source. They must all be condemned.
As we approach the end of the year, people from
all over the world will be flocking to Bethlehem and
Jerusalem for the seasonal celebrations. That is another
reminder of the importance of safeguarding the holy
sites and preserving their status quo. Maintaining
peaceful religious coexistence is a further step towards
achieving comprehensive peace in the region.
Let me conclude by expressing Albania’s support
for the importance of restoring a political horizon aimed
at a just and negotiated two-State solution within the
1967 borders. A comprehensive peace means a safe and
secure Israel and a viable, independent and democratic
Palestine. It means no more violence. It means more
development and a better life for all. It means hope and
prospects for young people and boys and girls. It means
a different Middle East, making a major contribution
to peace and prosperity in the region and in the world.
That can be achieved only with vision, leadership and
courage by negotiating and implementing a plan for
two States for two peoples, living side by side in peace
and security and mutual recognition, with Jerusalem as
their future shared capital.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I thank the Special Coordinator, Mr. Tor
Wennesland, for his thorough briefing and his efforts
in supporting peace in the region.
Here in the Security Council at this time last
year, Mr. Wennesland expressed his concern about
developments in the occupied Palestinian territory,

S/PV.9224

noting that if they were left unchecked, it was not
only likely that the situation in the West Bank could
deteriorate but that those developments could affect the
security situation in the Gaza Strip. In that regard, we
are now at the end of the deadliest year in the West Bank
in nearly two decades, according to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, which has also
noted that the number of children killed in the West
Bank this year was twice that of last year. As for Gaza,
we witnessed another spiral of violence in August that
claimed the lives of 17 children. On the political front,
there has been no serious action that might indicate an
imminent return to talks between the two parties since
negotiations ceased in 2014.
Given those realities, the Council must rely on
intensifying political and diplomatic efforts to reduce
tensions and help the parties return to negotiations.
Today’s meeting represents an opportunity for the
Council to send a united message about the importance
of achieving that. It is not only the future of two
peoples that is at stake in the ongoing conflict, it is an
entire region that could find itself in a dangerous spiral
of violence. The United Arab Emirates will therefore
never cease to call for de-escalation in the region
and to reach out for peace and explore ways to create
promising opportunities for young people away from
the violence. We believe it is imperative to focus on the
following messages throughout the coming period.
First, in the context of our discussion on
resolution 2334 (2016) today, we reiterate our demand
that Israel must stop all of its continuing settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory,
which constitute a violation of international law and
undermine peace efforts. That includes halting the
announced plans to build new settlement units in
various places. Considering the recent reports of plans
for legalizing settlement outposts, we reaffirm our
rejection of any steps aimed at annexing Palestinian
lands or legitimizing annexation. Such practices raise
many concerns about the future of a two-State solution,
and we warn against the danger of undermining it to the
extent that it will cease to be viable.
Secondly, it is imperative to refrain from inciting
rhetoric and instead to focus on taking steps to reduce
the violence. That includes putting an end to the settlerrelated violence as well as the demolitions and evictions
of Palestinian buildings, of which there have been
more than 700 this year, according to United Nations
reports. Such illegal measures fuel anger and despair,

22-7584313/16

S/PV.9224

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

exacerbate the already severe humanitarian conditions
and lead to more confrontations. We stress the
importance of Israel’s assumption of its responsibilities
in accordance with international law and the relevant
United Nations resolutions.
Thirdly, we need to explore the possible options
to revive the Middle East peace process. That requires
multilateral support, especially from the Council and
the stakeholders and States that have always undertaken
mediation efforts to resolve this conflict. But it does
not imply having to start from square one. The agreedon international mechanisms and parameters are still
in place. What we need is to intensify international
engagement with the two sides to build confidence,
urge them to prioritize wisdom and demonstrate the
serious political will needed to return to negotiations,
in addition to reaffirming their commitment to a twoState solution.
Fourthly, we note that any unilateral measures
that affect the legal status of Jerusalem and the holy
sites are a violation of international law and likely to
exacerbate tensions. We are concerned about the threats
of the forced displacement of dozens of families in East
Jerusalem, where settlements continue to expand. We
reaffirm the necessity of respecting the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan’s custodianship of the holy sites and
management of the endowments in Jerusalem.
In conclusion, we hope that the New Year will bring
hope for the possibility of improving the conditions on
the ground and achieving a quick return to negotiations
that can eventually lead to the establishment of an
independent and sovereign Palestinian State along
the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
living side by side with Israel in peace, security and
mutual recognition.

19/12/2022

fatalities in 2005, and also that this has been the sixth
consecutive year with an increase in the number of
Israeli settler attacks in the occupied West Bank.
We express concern about the frequent raids and
arbitrary arrests conducted by Israel Defense Forces
(IDF) in the occupied Palestinian territories and
convey our condolences to the family of the 16-yearold Palestinian girl who was shot dead on the roof of
her house during an IDF raid in the West Bank town of
Jenin. We call for a full investigation into the incident
and reiterate our previous call on Israel to protect
civilians, observe the principles of distinction and
proportionality and exercise maximum restraint in the
use of force.
We condemn in the strongest terms indiscriminate
attacks on United Nations peacekeepers and all civilian
personnel in the region, who continue to work under
harsh conditions to maintain peace, and convey once
again our condolences to the Government and the
family of the Irish peacekeeper who was killed in a
14 December attack against a convoy of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon near the town of
Al-Aqbieh, in southern Lebanon. We wish the three
others who were injured a speedy recovery.
We also condemn all acts of terror and violence
against civilians, as well as acts of provocation and
incitement. We call for immediate steps to prevent
violence, including acts of terror, against unarmed
civilians, children and the aged, and urge both parties
to refrain from provocative actions, incitement and
inflammatory rhetoric.

Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): Let me begin by thanking
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Process
Tor Wennesland for his comprehensive briefing
on the prevailing situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, focusing on Israeli
settlement activities.

We call on the Israeli Government not to continue
with plans to expand or create new settlements,
particularly in and around East Jerusalem, and not
to proceed with the legalization of unauthorized
settlements, including potential future measures that
would support settlers and settlement activities in the
West Bank, such as changing the law that currently
prohibits settlers from living in the Homesh outpost.
We do so mindful of the adverse impact of settlement
activities on the Middle East peace process.

We are deeply concerned about the reports that the
period under review has seen a further deterioration
of both the humanitarian and security situations on
the ground and an increase in the number of Israeli
settlement activities. We note with pain the fact that
2022 has been the deadliest year for Palestinians in the
West Bank since the United Nations started recording

While awaiting the formation of a new Israeli
Government, we underscore the need to prioritize a
political horizon for the peaceful resolution of the
conflict and urge the avoidance of unilateral steps
that could undermine the viability of the two-State
solution. We call on both sides to show maximum
restraint and refrain from unilateral actions that could

14/16

22-75843

19/12/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

escalate tensions and threaten the peace and mutual
trust that are urgently needed to stabilize the situation
and reverse negative trends on the ground, as well as to
create the conditions for subsequent negotiations and
for advancing the two-State solution.
In conclusion, I wish to underscore the need
for cooperation and unified action among all States
Members of the United Nations. We reiterate our firm
belief that lasting peace and an amicable solution to
the prolonged conflict is possible only through direct
talks between the Palestinians and Israelis, without any
preconditions. We therefore urge both parties to resolve
all differences through dialogue and negotiations in a
comprehensive and mutually acceptable manner.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
thank Special Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing.
Six years ago, in December 2016, the Security
Council adopted resolution 2334 (2016). The United
Kingdom reaffirms its commitment to the core tenets
of that text: first, the status quo is not sustainable, and
urgent action is required to maintain the viability of
the two-State solution; secondly, all acts of violence
against civilians, including acts of terror, provocation
and destruction, must be prevented, and thirdly, Israel
must immediately and completely cease all settlement
activities, including in East Jerusalem.
Meaningful dialogue must end the cycle of
violence that continues to have a devastating effect on
the civilian population across Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territories.
The death of 16-year-old Jana Zakarneh on
12 December in Jenin, during an Israeli search-andarrest operation, is another tragic reminder of the
human cost of this ongoing conflict. We urge Israel to
exercise maximum restraint in its use of live fire. Israel
and the Palestinian Authority must work together to
de-escalate, continue crucial security cooperation and
bring to an end the appalling violence we have seen
in 2022.
The past month also saw the demolition of a donorfunded school in the South Hebron Hills. A second
school, funded in part by the United Kingdom, is also
being threatened with demolition. The United Kingdom
condemns all demolitions by Israel in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including in Area C. The Oslo
Accords are clear — Area C should be gradually
transferred to Palestinian jurisdiction. I call on Israel

S/PV.9224

to avoid unilateral actions and to meet its obligations
under international humanitarian law by providing a
clear, transparent route to construction in Area C.
I urge donors to provide urgent support to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) in closing the
Agency’s critical funding gap this month. UNRWA
plays a key role in regional stability.
The United Kingdom remains a firm supporter
of a two-State solution based on 1967 lines and with
Jerusalem as a shared capital as the only way to ensure
a lasting peace between the parties. I encourage
all parties and the international community to take
actions that are helpful in bringing the parties back to a
productive dialogue.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of India.
First, I thank Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland
for his briefing on the implementation of resolution 2334
(2016). I also thank the Permanent Mission of Israel
and the Permanent Observer Mission of Palestine for
their cooperation during India’s two-year tenure in the
Security Council. Likewise, I extend my appreciation
to the Middle East team of the Department of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs for its support to our team.
Resolution 2334 (2016) was adopted by the Council
in order to reaffirm the international community’s
firm commitment to preventing the erosion of the
two-State solution. It calls upon the parties to prevent
all acts of violence against civilians, stresses that
all settlement activities must cease and underscores
the need to exert collective efforts in order to launch
credible negotiations.
We have said this before, and I now say it again — we
remain deeply concerned about the developments in
the West Bank, Jerusalem and Gaza. Violent attacks
and the killing of civilians took many Palestinian
and Israeli lives during the reporting period. Acts of
destruction and provocation are also continuing. India
has consistently advocated against all acts of violence,
and we reiterate our call for immediate steps to ensure
the complete cessation of violence.
We also note with concern — and the representative
of Kenya also mentioned it — the recent report of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) about a humanmade cavity beneath an UNRWA school in Gaza.

22-7584315/16

S/PV.9224

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Unilateral measures that unduly alter the status
quo on the ground and undercut the viability of the
two-State solution must be eschewed. It is extremely
important for the international community and the
Council to send a strong signal against any step that
would prevent the possibility of durable peace between
Israel and Palestine. It is only by realizing the vision
of two States living side by side in peace, security and
mutual recognition and by resolving all final-status
issues permanently through direct negotiations that the
legitimate aspirations of both peoples will be achieved.
The absence of a political process to achieve a
viable two-State solution continues to be the biggest
impediment to the peaceful settlement of the Palestine
question. One cannot overlook the consequences of
the current status quo. Terror attacks, violence and

16/16

19/12/2022

incitement continue to create mutual fear and suspicion
between the parties. That could lead to the perpetuation
of the conflict, which would only increase the number
of casualties on both sides.
Let me therefore conclude by saying that there is
no alternative to the two-State solution to guarantee
lasting peace between Israel and Palestine, and direct
negotiation is the only path that can lead us there. There
cannot be any shortcuts on that count.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.

22-75843
