S/PRST/2000/29

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 September 2000
English
Original: English/French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
Following consultations of the whole of the Council, at the 4201st meeting of
the Security Council, held on 29 September 2000, in connection with the Council’s
consideration of the item entitled “The situation in Burundi”, the President of the
Security Council announced that the following statement on behalf of the Council
would be issued as a Presidential statement:
The Security Council expresses its warm appreciation to former President
Nelson Mandela, in his capacity as Facilitator of the Arusha peace process in
Burundi, for his briefing to the Security Council on 29 September 2000. It
commends him for his tireless efforts in the cause of peace in Burundi, and
encourages him to continue his efforts.
The Security Council welcomes the signature on 28 August 2000 of the
Arusha Peace Accord, as well as the signatures added to that Accord at a
regional summit held on 20 September 2000 in Nairobi, Kenya. It commends
those Burundian parties, including the Government of Burundi, which have
demonstrated their commitment to continued negotiations.
The Security Council stresses that the key to achieving a lasting peace in
Burundi lies with the Burundian parties. It is convinced that compromise is the
only means to reach such agreement, and to this end urges all parties to work
towards resolving remaining differences over the peace accord, and to proceed
to its implementation.
The Security Council reiterates its call, in resolution 1286 (2000) of 19
January 2000, on all parties that remain outside the peace process to cease
hostilities and to participate fully in that process. In this regard, it supports the
call of the Facilitator to the rebel groups to clarify their positions by 20
October 2000.
The Security Council is encouraged by the engagement of regional
States. It urges them to continue their efforts, especially to use their influence
to draw the armed groups firmly into the peace process.
The Security Council condemns all attacks on civilians populations. It
remains deeply concerned at the continuing levels of violence in Burundi, in
particular that perpetrated by rebel groups, despite the call made to them for
direct negotiations with the Burundian Government to secure a lasting
ceasefire agreement.

00-66590 (E) 290900
`````````

S/PRST/2000/29

The Security Council remains deeply concerned at the dire economic,
humanitarian and social conditions in Burundi and calls on all parties to
cooperate fully with non-governmental organizations and international
organizations involved in the implementation of the agreement. It urges all
concerned to ensure that former camp inhabitants are protected, respected and
enabled to return voluntarily and in safety and dignity to their home.
The Security Council notes the holding of a meeting of donor countries in
Brussels on 15 September 2000. It welcomes the call made at that meeting for
progressive resumption of assistance to Burundi, including through
development aid, to alleviate its urgent humanitarian and economic problems
as it makes progress in its internal peace negotiations. In this regard, it also
welcomes the plan to hold a donor conference in Paris in due course.
The Security Council stands ready to consider practical ways in which it
can best support the peace process. To this end, the Council requests the
Secretary-General urgently to report to it on specific actions the United
Nations can undertake in the consolidation of peace and economic recovery in
Burundi.
The Security Council will remain actively seized of the matter.

2
