182

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

eluding the United Nations and the specialized agencies,
and are not always exempt from discrimination when they
are recruited,
Invites Governments in host countries to consider granting, when appropriate and to the extent possible, working
permits for spouses accompanying members of diplomatic
missions or consular posts and staff members of intergovernmental organizations.
97th plenary meeting
/4 December /98/

36/131.

Status of the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women
The General Assembly,
Considering that one of the purposes of the United Nations, as stated in Articles I and 55 of the Charter, is to
promote universal respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms without distinction of any kind, including any
distinction as to sex,
Affirming that women and men should, on a basis of
equality, participate in and contribute to the social, economic and political processes of development and should
share equally in improved conditions of life,
Recalling its resolution 34/ 180 of 18 December 1979, by
which it adopted the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women,
Recalling also its resolution 35/140 of 11 December 1980,
Having taken note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the status of the Convention, 106
1. Notes with appreciation that a significant number of
Member States have already ratified or acceded to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women;
2. Welcomes with great satisfaction the fact that, as a
result, the Convention entered into force on 3 September
1981;
3. Notes further that an important number of Member
States have signed the Convention;
4. Invites all States that have not yet done so to become
parties to the Convention by ratifying or acceding to it;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session a report on the
status of the Convention.
97th plenary meeting
14 December 1981
36/132. International campaign against traffic in drugs
The General Assembly,
Recalling the relevant provisions of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 196 l, as amended by the 1972
Protocol Amending the Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs of 1961, 107 and the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971, 108
Concerned that, despite national, regional and international efforts, the illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances is increasing in many parts of the
world,
Recognizing that many States, including those that are
not producers or significant consumers of illicit narcotics,
are increasingly affected by the international drug traffic,

Bearing in mind that the extensive and increasing abuse
of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances in many countries is directly linked to the volume of the traffic in illicit
drugs into or through such countries.
Convinced that greater control over the production and
distribution of narcotic raw materials and the reduction of
the demand for illicit narcotics are necessary prerequisites
for reducing the illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances,
Aware of the links between drug trafficking and organized
crime, illegal acquisition of firearms, exchange control violations, customs offences, various forms of criminality and
other serious problems of a socio-economic nature,
Affirming the need for increased surveillance and stronger
penalties regarding the use of boats, aircraft and other means
of transport of any type for illicit traffic in drugs,
Acknowledging that constraints of an economic and technical nature are obstacles in many developing countries to
their fight against drug trafficking,
Convinced that any liberalization of national legislation
with regard to the illegal possession of and traffic in narcotics will have a negative effect on international efforts to
control the illicit traffic in narcotic drugs,
Conscious of the fact that drug abuse and the related
trafficking present a threat to the health and social wellbeing of peoples, particularly youth, and endanger the national security, resilience and future of many countries,
Mindful of the important role of an informed public opinion in the struggle against drug trafficking,
Bearing in mind United Nations programmes related to
combating the problem of drug trafficking, in particular the
International Drug Abuse Control Strategy, 109
Acknowledging the need for a comprehensive international campaign against traffic in drugs,
I . Recognizes the need for an effective international
campaign against traffic in drugs in the context of the International Drug Abuse Control Strategy, which would involve activities at the national, regional and international
levels, with particular emphasis on, inter alia:
(a) The enactment of effective national legislation and
the strengthening of existing legislation against drug abuse,
wherever necessary;
(b) The strengthening of regional efforts, with due regard to the specific problems and needs of each region;
(c) A review of the situation and needs of those States
that are primarily transit States;
(d) The provision of technical and financial assistance
to countries, particularly developing countries, whose limited resources are strained by their efforts to implement drug
abuse control programmes;
(e) The strengthening of law enforcement efforts and
increasing co-operation at the regional and international
levels;
(j) A comprehensive information campaign on the hazardous effects of the abuse of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances and the dangers of drug trafficking, and
on the positive achievements in this regard;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the present resolution to Member States, relevant bodies of the
United Nations system and non-governmental organizations
for comments and proposals on an effective international
campaign against traffic in drugs and to report, through the
Economic and Social Council, to the General Assembly at
its thirty-seventh session;

106

A/36/295 and Add. I.
United Nations publication, Sale, No. E.77.Xl.3, p. n.
108
United Nations publication, Sales No. E.78.Xl.3. p. 7.
107

'"" See resolution Jh1 1h8 he low.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "International campaign against traffic in drugs'•.
97th plenary meeting
14 December 1981

36/133.

Alternative approaches and ways and means
within the United Nations system for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights
and fundamental freedoms

The General Assembly,
Recalling the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations to achieve international co-operation in
solving international problems of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character, and in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and for fundamental
freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language
or religion,
Reiterating the importance of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights 110 and of the International Covenants on
Human Rights 111 in promoting respect for and observance
of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Bearing in mind its resolution 321130 of 16 December
1977, in which it decided that the approach to the future
work within the United Nations system with respect to human rights questions should take into account the concepts
set forth in that resolution,
Recognizing that work should continue towards safeguarding human rights in a comprehensive manner to ensure
the dignity of human beings and, in that regard, that active
efforts should be made to implement the concepts set forth
in resolution 32/130, in conformity with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International Covenants
on Human Rights,
Further recognizing that the establishment of the new
international economic order is an essential element for the
effective promotion and the full enjoyment of human rights
and fundamental freedoms for all,
Reiterating its profound conviction that all human rights
and fundamental freedoms are indivisible and interdependent, and that equal attention and urgent consideration
should be given to the implementation, promotion and protection of both civil and political rights, and economic,
social and cultural rights,
Welcoming the decision of the Commission on Human
Rights in its resolution 36 (XXXVII) of 11 March 198 I 112
to set up a working group to study the scope and contents
of the right to development and the most effective means
to ensure the realization, in all countries, of the economic,
social and cultural rights enshrined in various international
instruments, and noting with satisfaction the commencement
of the work of the working group,
Recalling that, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 32/130, all human rights and fundamental freedoms
of the human person and of peoples are inalienable,
Emphasizing that the right to development is an inalienable human right,
Recognizing that international peace and security are essential elements in the full realization of the right to
development,

Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Seminar
on the Relations that Exist between Human Rights, Peace
and Development, organized by the United Nations at its
Headquarters from 3 to 14 August I 981, 1 13
Taking note with satisfaction of the study on present international conditions and human rights, 114 prepared by the
Secretary-General in accordance with the request made by
the General Assembly in paragraph 12 of its resolution
34/46,
Recalling its resolutions 34/46 of 23 November 1979 and
35/174 of 15 December 1980, as well as Commission on
Human Rights resolution 36 (XXXVII),
I. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to continue its current work on the over-all analysis with a view
to further promoting and improving human rights and fundamental freedoms, including the question of the Commission's programme and working methods, and on the overall analysis of the alternative approaches and ways and
means for improving the effective enjoyment of human
rights and fundamental freedoms, in accordance with the
provisions and concepts of General Assembly resolution
32/130, bearing in mind also other relevant texts;
2. Reaffirms that it is of paramount importance for the
promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms that
Member States should undertake specific obligations through
accession to, or ratification of, international instruments in
this field and, consequently, that the standard-setting work
within the United Nations system in the field of human
rights and the universal acceptance and implementation of
the relevant international instruments should be encouraged;
3. Reiterates that the international community should
accord, or continue to accord, priority to the search for
solutions to mass and flagrant violations of human rights
of the peoples and individuals affected by situations such
as those mentioned in paragraph I (e) of resolution 32/ 130,
paying due attention also to other situations of violations
of human rights;
4. Further reiterates that the establishment of the new
international economic order is an essential element for the
effective promotion and the full enjoyment of human rights
and fundamental freedoms for all;
5. Affirms that the efforts of the United Nations and its
Member States to promote and to protect civil and political
rights as well as economic, social and cultural rights should
continue;
6. Reiterates the need to ensure economic and political
stability at the national and international levels for the full
enjoyment, promotion and observance of human rights of
peoples and individuals;
7. Reaffirms that in order to ensure the full enjoyment
of all human rights and complete personal dignity it is necessary to promote the right to education and the right to
work, health and proper nourishment, through adoption of
measures at the national level, including those that provide
for the right of workers to participate in management, as
well as adoption of measures at the international level, including the establishment of the new international economic
order;,
8. Declares that the right to development is an inalienable human right;
9. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to take
the necessary measures to promote the right to development,
taking into account the work of the Working Group set up
under Commission resolution 36 (XXXVII);

110

Resolution 217 A (III).
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
112
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1981,
Supplement No. 5 (E/1981/25 and Corr. I). chap. XXVlll, sect. A.

183

111

"' ST/HR/SER.A/10.
I

14

A/36/462.
