XIV
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE FOURTH COMMITTEE
the authority of the General Assembly, shall assist
the General Assembly in carrying out its functions
with regard to the International Trusteeship System,

431 (V). Report of the Tnisteeship Council
covering its first special session, its second
special session, and its sixth and seventh
sessions

Considering that, under Article 15, paragraph 2, of
the Charter, the General Assembly shall receive and
consider the reports of the Trusteeship Council,

The General Assembly

l. Takes note of the report 1 of the Trusteeship
Council covering its first special session, its second
special session, and its sixth and seventh sessions ;
2. Expresses its confidence that the Trusteeship
Council, in a spirit of co-operation, will continue to
contribute effectively to achieving the high objectives
of the Trusteeship System;
3. Recommends that the Trusteeship Council consider at its next session the comments and suggestions
made during the discussion of the report at the fifth
session of the General Assembly.
316th plenary meeting,
2 December 1950.
432 (V).

Considering further that the present arrangement
of the subject-matter of the report of the Trusteeship
Council to the General Assembly, which conforms
strictly to the various functions of the Council, might
be improved so as to enable the General Assembly
to form a clearer understanding of conditions in the
Trust Territories,
1. Recommends that the Trusteeship Council,
accordingly, in its future reports to the General
Assembly:

(a) Present in separate sections all the relevant data
examined by the Trusteeship Council concerning the
political, economic, social and educational conditions
in each Trust Territory, so that each section may provide the General Assembly with a comprehensive
account of such conditions in each of the above-mentioned fields;

General procedure of the Trusteeship
Council

The General Assembly,

\ h) Include in each such section the observations,
conclusions and recommendations of the Cmmcii on
the topic under review, as well as such relevant observations of its individual members as the Council may
con,.;ider useful :
-

Noting the increase in the volume of work and in
the length of the sessions of the Trusteeship Council,
Considering that, for the more effective discharge
by the Council of its duties, a review of its present
methods of work appears desirable,
Recommends accordingly that the Trusteeship Council undertake a review of its general procedure bearing
in mind the observations and suggestions made during
the discussion of this matter at the fifth session of
the General Assembly, and include the results of such
review in its report to the next regular session of the
General Assembly.
316th plenary meeting,
2 December 1950.
433 (V).

( c) Give in each case in the appropriate section an
account of the manner in which the Administering
Authority has carried out each recommendation of
the General Assembly or of the Trusteeship Council:
( d) State also in the same section its conclusions
on the extent of the action taken by the Administering
:\uthority and on the measures which, in its opinion,
should he adopted in view of those conclusions :
( c) Include, wherever practicable, maps of the vari
ous Trust Territories;
2. Recommends also that the Trusteeship Council,
in preparing its future annual reports, take into consideration documents A/C.4/L.93 and A/C.4/L.94,
the texts of which will be of assistance in making clear
the structure of the annual report of the Trusteeship
Council which the General Assembly hopes will be
adopted.
316th plenary meeting,
2 December 1950.

Annual reports of the Tnisteeship
Council

The General Assembly,
Considering that, under Article 85, paragraph 2, of
the Charter, the Trusteeship Council, operating under
1
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Session, Supplement No. 4.

50
