S/PV.8984

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8984th meeting

Wednesday, 2 March 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Alhefeiti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun/Mr. Sun Zhiqiang
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Ms. Bongo
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Tirumurti
Mr. Flynn
Mrs. Toroitich
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Juul
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2022/64)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-27517 (E)
*2227517*

S/PV.8984

The situation in Afghanistan

Security Council and access to all parts of the country,
assured by the de facto authorities.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like
to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of
the Council, to His Excellency Ambassador Vassily
Nebenzia, Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation, for his service as President of the
Council for the month of February. I am sure I speak
for all members of the Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Nebenzia and his team for
the great diplomatic skill with which they conducted
the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications
for international peace and security (S/2022/64)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Afghanistan,
the Islamic Republic of Iran and Pakistan to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Deborah
Lyons, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan; and Ms. Mariam Safi, Executive
Director, Organization for Policy Research and
Development Studies.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/64, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
I now give the floor to Ms. Lyons.
Ms. Lyons: The United Nations and its implementing
partners have spent the past winter months doing
everything we can to meet the growing humanitarian
needs in Afghanistan. That has been possible due to the
generous support of donors, the ongoing support of the
2/24

02/03/2022

As the winter season comes to an end, we believe
that we have perhaps averted our worst fears of famine
and widespread starvation. Our humanitarian agencies
were able to reach nearly 20 million people with some
form of assistance in 397 out of Afghanistan’s 401
districts. That is the first time we have achieved that
degree of reach and coverage in more than two decades.
Providing short-term relief, however, is not the same as
giving hope or preparing a strong foundation for Afghan
self-reliance. Let us be realistic: what we have done has
been only to buy a little time. It is imperative that we
not find ourselves six months from now in the situation
we faced six months ago, with millions of Afghans
facing another winter of starvation and the only tool
at our disposal being expensive and unsustainable
humanitarian handouts.
It is now most urgent to address Afghanistan’s
economy. I would therefore like to take a moment to
highlight some of the key challenges. I want to start
by emphasizing that we are nearing a tipping point
that will see more businesses close and more people
unemployed and falling into poverty. It is approaching
a point of irreversibility. We welcome the many
recent General Licences issued by the United States
Treasury — and most particularly, the recent General
Licence 20, which is aimed at facilitating commercial
and financial activity and allowing work with all
governing institutions, which is a huge step forward,
albeit with some restrictions with regard to sanctioned
individuals.
But other challenges to reviving the economy
remain. These include the collapse of demand, owing
to the cessation of all development assistance — all
development assistance — restrictions on international
payments, lack of access to hard currency reserves,
lack of liquidity, and constraints on the Central Bank to
carry out some of its core functions.
To date, the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) has taken all conceivable
measures to inject liquidity into the economy, including
the physical import of cash. UNAMA, together with
United Nations partners and the World Bank, is also
seeking to establish — on a temporary basis, I would
emphasize — a humanitarian exchange facility to allow
a scale-up in humanitarian programming, which, as
Council members know, is badly needed in this coming
22-27517

02/03/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

year, and will provide access to United States dollars
to legitimate business to enable them to import goods
and allow the supply chain to function once again. We
will continue to engage with the Central Bank and the
de facto authorities on this facility, and, of course, with
Member States on further support to the all-important
banking sector.
When UNAMA’s mandate was rolled over for six
months in September 2021, it was still too early for
the international community — indeed, perhaps, even
this Chamber — to react to the Taliban’s seizure of
power. Six months of indecision, marked by continued
sanctions, albeit with some relief, and unstructured
political engagement, are eroding vital social and
economic coping systems and pushing the population
into greater uncertainty.
Let me make clear that we do not believe that we
can truly assist the Afghan people without working
with the de facto authorities. This must be difficult for
some to accept, but it is essential for the future. We
must acknowledge, however, that, as we move forward,
there remains an enduring distrust between the Taliban
and much of the international community and, yes,
even countries of the region, including Afghanistan’s
neighbours. The Taliban feel misunderstood and
complain to us that our reports do not reflect the reality
as they see it. They tell me that we underappreciate
their achievements and that we exaggerate the
problems — problems that they acknowledge, I must
say, and that they claim they are trying to solve.
Above all, the Taliban have told us that they should
receive greater acknowledgement for the security
that prevails in Afghanistan. In the six months since
15 August, there has been a 78 per cent decline in
civilian casualties as a result of the reduction of the
conflict. They also note that their amnesty declaration
has been honoured for the most part and that violations
are not State-sanctioned and that those violators will be
punished. Of course, security problems remain, and I
would like to note the tragic and senseless killing last
week of eight polio vaccinators in northern Afghanistan,
which was particularly unfortunate, given the progress
that we have been making with the de facto authorities
on expanding the polio programme. Of course, our
sympathy is with the families of the vaccinators.
The Taliban also highlight progress on the economic
front, including strong revenues despite decreased
economic activity, reduced Government corruption and

S/PV. 8984

a budget that does not require donor resources — again,
one of the first in several decades. They also point to
public universities being reopened and their desire to
see Afghans — all boys and all girls — educated to a
high international standard. On this issue, the Minister
of Education recently stated that the plan to reopen
schools for girls and boys had been finalized and is now
awaiting Cabinet approval. We all anticipate with great
hope and determination the reopening of the schools on
22 March.
In addition, yesterday, on the anniversary of the
signing of the Doha agreement some two years ago,
the Taliban reiterated their declared commitment to
ensuring that Afghanistan does not become a threat
to any country and expressed their desire for good
relations with all States and international organizations.
This complements another important point made to me
recently by the de facto Foreign Minister, namely, that
their diplomatic policy is to ensure that Afghanistan also
does not become an arena of competition between other
Powers or countries. Most importantly, they complain
that these positive achievements are being undermined
by an undeclared economic war against them by the
international community that has greatly affected
them and resulted in a choking of their economy. They
also note that it is exacerbating the suffering of the
population. This clash of perspectives forms the basis
of a serious gulf and distrust that must be addressed,
which is what UNAMA has been doing these past six
months, and what we hope the Council will be giving us
a mandate to continue to do in the year ahead, namely,
to bridge this gulf for the betterment of all Afghans.
In response everything I mentioned, we have
articulated to the Taliban the concerns of the
international community, and most notably the
instructions from this Chamber. As UNAMA, we must
continue to report on what we see, even as we continue
to build an understanding and a working relationship
with the de facto authorities. We are concerned
by restrictions on women’s and girls’ fundamental
rights, of course, by extrajudicial killings, enforced
disappearances and arbitrary detentions, and by failure
to respect minorities or uphold freedoms of assembly
and expression.
We were extremely vocal on the need to release
the disappeared women protesters and their family
members last month, and indeed they were released.
However, another group of women was arbitrarily
arrested. Nevertheless, before coming into the Chamber

22-275173/24

S/PV.8984

The situation in Afghanistan

this morning, we received news from Kabul that that
group has also been released. Naturally, our team in
Kabul is working to verify those reports, and I will
be following up with the de facto authorities when I
return. But those releases continue to be good news.
We continue to work with the de facto authorities on
investigative processes, protocols, procedures and due
diligence that must be put in place for all these cases.
Recent sweeping house-to-house searches in Kabul,
carried out by the main security institutions ostensibly
as a crime-fighting measure, are also of concern. I will
raise this with the de facto authorities as part of our
ongoing collaboration on such cases. I am confident
that our communications on these issues will continue
to improve.
Afghanistan indeed presents a complicated
situation, with positive and negative trends occurring
simultaneously. UNAMA has so far been able to
address many issues through constructive engagement
and cooperation with the de facto authorities, both
on humanitarian delivery as well as on some of the
sensitive issues that I just noted. We believe, as a
political mission, that we can do much more to work
with the de facto authorities on the main issues facing
Afghan society.
But a political mission implies a political purpose.
That purpose, implied in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2022/64), is ultimately to see Afghanistan, one of
the original Members of the United Nations, rejoin the
Organization as a Member in good standing, benefit
from the resources of the international community and
contribute to the global discussion on issues of common
concern. Naturally, working with the de facto authority
in no way means condoning everything that it does. But
this will give us the opportunity, on behalf of all Council
members and the rest of the international community,
to help shape a future for the people of Afghanistan,
free of conflict and where they can peacefully pursue
their quest for prosperity, participation and respect for
their rights.
The Secretary-General, in his report to the Security
Council, notes that the situation ahead is uncertain.
He has therefore proposed a one-year mandate, after
which we can evaluate the results of a sustained
political engagement.
The mandate the Security Council adopts for
UNAMA will send a signal from the international
community to the Afghan people that they have not
4/24

02/03/2022

been forgotten, and to the Taliban de facto authorities
that the world does not desire future conflict in
Afghanistan, but that it will need to recognize basic
standards of global citizenship in order to be accepted
by the international community.
If UNAMA is appropriately equipped and
empowered by the Security Council, a busy but
worthwhile agenda awaits us.
First, we must address the economic crisis that I
mentioned earlier.
Secondly, we must work with the Taliban de facto
authorities to ensure strong, vital, high-level education
for all girls and boys to help the country move forward.
Thirdly, we must continue supporting respect for
internationally recognized of human rights.
Fourthly, we must engage in a discussion about
political inclusion to ensure that the concerns of all
Afghans in their very rich diversity are in fact reflected
in decision-making.
Fifthly, we must support a structured policy
dialogue with the de facto authorities that supports
this process of securing domestic legitimacy, as well as
addresses the key concerns of members of the Security
Council, namely, counter-narcotics, counter-terrorism
and regional security.
Combined, the elements I just mentioned will
allow us to work with the de facto authorities and other
Afghans, and indeed all Council members, to establish
a pathway for the Afghan State to rejoin the larger
international community.
The international community, represented by
the 15 countries in the Council Chamber, must
make a choice. The Security Council has the lead
decision-making power. Its deliberations and decisions
on the mandate in the coming weeks have immense
consequences. Yes, they will resonate across the region
and the world but, more important, they will be felt in
every village in Afghanistan.
I would like to make a personal plea to the Security
Council. Those of us who work for the Council stand
in awe and admiration of the work that the Security
Council does, of the weight of the world that Council
members carry on their collective shoulders and in
their collective hearts. As the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, I recognize how busy Council
members’ schedules are and the many issues that they
22-27517

02/03/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

are addressing, and even the natural internal tensions
that happen within any organization. But I would
be remiss if I did not remind Council members that
they are about to approach a critical moment in their
relationship with Afghanistan. The Security Council
has the opportunity, in the next two weeks, to develop
and design a much-needed, relevant and solid political
mission that will help to build back the country,
that will help to build the capacity, that will help to
attract back the all-important development dollars and
will avoid the constant collapse of Afghanistan into
a humanitarian crisis. Have not the Afghan people
suffered enough? They will need Council members’
collective commitment to move the country forward in
a political mission supporting all Afghans. Rebuilding
is what political missions do, in concert with the
authorities and the citizens of the country. I implore the
Security Council to give us the strong, solid mandate
that will be required. Without it, I fear for the future.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Ms. Lyons
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Safi.
Ms. Safi: I thank the members of the Security
Council for this opportunity to address them on
the situation in Afghanistan. I am Mariam Safi, an
Afghan-Canadian with 15 years of experience working
as a researcher and peacebuilding practitioner in
Afghanistan.
Before I begin my briefing today, I want to express
my solidarity with the people of Ukraine. As a people
that have suffered conflict for decades, Afghans
understand their pain. And I salute their resolve.
Today I brought with me a piece of Afghanistan — a
bit of soil that I have kept with me from my first visit in
2007. To me, every grain represents an Afghan woman,
man and child — their aspirations, their courage and
their sacrifices. Let this soil remind Council members
that Afghanistan is more than images on television
or numbers on a page. It is the tens of thousands of
Afghans killed so far; it is the Hazaras and other ethnic
groups who continue to be persecuted — the 1 million
children at risk of malnutrition, the 24 million people
in need of humanitarian assistance and the dozens
of women protesters, civil society and journalists
who have been detained, disappeared or killed since
15 August. Council members’ decision in this Chamber
affects nearly 40 million lives.

S/PV. 8984

My statement today will focus on priorities for the
new mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), the humanitarian crisis and
the political path forward for Afghanistan.
As
Secretary-General
Guterres
remarked,
Afghanistan is hanging by a thread. I would add that
so is the credibility of the United Nations, the Security
Council and the international community. Peacebuilding
in Afghanistan has been intrusive, externally driven,
top-down and technocratic for two decades. Afghanistan
has been exploited by powerful countries for their own
ends. Instead of supporting Afghans in shaping their
own destiny, the international community’s approach
was short-sighted and undermined local autonomy.
That is why we are here today. Since August, five
Afghan women have briefed the Security Council.
They told the Council to stand strong on human rights
and inclusive governance, and they warned members of
the consequences should they fail to do so. Today it is in
the Council’s power to make decisions that could uplift
the people of Afghanistan, the region and the world,
breaking the cycle of conflict and violence. But it must
act now.
As the Council is well aware, there has been a rapid
deterioration of women’s rights since the Taliban seized
power. Members have heard from multiple Afghan
women and the United Nations about restrictions on
women’s movement, dress, access to education and
work. While the Taliban has announced the lifting of
some of those restrictions, it remains to be seen whether
it will follow through on those commitments.
Women’s access to justice and due process has been
severely curtailed due to the absence of an independent,
functioning judicial system. Freedom of expression,
along with civic space, has almost entirely disappeared.
Nearly 70 per cent of media outlets have closed, and
72 per cent of the journalists who have lost their jobs
are women. The repression of women’s rights appears
to be central to the Taliban’s vision for Afghanistan.
That is why, despite the life and death choices they face,
women continue to protest across the country. Those
are home-grown movements that have persisted despite
the Taliban’s systematic efforts to harm, detain and
even force them into making fake confessions.
As we speak, the Taliban is searching homes
and offices in Kabul, spreading fear among ordinary
Afghans. That campaign of intimidation should signal
to the international community, particularly those who

22-275175/24

S/PV.8984

The situation in Afghanistan

seek to engage the Taliban, that it should be judged
by its actions and not its words. Engagement without
conditions is complicity. The Taliban is willing to
silence those who criticize them. The international
community must therefore be clear that it is watching.
That is why it is essential for UNAMA to have a
robust mandate to monitor and report on human rights
and to support the implementation of Afghanistan’s
international obligations. The Special Rapporteur on
the situation of human rights in Afghanistan, while
also critical, cannot replace UNAMA or the local
infrastructure that existed before August.
Without the free functioning of the media
and civil society and without the scrutiny of the
international community, neither the Taliban’s abuses
nor its commitments can be monitored. UNAMA must
therefore have the resources and capacity to extend
its reach and support local organizations to carry out
their human rights work. Most important, the Security
Council must ensure that UNAMA prioritizes gender
equality and the rights of women in terms of both their
protection and their participation. The Council will
have no one to protect unless it also advocates for the
active participation of women in the public and political
life of their country.
Therefore, I implore the Security Council to ensure
that UNAMA has an explicit mandate to support the
full, safe, equal and meaningful participation of women
across all processes and regularly consults with women
and civil society more broadly, including persons
identifying as lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer
and others (LGBTQI+), young people, victims and all
ethnic and religious communities.
Today nearly 60 per cent of Afghans are in need of
humanitarian assistance, and an estimated $4.4 billion
is required to provide it. Afghan women’s organizations
are calling for at least 40 per cent of those funds to
be dedicated to women, girls and female-headed
households and for a significant increase in funding to
local humanitarian organizations. Moreover, women’s
participation in delivering humanitarian assistance is
essential. The humanitarian response must be carried
out in partnership with Afghan civil society, which, if
given the resources, is ready to support. It is time for
the international community to return ownership of
those processes to Afghans.
While humanitarian assistance is critical, it
cannot take the place of a strong national economy.
6/24

02/03/2022

Development aid is necessary to prevent the collapse of
the banking system and to allow ordinary Afghans and
local organizations access to much-needed resources.
Let me be clear: the recent decision of the United
States to split $7 billion of Afghanistan’s frozen assets
and keep them from the Afghan people is nothing short
of theft. Those funds belong to Afghans and must be
returned to them. In order to avoid benefitting the
Taliban, the funds can be gradually released to the
Central Bank, which should remain independent and
managed by a neutral technical team of Afghans.
Moreover, since taking power, the Taliban has been
collecting sufficient revenues, yet civil servants are
being paid irregularly. Where is that revenue going? We
need transparency on how those funds are being spent,
as well as accountability for any additional funds going
into the country.
That brings me to my final point. It has been six
months, and the Taliban has yet to articulate its vision
for a political path forward. And neither have they
fulfilled their assurances of security. On the contrary,
the Taliban has maintained close ties with foreign
terrorist fighters, mainly through the Haqqani Network
and Al-Qaida. The Islamic State in Iraq and the ShamKhorasan Province has expanded its reach into the
country, and the Taliban has created battalions of suicide
attackers to integrate into its own defence forces.
Being in a position of power requires being able
to govern and to do so responsibly. It means being
accountable to the people you serve and having the
wisdom to accept should they disagree with you.
There are no two ways about it. The Taliban want an
Islamic emirate, a form of Government where power is
consolidated in a leader selected by a council — whereas
in the past 20 years Afghans have experienced life
under a democracy, where citizens choose their leaders
through elections.
Afghans must have a means to freely express their
views, and all Afghans must be represented in any future
Government. The international community can play
an important role in facilitating discussions between
Afghans and the Taliban, as well as in monitoring
progress towards that goal. But to do so effectively, it
must unite and set clear benchmarks on fundamental
issues such as women’s rights, freedom of the press,
inclusive governance and the equal representation
of men, women, young people, civil society, victims
and LGBTQI+ individuals from all ethnic and
22-27517

02/03/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

religious communities, which can then be supported
and monitored through UNAMA. The international
community must be willing to withhold its support if
those benchmarks are not met.

S/PV. 8984

rights of women and girls are inextricably linked to
Afghanistan’s stability and prosperity.

I believe the United Nations is fit to serve the
Afghan people if it has the courage to uphold its own
values, to promote peace and to protect the human
rights of all Afghans, including women, even when it
is difficult. The United Nations can achieve that only if
the Security Council gives it a strong mandate and the
support to do so.

To build a stable, resilient and self-reliant country,
girls and boys must have equal access to education,
and both women and men must be able to contribute to
all sectors of Afghan society, including policymaking.
At this critical point, the decisions of the de facto
authorities will have immense impact on both the
immediate humanitarian situation and the long-term
efforts to prevent Afghanistan from remaining in a
perpetual humanitarian and economic crisis.

For years, I held on to this bit of soil to remind me of
where I started. While so much has changed, this soil,
like the will of the Afghan people, has endured. To my
fellow Afghans, let this soil be proof of our resilience
and a banner of our hope.

The international community must do its utmost to
assist the people of Afghanistan. Despite our concerns,
we must engage and challenge the de facto authorities to
alleviate the humanitarian emergency, promote human
rights issues and counter international terrorism.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Ms. Safi
for her briefing.

The United Nations must be part of the solution
in Afghanistan. For that, we need a continued, robust
United Nations presence. As we look ahead to the
renewal of the mandate, it will be important to maintain
the flexibility of the current mandate of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
while adjusting to the new realities on the ground.
We believe that the recommendations set out in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/64) provide a good
foundation in that regard.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I congratulate the United Arab
Emirates on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of March. Allow me first to thank
Special Representative Deborah Lyons and Ms. Mariam
Safi for their updates and insights.
After six months of Taliban rule, Afghanistan
is facing one of the world’s most rapidly growing
humanitarian crises. It is a disaster resulting from
many years of conflict, climate change, drought and
economic collapse. Half of the population now faces
acute hunger. More than 9 million people are displaced,
millions of children are out of school, the health system
is overburdened and women and girls in particular
lack access to critical health services. Humanitarian
and development assistance from the international
community will not be sufficient to respond to the
challenges facing Afghanistan. The de facto authorities
must recognize and fulfil their responsibilities to meet
the needs of the Afghan people.
We also remain deeply concerned about the
continuing level of violence, abuses of power and the
unpredictable security situation in Afghanistan. The de
facto authorities must heed the appeals of the Afghan
people and the international community. Respect for the
rule of law and human rights and a more representative
Government are necessary for sustainable peace
and for national and international legitimacy. The

The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and her team need a strong mandate to promote
political dialogue and engage with the Taliban, monitor
and report on human rights and facilitate the provision of
humanitarian and basic human needs. As penholder on
Afghanistan and the UNAMA mandate resolution, we
appreciate the constructive engagement of all Council
members in the ongoing negotiations and look forward
to the renewal of a strong mandate by 17 March.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): Allow me to congratulate
you, Madam President, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. You have our full
support. I thank Special Representative Deborah Lyons
for her briefing. I also thank Ms. Mariam Safi for her
insights on the current situation.
As an immediate neighbour with strong linkages
to the Afghan people, we are concerned about the
recent developments in Afghanistan, especially
the deteriorating humanitarian situation. India
supported resolution 2615 (2021), which provided for
humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan while ensuring

22-275177/24

S/PV.8984

The situation in Afghanistan

that the Security Council would continue to exercise
its oversight to guard against any possible diversion of
funds and misuse of exemptions from sanctions.
We hope that the humanitarian carveouts of that
resolution will be fully utilized by United Nations
agencies and their aid partners. In that context, we
reiterate that humanitarian assistance should be
based on the principles of neutrality, impartiality and
independence. The disbursement of humanitarian aid
should be non-discriminatory and accessible to all,
irrespective of ethnicity, religion or political belief. In
particular, assistance should reach the most vulnerable
first, including women, children and minorities.
Over the past several months, India has vastly
scaled up humanitarian assistance to the people of
Afghanistan. To tide over the dire food insecurity
situation, we recently committed 50,000 tons of wheat,
2,500 of which are being distributed through the World
Food Programme. We have also delivered 500,000 doses
of coronavirus disease vaccines, 13 tons of essential
life-saving medicines, as well as winter clothing,
which are being distributed through the World Health
Organization and Indira Gandhi Children’s Hospital
in Kabul.
As a contiguous neighbour and long-standing
partner of Afghanistan, India has a direct interest
in ensuring the return of peace and stability. Our
approach to Afghanistan, as always, will be guided by
our historical friendship and our special relationship
with the people of Afghanistan.
The expectations of the international community
on the way forward in Afghanistan have been clearly set
forth in resolution 2593 (2021). The expectations of the
international community, as outlined in the resolution,
must be adequately reflected in the upcoming mandate.
Those relate to ensuring that the territory of Afghanistan
is not used to launch terrorist attacks against other
countries, overseeing the formation of a truly inclusive
and representative Government, combating terrorism
and drug trafficking and preserving the rights of
women, children and minorities. That is essential.
Terrorism continues to pose a serious threat to
Afghanistan and the region. There are serious concerns
about the continued presence of Al-Qaida and the
increase in recruitment to the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant-Khorasan Province. We know from
the reports of the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team that all countries of the region,
8/24

02/03/2022

especially the Central Asian countries, share grave
concerns about the possibility of terrorism from
Afghanistan affecting their own security. In that
regard, the Security Council has noted the commitment
of the Taliban not to allow the use of the Afghan soil
for terrorism, including by terrorists and terrorist
groups designated under resolution 1267 (1999). We
need to see concrete progress in ensuring that such
proscribed terrorists, entities or their aliases do not get
any support, tacit or direct, either from Afghan soil or
from the terror sanctuaries based in the region.
India calls for an inclusive dispensation in
Afghanistan that represents all segments of Afghan
society, especially women. A broad-based, inclusive
and representative formation is necessary for both
domestic and international engagement.
Peace and security in Afghanistan is a critical
imperative that all of us need to collectively strive for.
The recent developments in Afghanistan will have a
significant impact on the neighbouring countries and
the wider region. We have seen the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2022/64) on his outlook for the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
We will be working constructively with other members
of the Council to ensure that UNAMA’s new mandate
focuses on the welfare, well-being and expectations
of the Afghan people. The ultimate objective for us is
to ensure peace and stability, with the interests of the
Afghan people at its core.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I wish the United
Arab Emirates all the best during its term in the
presidency of the Security Council. It can count on
our support.
I thank Ms. Lyons and Ms. Safi for their clear and
informative briefings. My delegation welcomes the
delegations of Afghanistan, the Islamic Republic of
Iran and Pakistan.
This month, the Security Council will face the
task of renewing the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). More
than six months after the fall of Kabul, it is time to
adjust the United Nations response to the reality on
the ground. It is high time, as members of the Council
previously stated, to judge the de facto authorities not
by their words, but by their actions.
The implementation of the recommendations of the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/64) is an important
22-27517

02/03/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

step forward. Brazil supports their incorporation
into the future UNAMA mandate, with a particular
emphasis on the following aspects.
First, we must strengthen the protection of
human rights. Reports of violations committed by
forces associated with the new regime, including
arbitrary arrests, kidnappings, extrajudicial killings
and restrictions on the freedom of expression, are
unacceptable. UNAMA must be able to monitor such
episodes and help the consolidation of the rule of law
in Afghanistan.
Secondly, we must support the rights of women and
girls. Women activists continue to suffer persecution,
and their presence in public life and the labour market
is limited. The de facto authorities should be constantly
reminded of their commitments under the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women and other international instruments.
Thirdly, we must uphold the protection of children.
The international community must raise its voice
against practices such as the recruitment of children
by armed groups, the closing of schools for girls and
the increase in deaths resulting from the presence of
landmines and other explosive devices.
The humanitarian situation in Afghanistan
continues to deteriorate. We cannot remain indifferent
to the drama of 9 million people threatened by hunger.
Brazil understands that the Afghan people must
have access to their assets held abroad and that those
resources should not be used without regard for Afghan
will, priorities and needs.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): Let
me start by congratulating the United Arab Emirates
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and thanking Russia for its tremendous
work as President last month. I also thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Lyons and
Ms. Safi for their briefings just delivered.
As is often said, if winter comes, can spring be
far behind? This cold winter is now coming to an end.
However, for the Afghan people, hunger and cold have
not yet receded, and hope and spring still seem far
away. As data from the World Food Programme show,
22.8 million Afghans face severe food insecurity, and
3.2 million children under 5 years of age are severely
malnourished. Afghanistan is facing an avalanche of
hunger and poverty. The briefing delivered by Special

S/PV. 8984

Representative Lyons also illustrates the severity of the
Afghan humanitarian situation.
At this critical juncture, helping Afghanistan to
ease its humanitarian crisis and stabilize the economy
should be the most important and urgent priority.
The international community, especially major donor
countries, should increase their assistance. There
should not be any political conditions attached to
humanitarian aid under any circumstances. At the same
time, it is important to recognize that humanitarian aid
alone is far from sufficient to resolve the problem. The
international community should actively inject liquidity
into Afghanistan and help the country to restore its
domestic market and economic system, reintegrate into
regional and international economic cooperation and
gradually embark on the path of peaceful development.
Any economic blockade or unilateral sanctions against
Afghanistan should immediately be stopped.
In such a grim humanitarian and economic situation,
last month the United States Government decided to
divert the frozen $7 billion worth of Afghan assets for
other purposes, triggering protests and demonstrations
in many parts of Afghanistan. Those assets belong
to the Afghan people and the sovereign State of
Afghanistan. The practice of arbitrarily handling other
countries’ overseas assets under domestic law has
no precedent. It is a breach of Afghanistan’s national
sovereignty and property and is a serious contravention
of international law.
Those assets are the only few available assets owned
by Afghanistan and are crucial to the stable order and
development of the country. For the Afghan people,
those assets are their life-saving money and hope for
survival. When the Afghan people need it the most, the
ruthless freezing and misappropriation of those assets
are a secondary injury to them and are completely
against the true spirit of morality and justice. If there is
genuine sincerity about supporting the Afghan people,
there could definitely have been more and better ways
to return those assets.
As the United States executive order indicates, some
of those assets were unfrozen because the humanitarian
and potential economic crisis in Afghanistan poses a
major threat to the national security and foreign policy
of the United States. Supporting the Afghan people is
clearly not the real motive. Returning other people’s
money in full is not a virtue of generosity, but a matter
of course. Paying back half and deducting half of other

22-275179/24

S/PV.8984

The situation in Afghanistan

people’s money is not gifting, but stealing. That is the
simplest truth. What the United States did is neither
legal and reasonable or humane. China once again
calls on the relevant countries to immediately and
unconditionally return those assets in full to the Afghan
people and not to make matters worse, let alone apply
double standards with regard to humanitarian issues.
Afghanistan has been experiencing many trials and
tribulations and is at a critical stage of reconstruction. We
have seen that Afghanistan is working hard to improve
its political structure, restore order in production
and life and actively conduct foreign exchanges and
cooperation. An increasing number of countries are
engaging with the interim Afghan Government in
various forms, which is a good trend. The international
community should continue to adhere to the Afghan-led
and Afghan-owned principle, step up engagement with
the Afghan Taliban through an equitable, rational and
pragmatic approach and patiently guide it to respond to
the expectations of the international community. Only
in that way can Afghanistan gradually achieve lasting,
peace and stability and eliminate the breeding ground
for terrorism, and Afghan women and children can
thereby achieve better development.
China supports the United Nations continuing to
play an important role in assisting with Afghanistan’s
peaceful reconstruction. The Security Council will
discuss the next phase of the mandate renewal of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) this month. China believes that UNAMA’s
next mandate should be realistic, feasible and in line
with the current situation and actual needs. It should
focus on key priorities, appropriately control the scope
and not try to do everything. The top priority is to push
the international community to increase assistance to
Afghanistan, support the country’s efforts to improve
people’s lives, maintain stability, restore socioeconomic
development and better integrate into the greater
international community.
The United Nations work in Afghanistan goes
hand in hand with the cooperation of the ruling Afghan
authorities. Therefore, it is important to take into
account their reasonable views and concerns to pave
the way for cooperation between the two sides. China
will remain closely engaged with Council members
to make the proper arrangements for the extension of
the mandate.
10/24

02/03/2022

As a friendly neighbour of Afghanistan, China has
always been committed to supporting the country’s
peace, stability and development. China will work
closely with countries in the region and make goodneighbourly contributions to Afghanistan’s longterm peace and stability through mechanisms such as
the Foreign Minister’s meeting on the Afghan issue
among the countries neighbouring Afghanistan. We
will also actively participate in various Afghan-related
multilateral mechanisms, promote coordinated actions
by all parties to create synergies and help Afghanistan
embark upon a path of sound development.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I join my colleagues in wishing you, Madam
President, every success for your presidency of the
Security Council for the month of March. Know
that you have our full support. I would like to thank
Deborah Lyons for her briefing and assure her of our
unwavering support in all her work. I would also like
to commend Mariam Safi for her first-hand account,
which was extremely powerful, and I thank her for that
and commend her courage.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) fulfils an essential mission.
We want to see the United Nations maintain a strong
presence in Afghanistan, as the Secretary-General
has recommended.
We heard once again from Ms. Lyons that the people
of Afghanistan face many significant challenges. Every
day, all Afghans, especially women and children,
struggle to survive and have their rights upheld. The
right to security; to unconditional freedom of movement,
above all for women and girls; to education; to exercise a
profession; to the freedom of expression and for respect
for the rights of minorities are not optional. Since taking
power by force, and contrary to their commitments, the
Taliban has increased abuses and violations of rights,
including the most fundamental.
Furthermore, we note that the Taliban is among the
persistent violators on the infamous list in the reports of
the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict.
We must therefore support a robust monitoring and
evaluation component of the human rights situation
during the next UNAMA mandate, including to enable
upholding women’s rights and the protection of children.
In the same way, it is imperative that, in carrying out
its political support mission, UNAMA work with the
Taliban for the establishment of a Government that is
22-27517

02/03/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

representative, inclusive and legitimate in the eyes of
the Afghan population.
Faced with a constantly deteriorating disastrous
humanitarian situation, UNAMA must also maintain
its role as coordinator of humanitarian aid so that the
latter can be delivered to all those in need in all of
Afghanistan. We will remain vigilant in ensuring that
UNAMA prevents any misappropriation of such aid.
We are counting on the United Nations to put in place
a robust monitoring mechanism, including through the
Risk Management Unit, to that end.
In terms of security, everyone can see the shortfalls
of the Taliban’s record. We have listened to their
promises. We are judging — and will judge them — on
to their actions. They must prioritize cutting all ties,
regardless of their nature, with terrorist groups, in
particular Al-Qaida and its regional affiliate, Al-Qaida
in the Indian Subcontinent. The latest report of the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
under the aegis of the Committees established pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999) and 1988 (2011) indicates
that the Taliban has so far taken no steps to limit the
activities of terrorist groups in Afghanistan and that the
latter have enjoyed unparalleled freedom that has not
been seen in many years.
The report shows that, far from having severed its
ties with Al-Qaeda, the Taliban, which has integrated
members of the terrorist organization into its own
interim Government, risk turning Afghanistan once
again into a sanctuary for the group and its affiliates. It
is therefore crucial that the Monitoring Team be able to
continue its work independently and in complete safety,
including by enabling the Team’s work on the ground.
Similarly, UNAMA will need to work together with the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to combat
drug production and trafficking in Afghanistan.
The Taliban must demonstrate that it has changed
and that it is ready to join the international community.
It must assume its responsibilities. In that context, the
assessment and dialogue role of UNAMA will be crucial
to retaining Afghanistan in the concert of nations. The
Council can count on France’s resolve and commitment
side by side with the Afghan people.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): Let me join others
in wishing you, Madam President, and your team all
the best for your presidency. Let me also thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Lyons and
Ms. Mariam Safi for their powerful sobering briefings.

S/PV. 8984

The situation in Afghanistan remains of deep
concern. Afghanistan is facing the world’s most severe
food security crisis, and more than half the population
is in need of emergency assistance. The risks of a
humanitarian catastrophe remain real, and urgent action
is needed to avert economic collapse. The work of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and United Nations leadership in leading
an adequately resourced, prioritized and coordinated
international response remain absolutely crucial.
The United Kingdom remains one of the foremost
supporters of the humanitarian response. United
Kingdom aid to Afghanistan has already doubled this
year, to $381 million. The United Kingdom has also
agreed to co-host a pledging conference on 31 March
to raise funds for the United Nations humanitarian
response plan. I urge all Member States to step up
their support.
However, humanitarian assistance can go only
so far. We welcome the United Nations Transitional
Engagement Framework for Afghanistan, a whole-ofUnited Nations system approach to provision of
life-saving assistance and support for basic human
needs. The international community must act quickly
to find creative solutions to address the liquidity crisis
and establish principles and mechanisms for providing
assistance beyond basic humanitarian aid.
For its part, the Taliban needs to address the
international community’s concerns, as we set out in
resolution 2596 (2021). We are particularly concerned
by the reports of increased reprisals against former
security forces and Government officials, as well as
attacks against minority groups and detentions of civil
society representatives. The recent arrests of female
activists, and members of their families, for protesting
peacefully in support of women’s rights were especially
worrisome, as were announcements that appear to
further restrict women’s ability to travel.
In the past few weeks in certain provinces, some
women have been able to return to university, and the
Taliban has made important public commitments that
all girls will be able to return to secondary school at
the end of March, when schools reopen following the
winter break. Educated healthy women and girls will
contribute to peace, stability and development, and we
will be watching closely to see that the Taliban meets
its commitments.

22-2751711/24

S/PV.8984

The situation in Afghanistan

02/03/2022

It is vital that we in the Security Council continue
to speak with one voice in support of the United Nations
work in the months ahead, and we look forward to
discussions on the upcoming UNAMA mandate renewal.
The United Kingdom fully supports an empowered and
effective United Nations mission responsible for the
delivery of the humanitarian response, monitoring and
advocating for the freedoms and rights of all Afghans
and promoting stability. We hope that all members of
the Security Council will unite behind this in support
of the people of Afghanistan

of us alone can provide. That is why we urge donors
to contribute generously to those efforts during the
pledging summit that Germany, the United Kingdom
and the United Nations will co-host later this month.
That is also why we have worked with the World Bank
and the Asian Development Bank to transfer hundreds of
millions of dollars out of their Afghanistan-related funds
to support the work of United Nations organizations in
Afghanistan. We expect the multilateral development
banks to issue more support to those lines of efforts in
the coming months.

Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank Special Representative Lyons for her briefing. I
also thank her team at the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for its work and
commitment. I thank Ms. Safi for her intervention
and perspective.

I would like to express my sorrow for the polio
workers who were killed last week in Afghanistan while
carrying out their life-saving work. We unequivocally
condemn those horrific attacks and extend our deepest
condolences to the families, friends and colleagues of
those killed. We are further saddened by the fact that
children in Kunduz and Takhar provinces will suffer
without access to the critical services those workers
hope to provide.

We cannot forget that Afghanistan’s humanitarian
crisis is inextricable from the broader economic
challenges facing the country as a result of the Taliban’s
decision to seek power by force rather than through
negotiation. The United States has taken several
concrete measures to help address those challenges in
recent weeks. On 11 February, President Biden signed
an executive order on protecting certain Afghan central
bank assets held in the United States and simultaneously
requested relief from the court to make them available
for the benefit of the Afghan people. Certainly, no
decision has been made about how those protected
funds will eventually be used to benefit the Afghan
people, but any disposition of those funds will have to
be made through close and meaningful consultations
with a wide variety of stakeholders, including Afghan
economic and technical experts, civil society and
international organizations, on how those funds can
be used most effectively to address Afghanistan’s
economic and humanitarian needs.

As the Council considers how to approach the
renewal of UNAMA’s mandate, the United States
underscores its strong support for UNAMA’s good
offices, human rights monitoring reporting functions,
its humanitarian coordination role, child and civilian
protection activities and work to promote the full, equal
and meaningful participation of women in all aspects of
public life. The need for the international community
to support and adequately resource the humanitarian
efforts of the United Nations also remains of the
utmost urgency.

Our courts will also have to determine how
much, if any, of the remainder of the assets held in the
United States should, under United States law, go to
the victims of terrorism who hold judgments against
the Taliban. However, without that executive order
and accompanying actions, all reserves subject to the
jurisdiction of the United States would have remained
inaccessible to the Afghan people for the foreseeable
future, in the light of established safeguards and the
attachment of those funds to ongoing litigation by
victims of terrorism.

The United States remains the largest donor of
funding to United Nations humanitarian operations in
Afghanistan. We have already contributed more than
$308 million to this year’s humanitarian response plan
and regional refugee response plan. However, the scale
of the current humanitarian crisis demands much more
support from the international community than any

It seems that those steps do not satisfy our Chinese
colleagues. We have listened time and again to their
criticism of the actions of the United States at the
various meetings we have had on Afghanistan. It is a
pity that China spends more time criticizing the actions
of the United States than focusing on helping the
Afghan people themselves. China is the second-largest

The United States remains firmly in support of
UNAMA and its mission. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations for UNAMA’s strategic
objectives and priorities moving forward.

12/24

22-27517

02/03/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

contributor to the United Nations. What China has
done to help the people of Afghanistan or contribute to
regional security does not match that standing.
We also continue to take steps to implement
resolution 2615 (2021), which this organ adopted in
December of last year. Just last week, our Treasury
Department issued General License 20 to ensure that
United States sanctions do not stand in the way of the
commercial transactions or institutional engagement
necessary for providing aid to and addressing the basic
human needs of the Afghan people.
Let me be clear — all those measures should not
belie the fact that the onus is on the Taliban to create the
conditions needed for Afghanistan to achieve economic
stability. We would like to see the Da Afghanistan Bank
get to a position where it resumes normal central bank
activity, for example. However, whether or not it can do
so is, frankly, not up to us.
Moreover, our attention on Afghanistan’s immense
humanitarian and economic needs cannot distract
us from continuing to demand that women, girls and
members of minority groups be able to fully enjoy
their rights and participate in political, economic and
social life in Afghanistan. As public schools reopen
throughout Afghanistan this month, we will be
watching carefully to see if girls and women are able
to access education at all levels, to which the Taliban
have publicly committed. Girls have been denied the
right to access education for too long now. We call on
the Taliban to put an end to reprisal killings and forced
disappearances. We also call on the Taliban to respect
freedom of expression, including for members of the
media, and freedom of peaceful assembly.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I congratulate you,
Madam President, on your country’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council.
I would like to welcome Ms. Deborah Lyons to
today’s meeting and thank her for her briefing.
The situation in Afghanistan continues to be cause
for serious concern. The Special Representative of
the Secretary-General mentioned the tipping point.
The humanitarian situation remains grave, with
dreadful prospects for Afghan society, in general,
and is worsening for women, girls and minorities, in
particular. The absence of an all-inclusive Government
is a serious obstacle to improving the country’s

S/PV. 8984

governance, economy and security. The Taliban have
yet to articulate what kind of State they intend to build.
The fact that more than half of the population relies
on international relief alone to survive is extremely
worrisome. Albania supports all ongoing efforts of
the international community, through all possible
means. Access to aid and support for the Afghan
people should continue unhindered. We endorse the
injection of emergency cash support for public servants
in Afghanistan, such as teachers, doctors and nurses,
thereby allowing the continued functioning of basic but
vital services for the population.
After talks in Oslo and Geneva, Albania reiterates
its call on the Taliban to seriously embark on upholding
Afghanistan’s international commitments. Without
meeting those commonly accepted demands and
without clarity and strong assurances from the de
facto authorities in Afghanistan, it will be hard for the
Taliban to engage on the international stage, which will
have a direct impact on the humanitarian situation in
the country. An Afghan-led, Afghan-owned process
of reconciliation and the formation of an all-inclusive
Government should be the only way ahead.
We will keep stressing that full respect for human
rights set forth in international human rights law, which
every State is bound to respect, remains the cornerstone
for a fully functional society in Afghanistan. All of
society should enjoy the freedom of assembly and
expression, and members of the press should be able
to report and fulfil their duties in liberty and without
fear. Albania reiterates its call for full respect for
human rights for everyone in Afghanistan and opposes
any form of discrimination based on ethnicity, belief
or gender. Recovery in Afghanistan cannot happen
without women returning to work and girls returning
to school.
Terrorism continues to threaten stability and
State-building efforts in the country, but also in the
Central Asia region. We cannot allow the achievements
of the last 20 years in the fight against the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, Al-Qaida and their affiliates
to be undermined. The prospect of Afghan territory
becoming a haven for international terrorism should
amount to zero.
Last but not least, we commend the exceptional role
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) is playing in Afghanistan as women and
men representing the United Nations. Accordingly, all

22-2751713/24

S/PV.8984

The situation in Afghanistan

of them deserve our praise for their work and efforts.
Albania has endorsed the report of the SecretaryGeneral of dated 31 January (S/2022/64) and is of the
opinion that giving UNAMA a clear, strong mandate
extending the Mission’s duties and responsibilities
will only improve the interaction between the world
and Afghanistan, which is what the Afghan people
so greatly need. Albania stands ready to support the
activities of UNAMA on the ground and engage in the
process of extending its mandate.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I would like to begin by
congratulating you, Madam President, and by extension,
the United Arab Emirates, for assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. I offer my best
wishes to you, Madam, and hope that together we can
advance the important work of the Council. I would
also like to commend the delegation of the Russian
Federation for the manner in which it conducted the
business of the Council last month.
Ghana is pleased that this meeting on the situation in
Afghanistan has been convened ahead of the expiration
later this month of the current mandate of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
In this regard, we warmly welcome the briefing by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of UNAMA, Ms. Deborah Lyons. We also extend
our sincere thanks to Ms. Mariam Safi for her briefing.
It is important that we be clear when we are
speaking about the complex political, security
and socioeconomic issues and the dire situation in
Afghanistan. Therefore, at the outset, let me affirm that
resolving the crisis situation in Afghanistan will entail
precluding all geopolitical considerations and concerns
in the approaches we adopt in the interest of the people
of Afghanistan.
I will proceed to make the following three points.
First, Ghana maintains that, at all times, the interest and
safety of the Afghan people must be pre-eminent and
take centre stage in the actions of the United Nations,
the international community and actors from the region.
Our unified and genuine actions can and will save the
lives of millions of Afghans, many of whom face acute
food shortages, are internally displaced and unable to
gain access to basic services, including drinking water,
health care and education.
Secondly, the international community must
sustain goodwill and solidarity with the Afghan
people. It has never been more critical than it is
14/24

02/03/2022

today to help Afghanistan stabilize and rebuild. The
Security Council in particular will have to shoulder
its responsibility and ensure that a fit-for-purpose and
robust UNAMA mandate is unanimously and rapidly
agreed to effectively backstop reconstruction and
recovery efforts in Afghanistan.
Thirdly, and as put succinctly by Special
Representative Lyons, we must approach the UNAMA
mandate creatively and with flexibility, leaving no
room for ambiguity. Ghana is therefore determined to
engage constructively in the process and will assist in
bridging differences, if any. We will also be resolute
in our support for specific language in the UNAMA
mandate that encourages inclusive political processes
and governance structures, taking into account
Afghanistan’s multi-ethnic and diverse society. We
will firmly maintain our support for a human rights
framework within the mandate that ensures the
protection of civilians, minorities and such vulnerable
persons as the aged and persons living with disability.
We will also support a UNAMA mandate that will be a
guardian for women and children in need.
Returning Afghanistan to normalcy is an
overarching objective that must remain a shared and
foremost responsibility for us all. We note in this regard
the Oslo-facilitated meetings between leaders of the
de facto authorities and Afghan civil society groups
in January 2022, as well as the Doha talks between
European countries and the de facto authorities. In
addition, the recent announcement of processes set in
motion to unfreeze Afghanistan’s assets and channel
the funds into humanitarian activities for the benefit
of the Afghan people is commendable. We further
commend the growing cooperation between UNAMA
and the de facto authorities. Ghana expects that the
de facto authorities will continue to act in good faith
and aligns itself with global efforts to bring lasting
relief to Afghan citizens, many of whom require urgent
humanitarian assistance.
It is not the case that the de facto authorities are
being called upon to do the extraordinary. On the
contrary, we are simply asking the Taliban to commit
to upholding the fundamental freedoms and liberties of
all Afghan citizens without discrimination and provide
them with equal access to basic human services as
well as access to a fair judicial system, employment,
freedom of expression and movement and guaranteeing
girls full access to education. This is the minimum
22-27517

02/03/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

standard expected of every responsible member of the
international community.
In conclusion, Ghana reiterates her commitment
to a stable resurgent and secure Afghanistan living
peacefully with its neighbours.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset of my statement, I would like
to congratulate the delegation of the United Arab
Emirates on the start of its presidency of the Security
Council this month and wish you, Madam President,
every success; you can count on our support.
We would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
Ms. Deborah Lyons, for sharing her views and the
assessment of the situation on the ground. We also
listened carefully to the opinion expressed by the
Afghan civil society representative, Ms. Mariam Safi.
We are glad to see that the representatives of countries
of the region are given the floor to discuss topics of
such great importance to them.
We read the report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in the country (S/2022/64) very carefully. The
current situation in Afghanistan keeps changing. The
new Afghan authorities demonstrate that they are ready
to build a constructive interaction with the international
community. We note certain efforts that they are
undertaking to resolve the political, socioeconomic,
humanitarian, and human rights issues. Among the
positive changes, we can list the decree issued by the
leader of the Taliban, Mullah Haibatullah Akhundzada,
on the measures being taken to ensure women’s rights
in marriage, property, inheritance and some other
areas. Women can be involved in business in line with
Islamic and Afghan values.
Increased attention is being paid to educational
issues. In February, public universities reopened their
doors, and education for girls is already accessible in a
third of the provinces of the country. We also note an
improvement in the security situation in the country,
which has allowed humanitarian workers to reach those
regions that were inaccessible until recently.
We still expect that the Taliban will undertake
serious measures to implement the obligations they
undertook, first of all, with regard to finalizing the
process of intra-Afghan reconciliation and putting in
place genuinely inclusive governance authorities that

S/PV. 8984

reflect the interests of all key ethnic and political forces
in the country. It is important to continue making efforts
to counter the terror and drug trafficking threats. I
would like to underscore that we are raising all of these
concerns in the course of our bilateral contacts with the
new authorities.
Our overall priority remains unchanged:
maintaining stability in Afghanistan, which is a goal we
share with Afghanistan, and the situation in the region
overall hinges on it. It is impossible to effectively resolve
old issues and take on new challenges when there is an
absence of national potential or when there is an outflow
of professionals and a lack of financial resources.
Allow me to recall that 20 years ago the United
States entered Afghanistan with a special mission to
fight terrorism. However, its arrival in the country
only strengthened Afghanistan’s status as a hotbed of
terrorism and drug trafficking. In addition to Al-Qaida
and related entities present in Afghanistan, we saw
the arrival of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) and the spread of its influence. At the same time,
during the years in which the United States military was
present in the country, it had many opportunities and
time to eliminate terrorism in Afghanistan, including
material, military and technical options.
On many occasions, we have asked about
unidentified helicopters that transported ISIL fighters
and their weaponry to various regions in the country,
including to the north, at a time when we were being
told the Coalition forces fully controlled the situation.
The growth of drug trafficking over these years also
reached unprecedented levels.
Against this background, the socioeconomic
situation of the country remained deplorable. Billions
injected into the country ended up in the pockets of the
corrupt American puppets. As a result, the country has
become an international dependent with no prospects
for independent development. The 20-year United
States presence in Afghanistan claimed thousands of
lives of ordinary Afghans and American soldiers, as
well as billions of dollars. The Afghan people were
hypocritically left to fight ruin, poverty, terrorism
and starvation alone. In this regard, we regret that
some members of the international community are
still not ready to extend comprehensive assistance,
without reservations or preconditions, to normalize
the socioeconomic and humanitarian situation
in Afghanistan.

22-2751715/24

S/PV.8984

The situation in Afghanistan

It has been two and a half months since the Security
Council adopted resolution 2615 (2021), which calls for
a strengthening of humanitarian assistance through
all channels in order to counter the growing crisis in
the country. We note the efforts being undertaken by
United Nations humanitarian agencies. We have also
taken note of their preliminary plans to organize, on
31 March, another international donors conference to
mobilize financial support and assess progress made in
these areas. But these steps are not enough to ensure
sustainable post-conflict recovery in Afghanistan.
Given the paralysis of the banking system and
unemployment, the people of the country remain on the
brink of survival. They are selling their children, not to
mention their own organs. Despite the tragic situation,
we are still seeing attempts by individual States to use
any pretext to postpone the unfreezing of the assets for
as long as possible. The order by the President of the
United States of 11 February to block the accounts of
the Afghan central bank and to use these funds to pay
compensation to the relatives of the victims of the act
of terror of 11 September is nothing short of mockery.
It is immoral to blame this tragedy on the innocent
Afghan people.
The consequences of a total collapse in Afghanistan
will affect everyone and will be far more widespread
than first thought. It will inevitably lead to a massive
outflow of refugees, a spillover of terrorism, increased
drug manufacturing and, as a result, even greater
instability in the region and beyond.
Further degradation only serves ISIL fighters and
other groups, including the Eastern Turkistan Islamic
Movement, the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan and
Jamaat Ansarullah. We are all well aware that ISIL
has plans to spread its influence in the region and
then into Russia. The issue of drug manufacturing
and smuggling remains acute. Afghanistan remains
the largest supplier of opiates in the world. The risk
of infiltration by terrorists and drug traffickers into
Central Asia, including in the guise of refugees, is
a cause of concern among our regional partners. We
maintain a regular dialogue within the Collective
Security Treaty Organization and the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization.
In this context, we are also closely following the
continued action of the Panjshir guerrillas within the
National Resistance Front of Afghanistan. A descent
16/24

02/03/2022

into full-scale civil war is not in the interest of the
Afghan people or of the region as a whole.
We would again like to recall that it is counterproductive to attempt to communicate with the new
Afghan authorities in the language of ultimatums and
that it is important to learn lessons from past mistakes.
Only a constructive dialogue that takes into account
regional specificities and a proper analysis of current
realities will make it possible to achieve a peaceful
settlement in the country. An expanded troika and the
Moscow format are examples of such successful and
effective cooperation.
Against that backdrop, we maintain regular contacts
between UNAMA and the new Afghan authorities.
We have taken note of the Secretary-General’s
recommendations on the modalities for its future work
in the country. We share the view that the special
political mission in Afghanistan plays an important
role as a coordinator of international humanitarian
assistance to the country. We support the intention
of its head, Ms. Lyons, to continue to monitor the
situation and to provide the international community
with relevant, objective information. We do not share
the idea that we need to strengthen the human rights
component of the mission or to link the human rights
situation to humanitarian aid and recovery assistance.
The desire to make UNAMA into an overseer to satisfy
those who are not ready to help ordinary Afghans
without preconditions is unacceptable.
We are convinced that the key to the effective
functioning of UNAMA lies in a good relationship
with the host country and the trust of the authorities.
The success of the special political mission depends on
having a realistic, clear and achievable mandate, taking
into account all regional specificities and nuances rather
than abstract ideas. An important factor in that regard
was and remains the consent of the new authorities to
a new mission format and the changed modalities of
its work.
Mrs. Toroitich (Kenya): I congratulate you,
Madam President, on your country’s assumption of
the presidency. My delegation wishes the United Arab
Emirates success, and it can count on our support.
I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Lyons for her briefing on the latest
developments in Afghanistan and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for the
22-27517

02/03/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV. 8984

work it is undertaking. I also thank Ms. Safi for her
intervention this morning.

restrictions to work. We therefore urge the Taliban to
carefully consider that reality when framing policy.

Kenya takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Afghanistan (S/2022/64)
and its recommendations.

Additionally, restrictions inhibiting Afghans
from leaving the country do not add any value if the
people who remain are not enabled to contribute to the
development of their country.

We welcome reports that the overall security
situation in the country has improved. We note with
concern, however, that crime has increased at the same
time. Any action in seeking solutions for crime-related
issues should respect human rights and uphold the
dignity of the Afghan people.
The increased regional cooperation of various
stakeholders, and in particular neighbouring countries,
is encouraging. In this regard, we urge the Taliban to
also engage with other regional countries to address and
resolve any tensions and security incidents along border
areas with a view to enhancing a collective security
approach. Such approaches should align to ensure that
the Taliban are committed to fighting terrorism and
that Afghanistan is not a haven from which terrorist
groups, such as the Islamic State and Al-Qaida, can
perpetrate their acts of terror not only in Afghanistan,
but also within the region and beyond.
Kenya remains concerned over the dire
humanitarian situation, which has been further
compounded by severe drought, leaving over 24 million
Afghans dependent on humanitarian assistance. We call
on all stakeholders, international donors and friends of
Afghanistan to unite and generously contribute to the
2022 humanitarian response plan in order to reduce the
$3.9 billion funding gap.
We stress, however, that humanitarian assistance is
not sustainable in the long term. We have to incorporate
elements of economic development into humanitarian
operations with the aim of establishing effective and
sustainable ways of recovery. We hope that every effort
will be made to implement the One-UN Transitional
Engagement Framework to assist Afghans in 2022.
The state of the economy remains a serious
issue affecting every Afghan. Restrictions that
disproportionately impact women’s access to
education and work create a further hurdle to
inclusive nation-building efforts. The United Nations
Development Programme report entitled Afghanistan
Socioeconomic Outlook 2021-2022: Averting a Basic
Needs Crisis indicates that at least 5 per cent of the
gross domestic product is lost when women face

We reiterate the imperative of women’s full, equal
and meaningful participation in all aspects of Afghan
life, including at the grass-roots and leadership levels.
We call on the authorities to prioritize eliminating all
forms of sexual and gender-based violence and other
gendered harms against Afghan women, girls and
children, as well as reversing any actions intended to
restrict women’s freedoms and movement.
Finally, Kenya supports a strong mandate to enable
UNAMA to do its work effectively. We reaffirm our
unwavering solidarity with the people of Afghanistan
and stand ready to support all endeavours aimed at
securing their safety and well-being.
Mr. Flynn (Ireland): Let me join other in
congratulating you, Madam, on assuming the
presidency of the Council. I would also like to thank
Special Representative Lyons and her team for all the
vital work they are doing, as well as Ms. Safi for her
very powerful message to the Council this morning.
I will focus on three points.
First, I wish to address the continuing and
devastating suffering experienced by the Afghan
people. Over six months have passed since the Taliban
seized control. In every discussion since, including
today’s, we have heard about the shocking and
deteriorating humanitarian and human rights situation
in Afghanistan: destitution, starvation, attacks on
freedom of expression, disappearances, the trafficking
and sexual exploitation of children, particularly girls,
intimidation, sexual and gender-based violence,
killings — sadly, the list goes on.
For 166 days, the Taliban have denied girls in
Afghanistan access to secondary education, denying
their fundamental human rights. Horrendously, some
who bravely work to alleviate suffering in Afghanistan
are paying with their lives. We deplore the murders of
eight polio vaccination workers last Thursday and call
for those responsible to be held accountable.
As we have heard, economic freefall is causing
extreme hardship for millions of Afghans, while

22-2751717/24

S/PV.8984

The situation in Afghanistan

humanitarian operations continue to be impeded
by the banking and liquidity crisis. In that context,
Ireland welcomes the announcement by the World
Bank yesterday of the release of more than $1 billion to
support the people of Afghanistan.
Now, as the Council negotiates a mandate for the
continued United Nations presence in Afghanistan, we
have an obligation to put the basic needs and human
rights of the Afghan people first. We must reaffirm
our commitment to decisively addressing the seismic
humanitarian needs in Afghanistan, building on the
sanctions carve-out of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) agreed in December
(see S/PV.8941).
Ireland commends the work of the United Nations
country team in Afghanistan, implementing the
One-UN Transitional Engagement Framework in very
challenging circumstances in support of those most in
need. We welcome the strong focus in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2022/64) on the humanitarian
catastrophe being endured by the Afghan people. It
is vital that principled humanitarian action be fully
safeguarded and remain a key priority in the vital work
of the United Nations in Afghanistan.
The Council must not falter in its responsibility
to Afghan women and girls. On 18 February, the
Informal Expert Group on Women, Peace and Security
was briefed on the situation of women and girls in
Afghanistan. The stark messages conveyed by Special
Representative Lyons and her colleagues left us in
no doubt of the Taliban’s systematic and continuous
erosion of the rights of Afghan women and girls.
We need to do much more to hold the Taliban to
account for their actions. Afghanistan will achieve
stability only when the rights and talents of all its
people are respected and when there is an inclusive and
representative Government.
The future mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) must
have at its core an unambiguous commitment to
women’s full, equal and meaningful participation in all
dialogue and political processes. To put it simply, the
voices of Afghan women need to be heard and, most
importantly, heeded. Women and peace and security
should be at the heart of the work of the United Nations
in Afghanistan. It should be a golden thread guiding us
all at this dark time for Afghan women.
18/24

02/03/2022

Finally, we have witnessed six months of the
Taliban’s contempt for human rights, compounding
the violations and abuses of two decades of war. The
Council has a duty to respond. A robust human rights
mandate for UNAMA is essential. A strong human
rights mandate will save lives, ensuring that those
who suffer human rights abuses are heard and not
condemned to silence. It will facilitate accountability.
It will protect civilians, including women, children and
minorities. Human rights issues are far more difficult
to address if they are not documented. The minimum
that the Council can do is ensure that the plight of the
Afghan people is recorded, not forgotten.
To conclude, the Council has a responsibility to
stand with and support the people of Afghanistan. They
need and deserve the support, advocacy and partnership
of the United Nations now more than ever. Their urgent
needs must define our efforts over the coming weeks.
Let us keep them front and centre as we decide on a new
mandate for the United Nations in Afghanistan.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to wish the
delegation of the United Arab Emirates the best of
luck for the month of March as it leads the work of
the Council. Mexico is also grateful for the briefings
by Special Representative Lyons and Ms. Safi. My
country recognizes the work of Afghan civil society in
defending the rights of women and girls.
Afghanistan has been the subject of the largestever humanitarian appeal for a single country, seeking
to address the most pressing needs of 24 million people.
We applaud the priority afforded to it by the United
Nations in recent months in response to the scale of
the situation.
In the context of that grave humanitarian crisis,
any attack on or harassment of humanitarian workers
is simply deplorable. We condemn the recent killing of
eight humanitarian workers. We sympathize with their
bereaved and underline the need to ensure the safety
of humanitarian personnel so that they can carry out
their tasks.
Defending the fundamental rights and freedoms of
women and girls has always been Mexico’s principled
position. Any regression in that area is unacceptable to
us. Nothing is more representative of such regression
than the fact that the headquarters of the Ministry
of Women’s Affairs is today the Ministry for the
Propagation of Virtue and the Prevention of Vice.
22-27517

02/03/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

The return to school for all girls in Afghanistan in
the coming weeks is critical. If that does not happen
in an unrestricted manner, it would have mediumand long-term consequences. Likewise, women must
be allowed to return to their places of work without
restrictions or exceptions.
As co-Chair of the informal Working Group
on Women and Peace and Security, we reiterate the
importance of taking into account the recommendations
from the recent meeting with regard to the renewal of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). In particular, I would like to highlight two:
to facilitate a dialogue between women and the de facto
authorities and to continue to report on the human
rights situation.
We recognize the efforts, particularly by countries
of the region to foster dialogue so as to ensure that the
Government is inclusive and reflective of the plurality
of Afghan voices and that it includes the effective and
meaningful participation of women and minorities. In
that connection, we will follow closely the outcome of
the meetings to be held in the coming weeks.
Reports of the increased presence of terrorist
groups are also cause for serious concern. At all costs,
we must prevent Afghanistan from once again becoming
a safe haven for such groups. In recent months, a large
number of weapons have been recorded in the country.
Mexico is concerned about their possible diversion, and
we launch an appeal to prevent them from having an
impact, particularly on the civilian population.
Mexico expresses its full willingness to work
constructively on the renewal of the Mission’s mandate.
We have heard it before in this Chamber — for my
country, it is also critical to have a robust mandate in line
with the strategic objectives proposed by the SecretaryGeneral and with a clear structure that divides its work
into two areas: political and governance matters and
humanitarian and development.
Maintaining the Mission’s capacity to monitor
the human rights situation is a priority. The provision
of impartial information regarding the protection of
civilians is equally vital. In the same vein, UNAMA must
retain the capacity to engage with all decision-makers
in defence of fundamental rights and freedoms.
I conclude by expressing Mexico’s support and
appreciation both to Special Representative Lyons at the
helm of UNAMA and to all United Nations agencies,

S/PV. 8984

programmes and funds on the ground for their tireless
commitment to the Afghan people.
Ms. Bongo (Gabon) (spoke in French): Allow me,
in turn, to congratulate you, Madam President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of March. You can count on the support
of my delegation. I am also grateful to the Ambassador
of the Russian Federation for the professionalism
with which he conducted our work during the month
of February.
I thank Ms. Deborah Lyons and Ms. Mariam Safi,
for their clear and informative briefings on recent
developments in Afghanistan. I welcome the presence
among us of the representatives of Afghanistan, the
Islamic Republic of Iran and Pakistan.
My speech will focus on three points: the worrisome
sociopolitical and economic situation, the status of
women and girls in Afghan society and the security
challenges, including the issue of foreign fighters.
Six months after the Taliban took power, the lack
of inclusivity of the Afghan ruling class remains a
serious issue. The diversity of the Afghan people is
poorly represented, with ethnic, geographic, political
and social minorities, including women, kept on the
periphery of the political process. The stabilization
of Afghanistan requires confidence-building, the
promotion of transparent and participatory governance
and the establishment of a structured political dialogue
between the Taliban and all Afghan stakeholders.
We are also of the opinion that the international
community must maintain a constructive dialogue
with the Taliban, for the individual and social wellbeing of the people. We note positively the steps taken
by countries of the region and others to establish such
a dialogue.
Hard hit by the financial and economic stagnation
linked, among other things, to the freezing of the
central bank’s assets, Afghanistan is being plunged into
poverty. It is thus prey to unspeakable destitution and
precariousness, which is leading to massive population
displacements in the midst of a pandemic. The stage
is thus set for a large-scale humanitarian crisis, with
children and women as its first victims.
My country remains concerned about the condition
of women and girls in Afghanistan, whose fundamental
rights and freedoms remain largely restricted to this
day, despite the commitments made by the de facto

22-2751719/24

S/PV.8984

The situation in Afghanistan

authorities to protect women’s rights, particularly the
right to education. Afghanistan, which has no women in
its Government and provincial governorships, needs to
restore women to their rightful place and move towards
an inclusive Administration.
Indeed, we all know that the inclusion of women
is not an option; it is a requirement for the peace and
security of any society. It is crucial to ensure respect for
women’s human rights and their effective participation
in all decision-making processes and at all levels of
Government in Afghanistan.
On the security front, it is clear that despite the
Taliban’s assurances of blanket amnesty for former
members of the Afghan Government and security
forces, as well as for those working with international
military forces, serious allegations of killings, enforced
disappearances and the like have been recorded by the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). That stigmatization of dignitaries of
the former regime, accompanied by human rights
violations, is extremely serious, as it hinders national
reconciliation, which is so essential for peacebuilding.
Despite the Taliban’s efforts to establish control
over the border areas, with a view to restricting attacks
by extremist groups from Afghan soil into neighbouring
countries, the active presence of foreign fighters, over
which the Taliban clearly has no control, is a matter of
real concern.
Such a large number of foreign fighters could
pose a permanent threat to Afghanistan’s neighbours
or create a staging ground for international terrorism
and cross-border drug trafficking, rendering futile
the international community’s efforts over the past
20 years.
In conclusion, we endorse the Secretary-General’s
recommendations on UNAMA’s mandate and express
our full support for UNAMA’s work on the ground,
particularly with regard to promoting and protecting
the fundamental rights and freedoms of individuals,
especially women and girls, as well as coordinating
humanitarian assistance.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.
I thank Special Representative Ms. Deborah Lyons
and Ms. Mariam Safi for their valuable insights.
20/24

02/03/2022

Our meeting today is taking place at a critical
juncture for Afghanistan as the Council considers
how the United Nations can best serve the people of
Afghanistan. The Organization’s presence is needed
now more than ever in order to tackle Afghanistan’s
multifaceted crises.
The United Arab Emirates therefore supports a
robust mandate for the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), one that is
calibrated to align with the realities on the ground. The
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General’s
latest report (S/2022/64) are sensible and offer a good
starting point for our deliberations.
As such, I would like to make several points.
First, the United Arab Emirates believes that
moving forward the coordination of donor activities
should remain a cornerstone of UNAMA’s activities.
We also support the Secretary-General’s proposal
that UNAMA play a role to minimize the risk of
aid diversion in Afghanistan. That should be well
coordinated with the relevant agencies through their
own risk management work.
Providing financial contributions to support the
Afghan economy remains an urgent necessity. We
therefore echo the calls made by the Secretary-General
for allowing international funding to pay for the salaries
of civil servants. In that regard, we recognize the recent
steps made and are also encouraged by the pledge of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) to set
up a humanitarian trust fund, as well as the launching a
programme for food security in Afghanistan. The United
Arab Emirates will continue to work with its partners,
including the OIC and the Islamic Development Bank,
to support humanitarian activities.
Secondly, as a vocal supporter of the protection
and empowerment of women and girls in Afghanistan,
we believe that UNAMA’s mandate should reflect the
situation of women and girls. Their exclusion from
education, public life and the workforce in Afghanistan
hinders the prospects for peace and security, as well as
economic prosperity in the country. The United Nations
Development Programme recently estimated that
restrictions on women’s participation in the workplace,
for example, could cost the Afghan economy up to
$1 billion. That statistic demonstrates that women’s
equal and meaningful inclusion is a necessity.
22-27517

02/03/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV. 8984

We reiterate that religion cannot be used to justify
discrimination against women. We welcome UNAMA’s
efforts to ensure that engagement in Afghanistan is
informed by the cultural and religious context, including
by working with the OIC. The United Arab Emirates
stands ready to provide its assistance in that respect.

the Afghan assets illegally frozen by the United States
Government. It seems that the representative of the
United States feels uncomfortable about that. It is very
simple for the United States to feel comfortable, namely,
by immediately returning all those assets to the Afghan
people, as called for by the international community.

Thirdly, the United Nations can play a critical
role in facilitating political dialogue with all relevant
parties, including the Taliban. That is necessary to
encourage it to heed the calls of the international
community, improve governance and effectively deliver
vital services to the Afghan people.

The President (spoke in Arabic): The representative
of the United States of America has asked for the floor
to make a further statement.

Lastly, the threat of terrorism in Afghanistan and
the wider region remains a top concern. Our concerns
were confirmed by the most recent report of the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
(see S/2022/83), which indicates that terrorist groups
may enjoy greater freedom in Afghanistan now than at
any time. The Taliban must implement the necessary
measures to combat terrorism in Afghanistan under
international law, including by severing ties with all
terrorist groups and preventing the use of Afghanistan
territory as a safe haven for terrorism.
As part of our presidency pledge to highlight the
two-year anniversary of the pandemic, we would also
like to draw attention to the fact that 10 per cent of
the population in Afghanistan has been vaccinated. We
believe that bundling coronavirus disease vaccination
with other essential services is likely one of the most
effective response measures, alongside international
investment in the primary health-care system. The
tragic recent killing of eight polio health workers also
underscores the need for the protection of humanitarian
workers to achieve vaccine equity.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates is
committed to contributing constructively to the
Security Council’s deliberations on the UNAMA
mandate, as well as to achieving stability and security
in Afghanistan.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of China has asked for the floor
to make a further statement.
Mr. Sun Zhiqiang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank you, Madam President, for giving me the
opportunity to make another statement. Just now, several
Council members made reference in their statements to

Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I am
sorry to take the floor again. I just wanted to make the
point that China’s extended references to the reserve
issue contain falsehoods and, it seems to me, were
designed to score political points with the Taliban, I
suppose — I am not sure — rather than anything else.
China knows exactly what we are trying to do, but
instead prefers to make a show, it seems, for its benefit.
I am not able to reach any other conclusion.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The
representative of China has asked for the floor to make
a further statement.
Mr. Sun Zhiqiang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to remind the United States representative
that the Afghan people are very angry about their assets
being frozen by the United States.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Isaczai (Afghanistan): I would like to thank
all members of the Council for their statements and
continued support for the Afghan people. I also wish to
congratulate the United Arab Emirates on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council and for convening
this briefing on the situation in Afghanistan. Let me
also thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Lyons for her comprehensive briefing and
Ms. Safi for her insightful and powerful remarks.
It has been more than six months since the
takeover of Afghanistan by the Taliban, and yet the
social, political and economic situation in Afghanistan
remains gravely concerning in the face of the growing
humanitarian emergency, paired with the absence of
a functional Government to provide basic services to
the people. The Taliban caretaker Government has
not been able to establish an accountable, inclusive,
effective and responsible Government and to fulfil its
national and international commitments that it made to

22-2751721/24

S/PV.8984

The situation in Afghanistan

upholding the fundamental human rights and freedoms
of all Afghans, including women, girls and minorities.
That political, economic and social crisis has
created a state of uncertainty and dismay for Afghans
about their future. Since the previous meeting of the
Council (see S/PV.8954), nothing has improved on the
ground. There are continued credible reports of human
rights violations committed by the Taliban, including
house searches, arbitrary arrests, ill-treatment, enforced
disappearances and extrajudicial killings of former
members of the Government, the Afghan National
Army and security forces, ethnic groups, human rights
defenders and media workers.
Those acts are utterly against all national and
international human rights laws and Islamic laws,
values and principles. That dangerous situation has
prompted growing migration and displacement of
Afghans across the country. Such violations must be
stopped, and the perpetrators of those heinous acts must
be held accountable. The continuation of this situation
will further endanger any prospects for ensuring viable
peace in Afghanistan, including efforts to establish
an accountable, inclusive, effective and responsible
Government that would acquire national legitimacy.
We are grateful to all regional and international
partners and donors, including bilaterally and
those through United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes, as well as national and international
non-governmental
organizations
(NGOs),
for
life-saving efforts, humanitarian assistance and other
activities to support basic human needs in Afghanistan.
We appreciate the issuance of new general licences
to expand authorization for commercial and financial
transactions in Afghanistan, including with the
governing institutions. We urge all Member States to
continue their support by funding the United Nations
humanitarian response plan in support of Afghanistan.
I wish to request Council members, the United Nations
and donors to establish a monitoring and reporting
mechanism to ensure the transparent, accountable
and effective implementation of any humanitarian
projects by NGOs and aid delivery to vulnerable people
in Afghanistan.
We firmly believe that, in order to have a longterm solution to the current crisis in Afghanistan, we
need a legitimate Afghan Government, with Afghan
ownership and effective governance, to restart
channelling development aid and the resumption of
economic development projects in Afghanistan. That
22/24

02/03/2022

requires the formation of an inclusive, representative,
responsible and accountable Government based on
integrity, competence and merit, with professional and
committed people, including women, with national and
international legitimacy. We call for the convening of
an international conference under the auspices of the
United Nations, with the support of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, regional and international
partners, to start negotiations and intra-Afghan dialogue
among key Afghan stakeholders and the Taliban to
amend the Constitution and enable the Afghan people
to decide their future based on their votes. That will
ensure the protection of the achievements of the past
two decades and rescue the Afghan people from
starvation and poverty. In that regard, I would like
to request that, in any future intra-Afghan dialogue
for achieving a political settlement in Afghanistan
and inclusivity, that the Council engage with Afghan
stakeholders that have credibility, legitimacy and a
good reputation among Afghans and those who actually
represent Afghanistan’s national interests.
I would like to reiterate the Afghan people’s call for
countering corruption by opening investigations into
the bank accounts and properties of the former Afghan
Government high-level officials who were involved in
corruption and allegations of embezzlement involving
international aid to the Afghan people. They must be
held accountable. I also take this opportunity to call on
all Afghan diplomatic missions to continue their service
to Afghan citizens, based on the national interests of
Afghanistan, and not allow any former Government
officials to misuse national resources for personal and
political purposes.
As the Council discusses and adopts the extension
of the UNAMA mandate, I would like to emphasize
the importance of the United Nations role and the work
of UNAMA and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in promoting peace and stability,
as well as in monitoring and reporting on the human
rights crisis in Afghanistan. I further reiterate our full
support for the recommendations and implementation
of the strategic objectives of the Secretary-General in
his latest report (S/2022/64), including the long-term
extension of the mandate.
In conclusion. I urge Council members to remain
united in their support for Afghanistan and not abandon
the Afghan people in these difficult times. I also call on
the Taliban to respond to the calls of the Afghan people
and the international community for the formation of
a just, accountable and inclusive Government and to
22-27517

02/03/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

respect and protect the privacy, safety, security and
fundamental human rights and freedoms of all Afghans,
including women, girls, minorities and former security
and defence forces. Women’s and girls’ rights to social,
economic and political participation must be ensured
and protected. Without the full and equal participation
of all Afghan citizens, there will be no peace, stability
or prosperity in Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Ms. Ershadi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank
Ms. Lyons for her briefing on the latest developments
in Afghanistan.
We take note of the recent report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security
(S/2022/64). The report provides a good update on the
United Nations activities in Afghanistan, including its
humanitarian efforts.
According to the report, the situation in Afghanistan
has remained challenging, and Afghanistan is grappling
with a growing humanitarian crisis, a major economic
downturn, crippled banking and financial systems and
challenges related to the establishment of an inclusive
Government. The risks of a humanitarian calamity
remain. More than 20 million people, or half of the
population, continue to be in critical need of assistance,
and immediate action is required to avoid the economic
collapse of the country.
We are deeply concerned about the potentially
disastrous ramifications of the situation for the
region’s security and stability, particularly those of
neighbouring countries. If the situation is not addressed
effectively, the country’s socioeconomic collapse is
possible, resulting in widespread destitution and a
large influx of migrants into neighbouring countries
that are already overburdened with hosting millions
of refugees. We once again urge the international
community, particularly donor countries, to meet their
responsibilities to Afghanistan’s neighbours in order to
assist refugees and displaced persons.
We support the United Nations efforts to meet
Afghanistan’s expanding humanitarian needs. As
we have emphasized on several occasions, the frozen
assets of Afghanistan belong to the Afghan people, and
their release, which is critical to restoring the Afghan

S/PV. 8984

economy and saving lives, should not be politicized or
conditional in any manner.
Iran remains deeply concerned about terrorist
activities in Afghanistan. According to the SecretaryGeneral’s report, terrorism remains a major challenge
in Afghanistan. Attacks claimed by or ascribed to the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan have
intensified and spread outside its previously focused
locations in Kabul and eastern Afghanistan. The
United Nations recorded 152 attacks by the group in 16
provinces for the period from 19 August to 31 December
2021, compared to 20 attacks in five provinces during
the same period in the previous year.
The trend underlines the international community’s
continued demand that the Taliban commit to fighting
terrorism and ensure that Afghanistan is no longer
a safe haven for terrorist groups like Da’esh and
Al-Qaida, which have been responsible for heinous acts
of terror, not only in Afghanistan, but throughout the
region and beyond.
Of equal importance, the international community
should continue to emphasize the need to establish
an inclusive and representative Government in
Afghanistan. We expect the Taliban to take serious steps
to ensure the Government’s true ethnic and political
inclusivity. To that end, Iran continues to engage with
all parties in Afghanistan, including the Taliban, to
address different challenges facing that country. The
Taliban needs to be responsive to the demands for the
establishment of an inclusive Government that truly
represents Afghanistan’s multi-ethnic society.
The Taliban should also heed the international
community’s call for the protection of human rights,
particularly the rights of women and minorities. We
continue to consult with Afghanistan’s neighbours, as
well as regional and international partners, including
the United Nations, in order to assist Afghanistan in
achieving long-term peace, security and stability.
Lastly, we stress the vital role of The United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
in promoting peace and stability in Afghanistan and
support the extension of its mandate. We consider that
the situation requires a strong UNAMA mandate in
order to help the people of Afghanistan and maintain
peace and security in that country.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.

22-2751723/24

S/PV.8984

The situation in Afghanistan

02/03/2022

Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I would like to congratulate
the United Arab Emirates on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council. I am sure that it will be hugely
successful. I would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador
Deborah Lyons, for her briefing and for the important
work that the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) is doing under her leadership.
We also thank Ms. Mariam Safi for her intervention.

for Afghanistan’s sovereignty. It should be discharged
with the consent of the Afghan Government, whether
recognized or not. It should be designed to support
efforts to promote stability and improve the lives of the
Afghan people, including women and children. Any
effort to create a parallel governance structure alongside
the actual Government is likely to be unacceptable and
will erode the trust and cooperation that exists between
UNAMA and the authorities in Kabul.

After four decades, there is a chance to promote
durable peace in Afghanistan. One Government
controls the entire country. There is no existential threat
to its survival. The main objective of the international
community must be to stabilize Afghanistan and ensure
durable peace within the country and in the region. To
that end, we must address the massive humanitarian
crisis in Afghanistan and prevent the collapse of the
Afghan economy.

UNAMA’s new mandate must focus on
humanitarian and emergency assistance and the
revival of the Afghan economy, as well as on building
the capacity of Afghan institutions and facilitating
reconstruction and connectivity projects. Political
objectives, such as promoting inclusive governance,
is the sole purview of Afghanistan and the Afghan
authorities. The six-neighbour platform has also helped
to move the process in that direction. The platform
will meet at the ministerial level in China in the near
future. Similarly, UNAMA’s role in monitoring human
rights will be inconsistent with its role as a partner for
progress in Afghanistan.

Pakistan commends the role of the United Nations
and its agencies in mobilizing and distributing such
assistance. We welcome the generous response to the
Secretary-General’s initial appeal and trust that there
will be an equally generous response to his new appeal.
We hope that the new crises we are now witnessing
will not lead to the abandonment of Afghanistan. That
mistake was made twice in the past 40 years, with
devastating consequences.
Reviving the Afghan economy is critical. We
welcome United Nations-led efforts to inject cash into
the Afghan banking system. In that context, it is vital
to release all of Afghanistan’s financial reserves. It is
most regrettable that half of the country’s reserves are
proposed to be sequestered by another country.
Beyond humanitarian help, stabilizing Afghanistan
requires
reconstruction
to
rebuild
damaged
infrastructure and implement connectivity projects,
such as the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India
pipeline, the Central Asia-South Asia power project
and the Central Asia-Afghanistan-Pakistan railroad, as
well as the envisaged extension of the China-Pakistan
Economic Corridor to Afghanistan.
UNAMA is playing a constructive role in promoting
those objectives and has established constructive
engagement and trust with the new authorities in Kabul.
We hope that it will continue to play that role. In that
context, the approach and elements for UNAMA’s new
mandate, as suggested in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2022/64), raise several questions. In our view, as in
the past, UNAMA’s mandate must be based on respect
24/24

Security remains of pre-eminent concern for
Afghans and their neighbours. There are still some
who wish to continue using Afghan territory to
promote terrorism, including against countries of the
region, especially against Pakistan. The international
community must encourage and support the efforts of
the Afghan authorities to eliminate Da’esh — or the
Islamic State-Khorasan Province. Effective strategies
are also needed to address other terrorist groups in
Afghanistan, in particular Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan,
the East Turkestan Islamic Movement, the Islamic
Movement of Uzbekistan and Al-Qaida. An important
element of success will be the early lifting of the
sanctions against Taliban members under resolution
1988 (2011), as envisaged in the Doha agreement and
resolution 2543 (2020).
Pakistan will continue to work with the Afghan
authorities and with the countries of the region and other
interested countries to promote the common objectives
of peace, stability and prosperity in Afghanistan and
the region.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I will now
adjourn the meeting so that the Council can continue its
discussion on the subject in closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.
22-27517
