A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/53/205
2 February 1999

Fifty-third session
Agenda item 112
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/53/521/Add.1)]
53/205. Results-based budgeting
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 52/12 B of 19 December 1997 entitled “Renewing the United Nations: a programme
for reform”,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on results-based budgeting1 and the related report
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,2
1.

Reaffirms its resolution 41/213 of 19 December 1986;

2. Reaffirms also the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects
of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation, and the Financial Regulations
and Rules of the United Nations, in particular financial regulation 4.5;
3.

Reaffirms further rule 153 of its rules of procedure;

1

A/53/500 and Add.1.

2

A/53/655.

99-76693

/...

A/RES/53/205
Page 2

4. Reaffirms paragraph 21 of its resolution 51/221 B of 18 December 1996, in which it decided that no
changes to the budget methodology, to established budgetary procedures and practices or to the financial
regulations could be implemented without prior review and approval by the General Assembly, through the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, in accordance with agreed budgetary
procedures;
5.
should:

Stresses that any proposal to be considered by the General Assembly on results-based budgeting

(a) Address the needs and reflect the characteristics of the United Nations;
(b) Not be a budget-reduction exercise;
(c) Not be a staff-reduction exercise;
6. Decides that the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2000–2001 should be prepared and
submitted for its consideration in accordance with existing budgetary procedures and processes;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly, through the Advisory Committee,
the prototype fascicles, as recommended by the Advisory Committee in paragraph 4 of its report;2
8. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to it, for consideration at its fifty-fourth session, through
the Advisory Committee, a comprehensive and analytical report on his proposal on results-based budgeting,
which should include, inter alia, the following elements:
(a) A comparative study of present budgetary procedures and the proposed results-based budgeting, which
should, inter alia, show very clearly the differences and similarities between the two systems;
(b) Justification for the proposed change from the present budgetary arrangements to results-based
budgeting;
(c) Identification of weaknesses in present budgetary procedures and in the Administration that hinder
implementation of those procedures;
(d) Identification of measures needed to improve current budgetary procedures;
(e) An indication of the regulations, procedures and information systems that should be in place if the
proposal on results-based budgeting is approved by the General Assembly;
(f) Demonstration of the applicability of the concepts of results-based budgeting, including “expected
results” and “performance indicators”, to all sections of the programme budget of the United Nations;
(g) A sharper and clearer definition of the terms “objective”, “output”, “results”, “performance indicator”
and “performance measurement”;
9. Emphasizes that Member States should continue to be fully involved, as at present, in the budgetary
process, in accordance with existing United Nations regulations, rules and budgetary procedures;

/...

A/RES/53/205
Page 3

10. Decides that, until the General Assembly decides otherwise, detailed information on post and non-post
requirements should continue to be provided to the Assembly and the Advisory Committee to enable them to take
appropriate and informed decisions on the budget proposals;
11. Requests the Joint Inspection Unit to undertake an analytical and comparative study of the experience
of the bodies of the United Nations system that are implementing an approach similar to results-based budgeting
and to submit its report no later than 31 August 1999;
12. Requests the Advisory Committee, when preparing its report on the proposed results-based budgeting,
to take into account the report referred to in paragraph 11 above;
13. Recognizes the international, multilateral character of the Organization, and emphasizes that the
quantitative results expected should not be the sole basis for the justification of resource requirements;
14. Stresses the role of Member States in carrying out a thorough analysis of resource allocation to all
sections of the programme budget;
15. Requests the Secretary-General, in the context of the above-mentioned comprehensive and analytical
report, to take into account the provisions of the present resolution.
93rd plenary meeting
18 December 1998
