UNITED

NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL
THIRTY-FOURTH

2183”
NEW

COUNCIL
RECORDS

YEAR

MEETING:

30 DECEMBER

1,FBRADy

up979

JWN 2 1982

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption
Letter dated 22 December
1979 from the Permanent
Representative
of the
United States of America to the United Nations addressed to the President
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
of the Security Council (S/13705)

I

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2183)
of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

--- -.- ._.

WPV.2183

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly SuppIements of the O~crizl R&or& of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2183rd MEETING
Held in New York on Sunday, 30 December 1979, at 4 p.m.
President:

Mr. CHEN Chu (China).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Zambia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2183)
1. Adoption

of the agenda

2. Letter dated 22 December 1979 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to
the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/13705)
The meeting was called to order at 4.40 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 22 December 1979 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Secmity

council (S/13705)

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation porn Chinese): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2182nd meeting, I
invite the representatives of Australia, Canada, the Federal
Republic of Germany and Singapore to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Anderson (Australia),
Miss MacDonald (Canada), Mr. von Wechmar (FederaI
Republic of Germany) and Mr. Koh (Singapore) took the
pIaces reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Chinese): I wish
to inform members of the Council that I have received a
letter from the representative of Japan in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the agenda. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that representative to participate in the discussion, without the right
to vote, in conformity with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nisibon (Japan) took
the place reservedfor him at the side of the CounciI climber.

3. The PRESIDENT
(inrerpretation from Chinese):
Members of the Council have before them document
S/137 I 1, which contains the text of a draft resolution sponsored by the United States.
4. Mr. CLARK (Nigeria): Once again the Security Council is meeting to consider the situation which has arisen in
the relations between the Islamic Republic of Iran and the
United States of America over the seizure and prolonged
detention of persons of United States nationality as hostages in Iran. Once again we are participating in the proceedings with a great deal of sorrow and sadness. Let me
make quite clear our threefold concern in the matter.
!
5. Our primary concern at the moment is to ensure the
immediate release of the hostages. We see no justifiable
cause for the taking of diplomatic agents as hostages, in
violation of all principles of justice and international law.
The Vienna Conventions on diplomatic and consular relations, as well as the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of Crimes against Internationally Protected
Persons, including Diplomatic Agents, have duly codified
the time-honoured practice of respect for the person and
functions of diplomatic personnel. This practice has over
the ages enabled an ambassador to walk defiantly to the
competent authorities of his host country in order to
present an ultimatum, even for a war, and thereafter be
granted safe conduct or be allowed with due courtesy to
leave for his country, safe and unharmed. Diplomatic,
immunities and inviolability are therefore so much apart of
international law and custom that developing non-aligned
countries which rely on law more than force have an abiding
obligation to defend them.
6. Our second concern is that we must not lose this
opportunity-or
any opportunity, for that matter-to use
the United Nations as a viable forum for resolving intemational disputes. Nigeria’s concept of United Nations action
as a viable alternative to unilateral action by the great
Powers is demonstrably proved by our consistent adherence
to the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
those of non-alignment in all our international relations.
Furthermore, there are so many African issues on the
United Nations agenda--such as Namibia and the aparrheid policies of South Africa--crying for redress and Security Council action that we cannot afford to undermine the
instrumentality of the Council by encouraging defiance of
its decisions. We therefore wish to encourage both the
Islamic Republic of Iran and the United States of America
to continue to use the avenues available to them in the
United Nations to solve their current crisis exclusively by
peaceful means.

7. Our third concern is that the issue of the hostages is
being allowed to becloud the legitimate grievances of the
Iranian Government and people. No nation against policies
of hegemonism or domination can fail to understand the
intensity of feeling of Iran against the insensitivity and
excessesof their former rulers, as well as against foreign
corruption and the exploitation of .their natural resources,
human and material. It is therefore in the interest of Iran to
put the indefensible issue of the hostages behind it in order
to ventilate and address itself to its paramount preoccupations. If Iran did so, Nigeria and, I presume, Iran’s many
other friends in the developing non-aligned countries would
not hesitate to co-operate with it fully in granting it a
respectable hearing in appropriate international forums.

rightly urged in its Order of 15 December’ indicating provisional measures, it is incumbent on both the Government of
the Islamic Republic of Iran and the Government of the
United States of America not to do anything that would
aggravate the tension between the two countries. These are
not harsh sentiments, in spite of the fact that the situation is
pretty phenomenal. They are the assurance that intemational peace and security and justice will be preserved.
12. Mr. HULINSK?
(Czechoslovakia) (zbrpretution
from Russian): The Czechoslovak delegation, in voting in
favour of resolution 457 (1979), was expressing support for
those measures that were aimed both at the immediate
release of American diplomatic staff at Teheran being held
in violation of the relevant international conventions on
diplomatic rights and at satisfying the just demands of Iran.
The importance and force of resolution 457 (1979) reside
precisely in the fact that, on the basis, in particular, of
Chapter VI of the Charter, it enjoys the unanimous support
of all members of the Council. The Government of the
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic for its part has, within the
limits of its capabilities, actively supported all steps that
have been taken on the basis of that resolution with the aim
of securing, by peaceful ways and means, a just solution of
the unresolved issues subsisting between the United States
and Iran, to their mutual satisfaction and in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the United Nations.

8. We welcome the determination of the United States
Government to use the Security Council and the United
Nations so as to exhaust all channels of peaceful resolution
of this crisis. While we appreciate its impatience and bitterness over the prolonged detention of the hostages, we wish
to address, as my head of State has already done, an honest
appeal to the United States Government not to resort to
other measures which are euphemisms for the use of force.
It must continue to concentrate its efforts on the safety and
release of the hostages, which those so-called other measures cannot guarantee. In our view, great Powers have no
complexes: they need not prove anything but their nobility
of character and prudence.

13. When my delegation spoke in the Security Council on
1 December [2275 meeting], we emphasized that any
measures that might be adopted in that respect should not
be interpreted by anybody or under any circumstances as a
cause for the further escalation of the conflict. On the basis
of the present situation, it is our belief that the Council
should continue to attempt to focus its efforts on creating
conditions for valid and well-tried steps to be taken in order
to eliminate the situation that has arisen. Any hasty or
unwarranted step might only have a detrimental effect upon
the further course, of events at Teheran and also in the
broader context. We continue to believe at the present stage
that it is essential that the precepts of the unanimously
adopted resolution 457 (1979) be observed, based as they
are on Chapter VI of the Charter. Indeed, Chapter VI
provides both the Security Council and the parties to the
United States-Iranian dispute with sufficient means for the
parties particularly concerned to utilize in a spirit of mutual
understanding. The Czechoslovak delegation will assessthe
merits of any new draft resolution in the Council on the
United States-Iranian crisis in the light of the fact that
opportunities for the utilization of these means in conformity with Chapter VI of the Charter at the present time have
not yet been exhausted. A spirit of responsibility and coolheadedness and further efforts to find a reasonable way out
of the situation that has arisen constitute an approach that
is in accordance with both the spirit and the letter of resolution 457 (1979), which urged the Governments of both Iran
and the United States to exercise the utmost restraint. It is
precisely by relying on resolution 457 (1979) and not on any
other-and particularly not on a text that holds forth the
threat of sanctions-that the Secretary-General can look
forward to the success of his good-offices mission to
Teheran.

9. As this is my last statement as Nigeria’s representative
on the Security Council, I should like to end on a personal
note. Nigeria, throughout its history and in spite of its
occasional failures and difficulties in living up to the ideal,
has always aspired to be a country where the rule of law and
respect for human rights prevail, where pragmatism, and
not dogma, guides our national endeavours, where circumspection or consensus is a hallmark of our approa :h to the
solution of our problems, domestic and international. If my
colleagues and I have succeeded in reflecting some of these
national traits in our efforts in the Council, we have you,
Mr. President, and our other friends in the Council to thank
for the opportunity; if we have not succeeded, it has not
been because of any lack of will on our part.
10. It is because of our strongly held convictions along the
foregoing lines that we wish to express our warm appreciation and gratitude to the Secretary-General for all his efforts
in the current and other crises. We wish him to persist in the
good-offices mission entrusted to him under resolution 457
(1979). His report of 22 December [S/137(74 on develop
ments in the situation is remarkable as much by his detailed
account of his efforts as by the hope for a peaceful solution
it holds out. As long as there is a glimmer of hope for
success,the Secretary-General must be afforded every facility to carry out his mission. We have just been advised of his
plan to leave for Iran tomorrow at the invitation of the
Government of Iran, and we welcome this. We sincerely
pray for the successof his visit. We hope that its outcome
will make consideration of measures other than the pursuit
of nis good offices supertluous and unnecessary.
11. If at the end of the road there is need for another
remedy, that remedy must be appropriately sanctioned by
the Security Council. As the International Court of Justice

’ United States Diplomatic and Cons&u Staflti Teheran, l?rov.Wonal
Measures, Order of IS December 1979. I.C.J. Reports 1979, p. 7.

2

14. The Czechoslovak delegation, consistent with its position, supported the urgent appeal of all members of the
Council for the immediate release of all ~personnel of the
Embassy of the United States of America being held at
Teheran. At the same time, it shares the view that it would
undoubtedly be useful for concerted and unanimous efforts
to be continued within the framework of the Council in
order to implement the purposes of resolution457 (1979). It
believes also that members of the Council should not seek to
take any steps that could provide anyone with an opportunity to use them to aggravate the situation further. Only a
diligent search for a peaceful resolution of any conflicts will
make it possible for peace in that region to be preserved and
,for international security to be strengthened.

mgimes, we are all too familiar with the lack of political will
m the part of some States represented here to use the
Council effectively.
20. However, be that as it may, and in the hope and
expectation that in future all States will want the United
Nations to be effective, we feel that it is time for all countries
to respect the authority of the United Nations without
equivocation and to refrain from applying double
standards.
21. Let me repeat here for the sake of clarity that the
Council has been unanimous in upholding the principles
which Iran continues to violate. These principles of intemational law, relating to the inviolability of diplomatic persons
and diplomatic establishments, are at stake in this case. We
deplore ban’s continued disregard of the appeals for the
release of the American hostages made by the Security
Council, the International Court of Justice, the SecretaryGeneral and the President of the General Assembly on
several occasions since November.

15. Mr. MUTUKWA (Zambia): Once again Zambia joins
its voice to the voices -of reason of all-those who have
appealed to Iran to release all the American personnel being
held hostage in that country. We urge the Council to reiterate its previous appeals on this matter. Iran does not stand
to gain anything by continuing to flout the appeals of the
international community for the release of the hostages and
for that country to live by the tenets of international law on
this matter. The norms of international law and practice
relating to the sanctity of diplomatic persons have, by and
large, been observed by diverse nations and peoples from
time immemorial, be they in Asia, Africa, Europe or the
Americas. This principle has to be ubserved in all situations:
in conflict, peace, or even war. :
I .
16. The Zambian delegation firmly believes that only
respect for the carefully articulated principles of the Charter
of the United Nations can enhance the effectiveness of the
world body in the maintenance of international peace and
security.

22. Many of us in the Council have stressed, and we stress
now, the need to resolve all crisis situations by peaceful
means. We have stressed that States should refrain from
threatening to use force in pursuit of their objectives. We
stand firmly by these principles of international relations,
without which the foundations of international peace and
security would be in peril.
23. It is vital that we all bear in mind that the issue we are
handling is delicate, as it is a crisis situation. In Zambia’s
considered view, we should not despair in the pursuit of the
dictates of reason. We should not despair in the search for
peaceful solutions to the problem. We should also not
despair in our resolve to succeed in attaining our ultimate
objectives. To do so would be to jeopardize the sanctity of
institutions and the quintessence of human survival, which
we in Zambia cherish.

17. The present crisis, which constitutes a potential threat
to international peace and security, is of grave concern to us
as members of the international community and of the
Security Council. The international community therefore
bears the responsibility for finding a peaceful solution to the
problem. My delegation deeply appreciates the continued
mediation efforts by the Secretary-General in seeking to
secure the release of the American hostages. We also hope
and pray that the Iranian authorities will heed the pleas of
many world leaders, including that of my own country’s
President, that the American hostages be freed.

24. In the view of the Zambian delegation, therefore, the
international community has yet to exhaust diplomatic
negotiations in seeking the release of the hostages. I say that
without prejudice to all the preceding efforts at peaceful
negotiation. As we are aware, Chapter Vl of the time-tested
Charter on the role of the United Nations in crisis situations
provides a variety of options on how to resolve conflict
situations by peaceful means. As one of those options, the
Council should renew its request to the Secretary-General
to consider proceeding to Iran to negotiate the release of the
hostages. We are grateful that the Secretary-General has
stated publicly on several occasions that he is prepared to
continue using his good off&s, including undertaking a trip
to Teheran.

18. The continued holding by Iran of the American diplomatic personnel is a violation of the basic tenets of intemational law and practice. In Zambia’s view it is very
important that all countries, irrespective of their size and
strength, respect the decisions and authority of the Security
Council, an institution whose very existence we should all
recognize as being essential if world peace is to be maintained. Through the United Nations we can all collectively
co-ordinate our efforts to remove the causes of war.

25. If the Council were to mandate the Secretary-General
to proceed to Iran, it would be unfortunate, to say the least,
for the Council to attach any conditions which could be
tantamount to prejudging issues. For instance, it would be
inappropriate to suggest that the Secretary-General proceed while. at the ‘same time we envisage what course of
action to take in the event of failure. At this stage, when the
mission has not even taken place, it would be inappropriate
to contemplate in a resolution the kind of action w.hich

19. Small countries like my own have repeatedly called
upon all States, including the permanent members of the
Security Councii, to help to enforce the decisions of the
Council against all international culprits. As a frontline State in the southern African region, where conflict
abounds as a result of the existence of racist minority
3

30. My Government’s position on the issue before us has
been made clear in a statement issued by Prime Minister
Manley on 20 November and reafIirmed in our statement
before the Council on ,2 December [227&h meeting],We
expressed our strong disapproval of the action in Iran,
which .is a grave violation of international law and undermines the institutional framework through which relations
between States are conducted. From the humanitarian
standpoint, our concern for the safety of the hostages remains undiminished. We once more appeal to the Govemment. of Iran to heed the voice of world opinion, to honour
its obligations under international law, and to take into
account the suffering and mental anguish that is being
endured by the persons held in such long confinement, as
well as their families. We again appeal for the immediate
and unconditional release of the hostages and their safe
departure from Iran.

would be taken if Iran failed to comply. I would ask who
knows whether Iran will not comply before a fresh attempt
is made? To assume that Iran will not comply would be
counter-productive to the proposed mission of the Secretary-General. The Secretary-General should be allowed
room for flexibility in the use of his good offices.
26. In conclusion, I wish to reiterate the view that the
strength of the Security Council lies in its unity of purpose,
which has so far been eloquently demonstrated in all our
deliberations on this issue. Those of us who have been
seized of this issue behind closed doors and in open Council
meetings know this for a fact. If there are any differences in
approach, they are in the spirit of trying to be helpful,
because we are all agreed on the objective: the safe release of
the American hostages being held in Iran. Zambia will
cooperate with the other members of the Council in working relentlessly for the release of the hostages and for a
peaceful solution to this crisis as we enter the new year.

3 1. We continue to assure the Government of Iran that we
are aware of the intense feelings of the people of Iran with
regard to the past grievances, and with regard to the acts
committed by the previous regime. But a remedy for legitimate grievances should be sought in an appropriate forum
and within the terms of international law. Jamaica believes
that the interests of the Government and people of Iran
cannot bc served by taking a path of confrontation with the
United Nations.

27. Mr. NEIL (Jamaica): Almost a month has elapsed
since the Council met in response to the request of the
Secretary-General to consider the problem that again confronts us today. On 4 December the Council, in a unanimous vote, adopted resolution 457 (1979). which urgently
called on the Government of Iran to release immediately the
personnel of the Embassy of the United States being held
hostage at Teheran, and which also called on the Govemments of Iran and of the United States to take steps to
resolve peacefully the remaining issues between them. Since
. the adoption of that resolution, the International Court of
Justice, on 15 December, in a unanimous decision issued an
order requiring the Government of Iran to ensure that the
premises of the United States diplomatic missions in Iran be
restored to the possession of the United States authorities
and to ensure the immediate release of the American hostages. The Court also called upon the Governments
involved to ensure that no action be taken by them that
might aggravate the tension between the two countries. It is
not often that the international community has been able to
express itself so clearly and unanimously as it has on this
issue.

32. Jamaica’s firm commitment to international co-operation and to ensuring an effective role for the United Nations
in world affair’s has been restated on many occasions.As a
small country we regard it as vital to our interests and to our
security and as an important instrument for the peaceful
resolution of differences and disputes between States.
33. We are therefore pleased that the Government of the
United States has sought to use the machinery of the United
Nations to seek a peaceful resolution of the current problem. The Security Council, which has the primary responsibility for maintaining international peace and security,
should do its utmost to satisfy this aspiration. The authority
and prestige of the Council must be protected. The integrity
of international law must be upheld.

28. Yet up to now, after nearly two months, the United
States Embassy at Teheran remains occupied by an armed
group of demonstrators, and embassy personnel are held in
captivity-all of this with the support of the Government of
Iran. With each passing day the tension mounts, and a crisis
which represents a great danger to international peace and
security is prolonged.

34. But a lot now depends on the Government of Iran. We
sincerely hope that that Government will seize the further
opportunity which is offered to choose a course which will
assist in bringing about a speedy end to the current crisis by
co-operating in the implementation of the decisions of the
Security Council, particularly through the good of&es of
the Secretary-General during his planned visit to Iran.
Without such co-operation, and without an improvement
in the situation, the Council will have to consider the adoption of specific enforcement measures provided for in the
Charter to give force to its decisions.

29. The delegation of Jamaica must expressits deep disap
pointment and dissatisfaction at the failure of the Govemment of Iran to respond positively to the many appeals
made to it, in particular the call by the Council in resolution
457 (1979) for the immediate release of the American hostages and for the ensuring of their safe departure from Iran.
‘)Ne are particularly disappointed at the response to the
efforts of the Secretary-General, who has patiently and with
perseverance pursued his contacts with the Iranian authorities at various levels. His report indicates that the Iranian
authorities appeared unwilling to make use of his good
offh~s made available within the terms of resolution 457
(1979).

35. Mr. PALACIOS de VIZZIO (Bolivia) (interpretation
from Spanish):The delegation of Bolivia can do no less than
express its disappointment that the Council must, once
again face a reality-that is as sad as it is frustratingi Fiity
members of the diplomatic staff of the United States at
Tehcraq are still being detained as hostages in violation of
the most fundamental norms of humanitarianism and international coexistence.

4

-~

‘.

36. As it has made known on many occasions, my country
is not precisely a supporter of condemnations and Sanctions
as advisable means of modifying the actions of a State or
obtaining a change in its international conduct. On the
contrary, my country has always promoted the utilization
of negotiations, mediation, good offices and other peaceful
measures recognized in the Charter as those most suited to
the settlement of international disputes. Therefore, Bolivia.
particularly appreciates the tireless efforts the SecretaryGeneral has made and is making, and we give him ‘our
unreserved recognition and admiration. That is why my
country resolutely supports the initiative that the’secretaryGeneral visit Iran so as personally to continue his endeavours finally to obtain the release of the hostages.
37. My delegation is convinced that all possibilities of
reaching a peaceful settlement that is satisfactory to the
parties to the dispute must be explored and exhausted. It
has been guided by this criterion during the present crisis.
Obviously, we are facing a situation that is exceedingly
unusual, indeed highly exceptional, as the SecretaryGeneral emphasized in his report of 22 December. It is a
situation that doubtless requires the most serious and discerning consideration by the community of nations.
38. However, in the existing circumstances my delegation
cannot but take into consideration an exceedingly deilorable fact: that the outcry of the international community of
nations for nearly two months, as in particular expressed in
the appeals and exhortations of the Presidents of the General Assembly and the Security Council, in resolution 457
(1979) and in the provisional measures indicated by the
International Court of Justice-a unanimous, repeated and
consistent outcry for the immediate release of the hostages
and the complete protection of their persons-has been
totally ignored by a State Member of the Organization.
39. The undebatable seriousness of this situation, which is
creating a climate of real anguish and concern for intemational peace and security, is such that my delegation is of the
opinion that, if the important mission that the SecretaryGeneral must personally undertake in Iran does not obtain
the results for which the international community is hoping
within a specific reasonable period, the Security Council
should meet to consider the urgent adoption of measures,
including those envisaged in Chapter VII of the Charter.
40. Bolivia is a small country, a founding Member of the
United Nations and a member of the non-aligned movement. As such, it firmly supports the principles of peaceful
coexistence enshrined in the most relevant standards of
international law: the right to selfdetermination, to independence, to the free choice of means and methods of
development and political, economic and social progress.
Above all, my country has placed its trust in the United
Nations, which, day by day, represents the best answer that
mankind has been able to create for the achievement of just
and lasting peace on our planet.
41. Consequently, it urges the Organization to fulfil the
aims for which it wascreated and thus effectively respond to
this challenge to its authority. Otherwise, by failing to act
and evincing indecisiveness, not only shall we be giving
credence to the voices opposing and contradicting what the

I

Organization represents, but we ourselves shall be shaking
the foundations of one of the most solid bulwarks that
States, particularly small ones, rely on for the defence of
their interests.
42. In conclusion, my delegation again urges the leaders
of Iran, in accordance with the most sacred humanitarian
principles, to forgo their obduracy and immediately and ’
unconditionally release all the hostages, thereby overcoming this difficult crisis which, moreover, does nothing but
indefinitely delay the possibility of the international community’s considering the legitimacy of the claims of that
country.
43. The PRESIDENT (inzerpreZaZionjkm Chinese): The
next speaker is the representative of Japan. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
44. Mr. NISIBORI
(Japan): I should like to begin by
stressing my sincere gratitude to you, Mr. President, and
through you to the members of the Security Council for
allowing me once again to present Japan’s views on the
crucial issue now under deliberation. Recognizing the gravity of this issue to the international community, my delegation has requested the opportunity to speak in the hope of
contributing to an early solution of the problem.
45. We deeply regret the fact that the hostages’have still
not been released, although it will soon be two months since
the problem arose and one month since resolution 457
(1979) was unanimously adopted. We feel profound sympathy with the hostages and their families for the unimaginable stress and anguish they are being forced to endure.
46. The international community finds it absolutely intolerable that the Iranian Government has ignored the calls for
the immediate and unconditional release of the hostages, as
contained in the Security Council resolution and in the
order of the International Court of Justice, as well as in the
numerous appeals by the President of the Council, the
Secretary-General, the President of the General Assembly
and various regional groups.
47. In seeking a peaceful settlement of the problem, Japan
fully supports resolution 457 (1979) and highly appreciates
the ongoing endeavours of the Secretary-General in lending
his good ofices to the search for a solution, We find it
regrettable that, despite these efforts, the situation has yet to
be resolved. Thus we heartily welcome the SecrstaryGeneral’s announcement made just a short while ago that
he is leaving for Iran tomorrow. Japan strongly hopes that
the Secretary-General’s efforts will be fruitful and we
eagerly await his report to the Council upon his return.
48. In the event that the repeated and manifold efforts
exerted by the Secretary-General as well as by various relevant organs and countries do not achieve their objective
within a reasonable period of time, my delegation believes
that the Council should take effective and appropriate
measures in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter. Let me assure you, Mr. President, that my Govemment would support such measures by the Council.
49. Japan earnestly hopes, above all, that the concerted
efforts of the international community will result in the

57. But what the Security Council faces today is more
than just a decision on a matter of humanitarian rights or of
international law. Members should all be conscious that
their decision may substantially affect the relevance-the
very usefulness-of the United Nations as an instrument for
the maintenance of world order.

immediate release of the hostages and then that, in accordance with resolution 457 (1979), the parties concerned will
take steps as soon as possible to resolve peacefully the
remaining issues between them to their mutual satisfaction.
50. In closing, I should like to express the hope that our
endeavours will be successful in the near future and thus
preclude the necessity of convening yet another substantive
meeting of the Council on this issue.

58. The Council has already called upon Iran to release
the hostages it holds at Teheran and has called upon both
Iran and the United States to take steps to resolve the
remaining differences between them. The International
Court of Justice, in a unanimous decision, has also called
for such release. Clearly, these actions have not sufliced to
persuade Iran to live up to its international obligations.

51. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Chinese): The
next speaker is the Secretary of State for External Affairs of
Canada, Miss MacDonald. I welcome her and invite her to
take a place at the Council table in order to make her
statement.

59. The draft resolution the council has before it [WI3714
allows for a final intensified effort at persuasion by ‘the
Secretary-General, further to those actions he has already
taken. We pray that it will be successful. But should he
fail-should Iran not respond-you are asked to agree to
take further measures: to implement sanctions under the
provisions of the Charter. These provisions were designed
from the outset to- be used in situations such as this one,
where a country is in flagrant violation of the obligations it
has undertaken as a member of the international community.

52. Miss MacDONALD (Canada): Mr. President, I thank
you for this opportunity to be able to participate today in
this meeting of the Security Council.
53. It is because we have respect for international law that
we are able to meet here today. It is because 23 million
Canadians are outraged by a violation of international law
that I have asked to speak. Probably more than any other
nation, Canada is aware of the enormity of feeling that the
hostage situation in Iran has aroused in the American
people. Perhaps more-than most we are able to admire the
restraint with which the. United States Government has
acted in the face of such strong provocation.

60. The United States in particular, but also every civilized
country, has the right to.expect that the Council will adopt
this draft,resolution. To fail to do so would be to admit the
inability of the community of nations to use its institutions
to maintain order in international affairs.

54. On humanitarian grounds alone, the need to act is
clear. indeed it is compelling. For two months now, 50 ordinary men and women have been subjected to the grossest
violation of their rights. Like all of us here I am deeply
concerned for these hostages, just as I am in every instance
where people anywhere in the world are deprived of their
human rights.

61. Unquestionably, the people and Government of Iran
feel a deep grievance, and look forrecognition of the right to
redress which they so strongly feel. Accordingly, it is
imperative that Iranians be made to understand that the
international institutions are just as much at their service as
they are at the service of the Americans.

55. That ground alone would suffice to compel this body
to act. But even more is at stake. As other speakers have
made amply clear, the very foundations of international law
and of civilized diplomacy are called into question by the
situation in Iran.

62. By supporting the draft resolution, members of the
Council will be sending a direct message to the Government
of Iran that its current behaviour is totally unacceptable to
the civilized world. But it should also be clear that once Iran
has again made its behaviour conform to international law,
it will be able to turn to the international community for a
full and fair hearing of its complaints.

56. It is not necessary for me to rehearse the sound and
compelling arguments that have already been made here.
None the less, no delegation in the Council should losebight
of its responsibility before. the world community, now and
in the future, for the way it votes on this issue. Rarely is a
turning point in world history so clear to the people in
whose hands a decision lies. To ignore this stark need for
communal corrective action would be to threaten the fabric
of the international community and to risk a dark age of
diplomatic anarchy.

63. On behalf of the people of Canada, I urge the
members of the Council to endorse this draft resolution. It is
a powerful, positive and peaceful step that can help to
resolve this intolerable situation which threatens the peace,
the order and good governance of the whole world.
The meeting rose at 5.35 p.m.

:

6
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

su.s.

I.50

79-70002~March

198%2,250
