VIII

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE
AD HOC POLITICAL COMMITTEE
3. Is of the opinion that the conduct of the Governments of Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania in this matter
is such as to indicate that they are aware of breaches
being committed of those articles of the Treaties of
Peace under which they are obligated to secure the enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms in
their countries; and that they are callously indifferent
to the sentiments of the world community;
4. Noles with anxietv the continuance of serious accusations on these matt'ers against the Governments of
Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania, and that the three
Governments have made no satisfactory refutation of
these accusations;
5. Invites 1fembers of the United Nations, and in particular those which are parties to the Treaties of Peace
with Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania, to submit to the
Secretary-General all evidence which they now hold or
which may become available in future in relation to this
question;
6. Lil<'twisc im·itcs the Secretary-General to notify
the Members of the United Nations of any information
he may receive in connexion with this question.
303rd p!cnary mcC'ting,
3 November 1950.

385 (V). Observance in Bulgaria, Hungary and
Romania of human rights and fundamental
freedoms
The General Assembly,
Considering that one of the purposes of the United
Nations is to·achieve international co-operation in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to
race, sex, language or religion,
Havin_q rC'gard to General Assembly resolutions 272
(III) and 294 (IV) concerning the question of the
observance in Bulgaria, Hungary and Romapia of human
rights and fundamental freedoms, and to its decision in
the latter resolution to submit certain questions to the
International Court of Justice for an advisory opinion,
l. Ta!ws notC' of the advisory opinions 1 delivered by
the Interna~ional Court of Justice on 30 March 1950 and
18 July 1950 to the effect that:
.(a) The diplomatic exchanges between Bulgaria,
Hungary and Romania on the one hand, and certain
Allied and Associated Powers signatories to the Treaties
of Peace on the other, concerning the implementation
of article 2 of the Treaties with Bulgaria and Hungary
and article 3 of the Treaty with Romania, disclose disputes to the provisions for the settlement of disputes
contained in article 36 of the Treaty of Peace with Bulgaria, article 40 of the Treaty of Peace with Hungary,
and article 38 of the Treaty of Peace with Romania;
(b) The Governments_ of Bulgaria, Hungary and
Romania are obligated to carry out the provisions of
those articles of the Treaties of Peace which relate to the
settlement of disputes, including the provisions for the
appointment of their representatives to the Treaty
Commissions ;

386 (V).

The GenC'ral Assembly,
Considering that:
The General Assembly, during the second part of its
first session in 1946, acloptecl several recommendations
concerning Spain, one of which provided that Spain be
debarred from membership in international agencies established by or brought into relationship with the United
Nations, and another that Member States withdraw
their Ambassadors and Ministers from Madrid,

( c) If one party fails to appoint a representative to
a Treaty Commission under the Treaties of Peace with
Bu)garia, Hunga_ry and Romania where that party is
ob_hg_ated to appomt a re~resentative to the Treaty Comm1ss10n, the Secretary-General of the United Nations
is not authorized to appoint the third member of the
C_ommission upon the request of the other party to a
dispute;

The establishment of diplomatic relations and the
exchange of Ambassadors and Ministers with a government does not imply any judgment upon the domestic
policy of that government,
The specialized agencies of the United Nations are
technical and largely non-political in character and have
been established in order to benefit the peoples of all
nations, and that, therefore, they should be free to
decide for themselves whether the participation of Spain
in their activities is desirable in the interest of their
work,
Resolves:
1. To revoke the recommendation for the withdrawal
of Ambassadors and Ministers from Madrid, contained

2. Condemns the wilful refusal of the Governments of
~ulg~ria, Hungary and Romania to fulfil their obligat10;1 under the pr?visions of the Treaties of Peace to app01~t r~presentatives to the Treaty Commissions, which
obhgat1011 has been confirmed by the International Court
of Justice;
1

Relations of States Members and specialized agencies with Spain

See Interpretation of Peace Treaties, Advisory Opinion:

I.C.J. Reports 1950, page 65 and Interpretation of Peace Treaties
(second phase), Advisory Opinion: I.C.J. Reports 1950, page 221.

16

Resolutions adopted on reports of the Ad Hoe Political Committee

in General Assembly resolution 39 (I) of 12 December

1946;
2. To revoke the recommendation intended to debar
Spain from membership in international agencies established by or brought into relationship with the
United Nations, which recommendation is a part of the
same resolution adopted by the General Assembly in
1946 concerning relations of Members of the United
Nations with Spain.

304th plenary meeting,
4 November 1950.
387 (V). Libya: Report of the United Nations
Commissioner in Libya; Reports of the administering Powers in Libya

The General Assembly,
Having resolved by its resolution 289 A (IV) of
21 November 1949 that Libya shall be constituted a
united independent and sovereign State,

Having noted the report 2 of the United Nations
Commissioner in Libya, prepared in consultation with
the Council for Libya, and those of the administering
Powers,3 submitted in accordance with General Assembly resolution 289 A (IV), as well as the statements•
made by the United Nations Commissioner and the
representatives of the Council for Libya,
Having noted in particular the confidence expressed
by the United Nations Commissioner that the aim
of the General Assembly, namely, that Libya should
become an independent and sovereign State, will be
attained within the time-limit prescribed, with the increasing co-operation of the administering Powers with
the United Nations Commissioner and the mutual coordination of their activities toward that end,
Having noted the statements in the above-mentioned
report of the United Nations Commissioner regarding
the needs of Libya for technical and financial assistance
both before and after independence, if such assistance
is requested by the Government of Libya,
l. Expresses confidence that the United Nations
Commissioner in Libya, aided and guided by the advice
of the members of the Council for Libya, will take the
necessary steps to discharge his functions toward the
achievement of the independence and unity of Libya
pursuant to the above-mentioned resolution;
2. Calls upon the authorities concerned to take all
steps necessary to ensure the early, full and effective
implementation of the resolution of 21 November 1949,
and particularly the realization of the unity of Libya
and the transfer of power to an independent Libyan
Government; and, further,
3. Recommends:
(a) That a National Assembly duly representative
of the inhabitants of Libya shall be convened as early
as possible, and in any case before 1 January 1951 ;
2
. Sec Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Session, Supplement No. 15.
8
See documents A/1387, A/1390 and A/1390/Add.I.

17

( b) That this National Assembly shall establish a
Provisional Government of Libya as early as possible,
bearing in mind 1 April 1951 as the target date;
( c) That powers shall be progressively transferred
to the Provisional Government by the administering
Powers in a manner which will ensure that all powers
at present exercised by them shall, by 1 January 1952,
have been transferred to the duly constituted Libyan
Government ;
( d) That the United Nations Commissioner, aided
and guided by the advice of the members of the Council for Libya, shall proceed immediately to draw up a
programme, in co-operation with the administering
Powers, for the transfer of power as provided in subparagraph (c) above;

4. Urges the Economic and Social Council, the specialized agencies and the Secretary-General of the
United Nations to extend to Libya, in so far as they
may be in a position to do so, such technical and
financial assistance as it may request in order to establish a sound basis for economic am! social progress ;
5. Reaffirms its recommendations that, upon its establishment as an independent State, Libya be admitted
to the United ~ations in accordance with Article 4
of the Charter.
307th plenary meeting,
17 November 1950.
388 (V).

Economic and financial provisions relating to Libya
A

W hcreas, in accordance with the provisions of article
23 and paragraph 3 of annex XI of the Treaty of Peace
with Italy, the question of the disposal of the former
Italian colonies was submitted on 15 September 1948 to
the General Assembly by the Governments of France,
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and
the United States of America,
W hercas, by virtue of the above-mentioned provisions,
the four Powers have agreed to accept the recommendation of the General Assembly and to take appropriate
measures for giving effect to it,
Whereas the General Assembly, by its resolutions~ of
21 November 1949 and of 17 November 1950, recommended that the independence of Libya should become
effective as soon as possible, and in any case not later
than 1 January 1952,
Whereas paragraph 19 of annex XIV of the Treaty
of Peace with Italy, which contains the economic and
financial provisions relating to ceded territories, states
that "The provisions of this annex shall not apply to
the former Italian colonies. The economic and financial
provisions to be applied therein will form part of the
arrangements for the final disposal of these territories
pursuant to article 23 of the present Treaty",
• See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Session, Ad Hoe Political Committee, 7th-17th meetings inclusive.
~ See resolutions 289 (IV) and 387 (V).
