IX.

Noting also the report of the Special Committee on
the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization,'" especially the
work done on the draft Manila declaration on the
peaceful settlement of international disputes, 11
Taking into account the suggestions and opinions expressed during the examination at its current session of
the question of the peaceful settlement of disputes between States,
Bearing in mind the wide consultations that have
taken place in connexion with the content of the declaration on the peaceful settlement of international disputes and the fruitful activity in the Working Group,
established at the current session of the General
Assembly, which continued the elaboration of the declaration,
l. Calls again upon all States to adhere strictly in
their international relations to the principle that States
shall settle their international disputes by peaceful
means in such a manner that international peace and
security and justice are not endangered:
2. Considers that the question of the peaceful settlement of disputes should represent one of the central concerns for States and that, to this end, the efforts for
examining and further developing the principle of the
peaceful settlement of disputes between States and the
means of consolidating its full observance by all States
in their international relations should be continued:
3. Considers also that the elaboration, as soon as
possible, of a declaration of the General Assembly on
the peaceful settlement of international disputes is likely
to contribute to the strengthening of the role and the efficiency of the United Nations in pn:venting conflicts
and settling them peacefully:
4. Requests the Special Committee on the Charter of
the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the
Role of the Organization to continue the elaboration of
the draft Manila declaration on the peaceful settlement
of international disputes with a view to submitting it for
further consideration to the General Assembly at its
thirty-sixth session;
5. Refers to the Special Committee the report of its
Working Group on the Peaceful Settlement of
Disputes, 1x as well as the views expressed at the current
session of the General Assembly on the contents of the
declaration;
6. Expresses the hope that the States which have not
yet transmitted to the Secretary-General their opinions
on that matter will do so as soon as possible in order to
contribute, in this way also, to the elaboration of the
declaration;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Peaceful settlement of disputes between States".
95th plenary meeting
I 5 December I 980
35/161.

261

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Consideration of the draft articles on mostfavoured-nation clauses

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33 / 139 of 19 December 1978
relating to the report of the International Law Commis" Official Records of the General A.uemhly. Thirty-Jijih Session.
Supplement No. 33 (A/35/33 and Corr. I)_
11
Ibid., para. 159.
1
' A/C.6/35/L.21.

sion on the work of its thirtieth session, in particular section II of the resolution,
Having considered the item entitled "Consideration of
the draft articles on most-favoured-nation clauses", including the report of the Secretary-General submitted
pursuant to resolution 33/139, 1"
Bearing in mind the importance of facilitating international trade and development of economic cooperation among all States on the basis of equality,
mutual advantage and non-discrimination in the establishment of the new international economic order,
A ware of the fact that more replies from States and interested intergovernmental agencies are needed,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General:
2. Requests the Secretary-General to reiterate his
invitation to Member States, organs of the United
Nations which have competence in the subject-matter
and interested intergovernmental organizations to submit or bring up to date. not later than 30 June 198 I,
their written comments and observations on chapter II
of the report of the International Law Commission on
the work of its thirtieth session 211 and, in particular, on:
(a) The draft articles on most-favoured-nation
clauses adopted by the Commission:
(b) Those provisions relating to such clauses on
which the Commission was unable to take decisions:
and also requests States to comment on the recommendation of the Commission that those draft articles
should be recommended to Member States with a view
to the conclusion of a convention on the subject:

3. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate, before the thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly,
the comments and observations submitted in accordance with paragraph 2 above:
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to bring
up to date, in view of the comments and observations
mentioned in paragraph 2 above, the analytical compilation of comments and observations from Governments, organs of the United Nations which have
competence in the subject-matter and interested intergovernmental organizations:
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Consideration of
the draft articles on most-favoured-nation clauses" and
to consider it at an early stage.

95th plenary meeting
15 December 1980
35 / 162.

Review
process

of the

multilateral

treaty-making

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that multilateral treaties are an important primary source of international law,
Conscious, therefore, that the process of elaboration
of multilateral treaties, directed towards the progressive
development of international law and its codification,
forms an important part of the work of the United
Nations and of the international community in general,
Recalling its resolution 32/48 of 8 December 1977, by
which it requested the Secretary-General to prepare a
'A/3\'20J and:\dd. i-J.
'" Official Records of !he General Assembly. Thirty-third Session.
S111,pleme111 .\'o 10 1 \ _11 10).

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

262

report on the techniques and procedures used in the
elaboration of multilateral treaties, taking into consideration the observations of Governments and of the International Law Commission on the subject,
Aware of the heavy burden which active involvement
in the process of multilateral treaty-making places upon
Governments,
Convinced that the most rational use should be made
of the finite resources available for elaboration of multilateral treaties,
Taking into account statements made at the current
session in the debate in the Sixth Committee, 21
I. Takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral, 22 and of the views of Governments and of the
International Law Commission contained in the addenda thereto, 23 on the review of the multilateral treatymaking process;
2. Invites Governments and international intergovernmental organizations to submit by 31 July I 981 their
observations on the report of the Secretary-General,
taking into account the specific questions contained in
section IV thereof, as well as their comments on any
other aspect of the subject, as they consider desirable:
3. Requests the Secretary-General to make his
report and its addenda widely available to other interested organizations which are active in the preparation
and study of multilateral treaties, and to invite them to
comment on the subject of the report;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to collate and
arrange the material received pursuant to General
Assembly resolution 32/48, with a view to its possible
publication;
5. Also requests the Secretary-General to prepare
and publish new editions of the Handbook of Final
Clauses 24 and the Summary of the Practice of the
Secretary-General as Depositary of Multilateral Agreements;25
6. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit
to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session a
report containing the replies received pursuant to paragraphs 2 and 3 above, as well as a topical summary of
the debate at its thirty-fifth session:
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Review of the multilateral treaty-making process".

95th plenary meeting
15 December 1980

35/163.

Report of the International Law Commission

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its thirty-sixth session/"
Emphasizing the need for the progressive development
of international law and its codification in order to
make it a more effective means of implementing the purposes and principles set forth in the Charter of the
"Ibid.. Thirty-fifth Session, Six1h Committee, 55th. 60th-64th, 73rd
and 75th meetings: and ibid.. Sixth Commillee. Sessional Fascicle.
corrigendum.
"A/35/312 and Corr. I.
"A/35/312/Add.l and 2 and Add.2/Corrl.

"ST/LEG/6.
"ST/LEG/7.
1
•

Official Records of 1he General Assemhii'. 7111rtr,/ijih Ses.1ion.
Supplement No. 10 (A/35/10).

United Nati•Jns and in the Declaration on Principles of
International Law concerning Friendly Relations and
Co-operation among States in accordance with the
Charter of the United N ations 27 and to give increased
importance to its role in relations among States,
Noting with appreciation that at its thirty-second session the International Law Commission, pursuant to
General Assembly resolutions 33/139 of 19 December
1978 and 34/141 of 17 December 1979, completed the
first reading of the addendum to the draft articles on
succession of States in respect of matters other than
treaties and of the draft articles on treaties concluded
between States and international organizations or between international organizations, as well as the first
reading of the set of articles constituting part one of the
draft on responsibility of States for internationally
wrongful acts,
Noting further with appreciation the progress made by
the International Law Commission in the preparation of
draft articles on the law of the non-navigational uses of
international watercourses, and on jurisdictional immunities of States and their property, as well as the work
done by it regarding the status of the diplomatic courier
and the diplomatic hag not accompanied by diplomatic
courier and international liability for injurious consequences arising out of acts not prohibited by international law,
Recognizing the importance of referring legal and
drafting questions to the Sixth Committee, including
topics which might be submitted to the International
Law Commission, thus enabling the Commission
further to enhance its contribution to the progressive development of international law and its codification,
I. Takes note of the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its thirty-second session;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the International
Law Commission for the work accomplished at that session:
3. Approves the programme of work planned by the
International Law Commission for l981; 2x
4. Recommends that, taking into account the written
comments of Governments and views expressed in
debates in the General Assembly, the International Law
Commission should, at its thirty-third session:
(a) Complete, as recommended by the General
Assembly in resolution 34/141. the second reading of
the draft articles on succession of States in respect of
matters other than treaties, adopted at its thirty-first and
thirty-second sessions:
(b) Commence the second reading of the draft articles on treaties concluded between States and international organizations or between international organizations:
(c) Continue its work on State responsibility with
the aim of beginning the preparation of draft articles
concerning part two of the draft on responsibility of
States for internationally wrongful acts, bearing in mind
the need for a second reading of the draft articles constituting part one of the draft:
(d) Continue its work on international liability for
injurious consequences arising out of acts not prohibited hy international law:
(e) Proceed with the preparation of draft articles on
the law of the non-navigational uses of international
· Resolution 2625 (XXV). annex.
·, Sec Official Records of the Genaal Assemhl_i-. Thirty-jijih Session.
S11pplrn1en1 :Vo 10 (A _1, 1 Ill). chap. IX. ,eel. A.
