s

UNITED
NATION,S

---------------------------------------·---Security Councll

Distr.
GENERAL
S/24091

12 June 1992
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH/FRENCH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE &ECURITY COUPCIL
Following coneultations among membera of t.,,e Security Council, the
President of the Council made tbe following statemeut, on bebalf of the
Council, at its 3085th me•ting, on 12 June 1992, in connection with the
Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation in Cambodia":
"Having nad the report of the Secretary-General (S124090), the
Security Council is deeply concerned bt the difficultiea that thA United
Nations Tranaitional Autho~ity in Cambodia (UNTAC) is en~ountering in the
implementation of the Paris Agreements, l i on the eve of moving to the
second phase of the cease-fire. In particular, the Council notes that,
during the meeting of the Supreme National Council on 10 June 1~92, one
part.y waa not able to allow the net.:esaary deployment of U'lTA.C in areas
under its control. The Council believes that any delay could j6opardize
the whole peace process to which all Caml:,odian parti.es have agreed under
the a~apices of the United Nations and the Paris Conferunce.

"The Council reaftirma the importance of the full and timely
implement~tion of the Paris Agreements. The Council commenda the efforts
of the Secretary-Gefieral's Special Rapresentative and UNT~C in this
ragarâ. It reaffirma that the Supreme National Council~ under the
chairmanship of HRH Prince Norodom Sihanouk, is the unique legitimate
body and source ot authoxity in which, throughout the tranaitional
period, the sovereignty, independence and unity of Cambodia aro
enahrined. In this regard, section lII of part lof the PQria Agreements
ahould be implemented as 100n as possible.
"The Council atrenes the ne&d that the second phase o! the mil i tary
arr•ngemente shou:d begin on 13 June 1992, as determined in accordance
with the Agreeme~ts. In thia connection, the Council urges the
Secretary••General t.o accelerate the deployment of Lhe full l.f~lTA.C
peace-keeping force to Cambodia and wlthin the co~ntry,

92-25019

3258j (E)

120692

120692

/

...

S/'24091

English

Page 2
"The Cowi~il call• upon &11 parties to cortply strictly with the

collluitmeQts they haV<a accapted, including cooporation with UNTAC.

It

sp•citically calls upon a.ll parties to r•apond e.tfirmativ•ly to th•
latest demanda for cooperation in implementation ot tb• Aqre~menta putto
theni by UNTAC."

li

S/23177, amie~.
