United Nations

S/PV.3713

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-first Year

3713th Meeting
Friday, 15 November 1996, 4 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wisnumurti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Indonesia)

Members:

Botswana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Egypt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea-Bissau . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Honduras . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Legwaila
Mr. Somavía
Mr. Qin Huasun
Mr. Gomaa
Mr. Dejammet
Mr. Henze
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Martínez Blanco
Mr. Ferrarin
Mr. Włosowicz
Mr. Park
Mr. Lavrov
Sir John Weston
Mrs. Albright

Agenda
The situation in the Great Lakes region
Letter dated 14 November 1996 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/1996/941)

96-86834 (E)

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service,
room C-178.

Security Council
Fifty-first year
The meeting was called to order at 4.40 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Great Lakes region
Letter dated 14 November 1996 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/1996/941)
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Austria, Belgium, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Congo,
Denmark, Finland, Gabon, Ireland, Israel, Luxembourg, the
Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Rwanda, Spain, Sweden
and Zaire, in which they request to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nsanze
(Burundi), Mr. Kayinamura (Rwanda), Mr. Lukabu
Khabouji N’Zaji (Zaire) took seats at the Council
table; Mr. Sucharipa (Austria), Mr. Baekelandt
(Belgium), Ms. Boum (Cameroon), Mr. Fowler
(Canada), Mr. Abibi (Congo) Mr. Kimberg
(Denmark), Mr. Breitenstein (Finland), Mr. Dangue
Rewaka (Gabon), Mr. Campbell (Ireland), Mr. Ayalon
(Israel), Mr. Wolzfeld (Luxembourg), Mr. Biegman
(Netherlands), Mr. Biørn Lian (Norway), Mr. Catarino
(Portugal), Mr. Zulueta (Spain) and Mr. Osvald
(Sweden) took the seats reserved for them at the side
of the Council Chamber.
The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/1996/941, which contains the text of a letter dated 14
November 1996 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council.

2

3713th meeting
15 November 1996
Members of the Council also have before them
document S/1996/943, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Belgium, Botswana, Canada,
Chile, Denmark, Egypt, France, Gabon, Germany,
Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, the
Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of
Korea, Spain, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Zaire.
Austria, Cameroon, Congo, Finland, Israel, Luxembourg
and Sweden have joined as sponsors of the draft
resolution contained in document S/1996/943.
I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents:
S/1996/922, letter dated 11 November 1996 from the
Permanent Observer of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral, transmitting the text of the communiqué of the
Fourth Extraordinary Session of the Central Organ of the
OAU Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management
and Resolution, held at Addis Ababa on 11 November
1996; S/1996/942, letter dated 15 November 1996 from
the Chargé d’affaires, a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Zaire to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council; and S/1996/944, letter dated 15
November 1996 from the Permanent Representative of
Eritrea to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council.
Members of the Council have received photocopies
of the letter dated 15 November 1996 from the Permanent
Representative of Rwanda to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council, which
will be issued as document S/1996/945.
The first speaker on my list is the representative of
Zaire, on whom I now call.
Mr. Lukabu Khabouji N’Zaji (Zaire)
(interpretation from French): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir. We have even had personal
relations for many years and are most pleased to see you
presiding over the Council for the month of November,
which will be a difficult month for the Council.
At the same time, I would like to thank the
Permanent Representative of Honduras for his work as
President in the month of October.
On behalf of my country, I wish to express sincere
thanks to the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros BoutrosGhali, for his initiative in submitting the matter of the

Security Council
Fifty-first year
prevailing situation in eastern Zaire to the Security Council.
We also wish to pay a well-deserved tribute to Canada and
its two distinguished sons, Ambassador Chrétien and
General Baril, who have both accepted very difficult
missions on behalf of the United Nations, which we all
cherish.
On 30 June 1960, my country achieved independence
and international sovereignty. A few months later, turmoil
broke out in the country that led the United Nations
Security Council to take up the question of my country and
to come to its rescue to save its unity and integrity. Today,
that same Council is meeting to study the situation of
manifest aggression, witnessed by the entire world and
recognized even by the aggressors themselves.
Neighbours with whom we have maintained fraternal
relations for 34 years now think that they belonged to the
Hima empire. Rwanda, whose authorities came to power
through arms, has forced a portion of its population out of
the country. Eighty-five per cent of that population lives in
camps called “refugee camps”; however, I doubt that many
of you have had the opportunity to visit those camps known
as “refugee camps”. Those who have, I am certain, will
long remember the conditions in which these populations
live. People are reduced to living like animals under tents
in indescribable conditions, entire families live together,
relieve themselves together. That is what the camps are
like.
I do not want to sicken the Council any further on the
subject of the camps. This situation leaves the Kigali
authorities indifferent. Day after day, they exult in saying
that security reigns in Rwanda. If security reigns in
Rwanda, why should the camp population living in
undescribable conditions not be able to benefit from that
security? They are alive, but they are refugees who have
lost everything, even their dignity.
There is no way to convince us that 80 per cent of a
population is composed of criminals but since we are on
the subject of crime, according to the law of our countries,
as far as I know, crime is perpetrated by individuals. One
cannot accuse an entire population on a collective basis of
having committed a crime. Genocide did in fact take place,
but who conceived of it? Who carried it out? The
Rwandese themselves! There were Tutsi victims, I agree,
but we must not forget that there have been Hutu victims
as well. The people sought by the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda include Tutsis who were in power at
the time, just as there are now Hutus in power. Who knows

3713th meeting
15 November 1996
if, tomorrow, these Hutus might not also find themselves
accused of genocide against their own brothers?
My country has a tradition of welcoming refugees,
particularly those from Rwanda. In 1959, we took in a
wave of refugees who established themselves in our
country and some of whose sons are now in power in
Kigali. In 1972, we took in refugees again but they were
not armed. In 1994, tragedy erupted in Rwanda and Zaire
took in more than 2.5 million refugees. By way of
example, Germany, a developed country wealthier than
Zaire, with better means and more structures to cope with
refugees, took in 400,000 refugees from the former
Yugoslavia. Germany had no qualms about complaining
of the burden of these refugees on its territory. But,
imagine Zaire — no means, in a financial crisis, in a
social crisis, in an economic crisis — receiving five times
the number of refugees that Germany took in. Germany
knows how these refugees rewarded its generosity; Zaire
is in the same boat today.
The people we took into Zaire, whom we fed and
dressed, have returned through the back door with
weapons to kill our Zairian population. That is why,
before this Council, I wish to reiterate Zaire’s position, as
set out in the letter I addressed to the President of the
Security Council this morning. Zaire considers that the
key to the crisis in eastern Zaire is the problem of
refugees, be they from Rwanda or Burundi. We therefore
call on the international community to intervene and to
exert pressure, on Kigali in particular, to ensure that the
leaders in Kigali bring their compatriots home. I believe
that, once the refugee problem has been solved, calm will
return to the region. I can guarantee this because Zaire
lived on good terms with Rwanda and Burundi for 34
years.
Zaire, my country, agreed to the Secretary-General’s
proposal to convene a regional conference to consider the
problem in the region. Zaire, my country, even made an
offer to the Secretary-General, through the President of
the Republic of Zaire to accept the deployment of
observers along our borders with our neighbours. Zaire
was the sole country to welcome the Secretary-General’s
initiatives, in the belief that it could help solve the crisis
in Rwanda and Burundi. But what did Rwanda do?
Rwanda rejected that initiative; Rwanda called for the
departure of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Rwanda; Rwanda reduced the proposed number of United
Nations staff members allowed to stay in Kigali to a level
at which they could not work effectively. The non-

3

Security Council
Fifty-first year
governmental organizations that were permitted to function
in Rwanda were minimized.
But what was Rwanda trying to do? Perhaps the
Council does not know. Rwanda had a very clear-cut
objective: to get rid of all witnesses. Rwanda knew that,
some time ago, along the border of Zaire, an inflammatory
speech was given by a local leader in which he advocated
the establishment of an army. What we are experiencing
today is the result of that speech. Rwanda remembered that
it belongs to the Hima empire and wants to restore it. That
it is its right, but we remind Rwanda that the charter of the
Organization of African Unity enshrines a principle that no
African country would wish to abuse: the inviolability of
borders acquired after independence.
With regard to the refugee situation, how can the
international community remain impassive and indifferent
to what is occurring in Kigali? How can we accept that a
monoethnic Government should drive away the majority of
its population and then govern on behalf of that very
population. The principle against which the international
community fought in Bosnia and Herzegovina when it tried
to stop ethnic cleansing has become a rule of thumb for the
Government in Kigali. A tribe representing 85 per cent of
the population is expelled from the State of Rwanda and the
international community is content to follow the situation,
exerting no pressure whatsoever on Kigali to take that
population back.
My country made proposals when the wave of
Rwandese refugees invaded my country. We were aware of
the fact that there were armed elements among the refugees
crossing the border. We disarmed some, but how could we
disarm everybody? We could not contain such a mass. The
luggage that they carried on their heads sometimes
contained weapons that we were unable to inspect.
However, we made a proposal to the Security Council and
to the Secretary-General. Zaire identified sites where the
armed elements could be separated from civilian refugees.
Former members of the Council can testify to the
Council’s reaction at that time: “It is going to be very
expensive.” Zaire is curious to know today how much the
operation that we are about to undertake is going to cost. It
was the reluctance of the Security Council that has brought
us to the situation in which we find ourselves in today.
With regard to a regional conference, Ambassador
Jesus of Cape Verde was entrusted with the happy mission
of considering with leaders of the region the possibility of
bringing them together. Rwanda rejected the convening of

4

3713th meeting
15 November 1996
such a conference. Today, in the mandate entrusted to
Ambassador Chrétien — who is in the region — such a
conference is envisaged. We put it to the international
community that if the initiative for the conference
entrusted to Ambassador Jesus had taken place, we would
not be sitting here regretting the deaths of all those who
have already died.
We call upon the international community to exert
greater pressure on Kigali so that the refugee problem can
be solved through their return to their country.
My country is the victim of obvious aggression. I
was in this Chamber as the representative of Zaire to the
Security Council on 2 August 1990. We were in a similar
situation then: aggression perpetrated by one State against
another had sprung up in a different part of the world.
We raised an army to combat that aggression, so we
cannot understand the timidity with which the Security
Council is dealing with the aggression against my
country.
Today it is Zaire. Yesterday it was Kuwait. But who
knows whose turn it will be tomorrow?
I began by thanking Canada and its two worthy sons
for having agreed to this mission. I would like to say a
few words about the composition of the force that is
currently being authorized. I will be brief because the
details appear in the letter that I sent to the President of
the Security Council this morning. However, let me recall
that Zaire wishes to be consulted at all times on this
operation and may challenge offers from some States that
it considers to be working side-by-side with the aggressor.
In closing, I should like to return to the images that
our beloved CNN has been broadcasting throughout the
day. It showed us a column of women and children
wandering around — I do not know in which direction.
It told us of the return of the refugees to their beloved
country, Rwanda.
We are not dupes. That is a diversionary tactic
undertaken by Rwanda. The troops of the Rwandese
Patriotic Front in Goma have gone to the Mugunga camp
to chase out the few refugees remaining in the camps and
showed them the road to Gisenyi. The entire Rwandese
cabinet went to Gisenyi to say: “We will now welcome
our returning brothers.” For shame! For shame! For two
years, those people have been living like animals and only
today does the Rwandese cabinet go to Gisenyi to
welcome them.

Security Council
Fifty-first year
The Council should not let itself be duped by such
manoeuvres. Rwanda is a past-master of these ploys. Let us
remember that Rwanda had asked the United Nations to
leave it the matériel used by the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Rwanda. Its request made a mockery of the
United Nations.
I wish to express my country’s sincere gratitude for
the draft resolution that the Security Council is going to
adopt. It will enable the deployment of this multinational
force to eastern Zaire, first for humanitarian purposes and
allow for the possibility of an extended mandate for the
force under United Nations auspices.
I wish to thank the Council again and I do wish to
reserve my right to speak again later.
The President: I thank the representative of Zaire for
the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Rwanda, on
whom I now call.
Mr. Kayinamura (Rwanda): Allow me, at the outset,
to congratulate you warmly, Sir, on your assumption of the
office of President of the Security Council for the month of
November. We are convinced that, under your leadership,
the Council is in safe hands. We would also like to thank
Ambassador Gerardo Martínez Blanco of Honduras for his
skilful guidance of the work of the Council during the
month of October.
I will be responding to the statement made by the
representative of Zaire, but I will spare the Council a
lengthy and misleading statement so as to make good use
of the purpose of this organ.
For the past 48 hours, we have been registering 100
refugees per minute crossing the border from Zaire. We
expect that, by early next week, the bulk of Rwandese
refugees will have regained their motherland. The Rwanda
Government welcomes this long-awaited return of its
nationals. We believe that the conditions are now in place
for the orderly return of many more refugees. I am also
happy to inform the Council that the entire cabinet
accompanied the President of Rwanda to the Zaire border
town of Goma to welcome incoming refugees.
The local and Government machinery have been
mobilized throughout the country in order to prepare the
welcome centres for refugees, where they will be received
before returning to their respective homes.

3713th meeting
15 November 1996
In the light of these welcome developments, it is the
view of the Rwandan Government that the proposed
multinational force is no longer relevant, at least as far as
rescuing the Rwandan refugees in eastern Zaire is
concerned.
As the situation in eastern Zaire has changed, the
plans for the proposed multinational force should also be
changed to adapt it to the changing situation on the
ground. In this regard, the multinational force should
perhaps be smaller, reconsider the location of its troops,
seek a new mandate and be able to quickly address its
purely humanitarian mission. The mandate of the
multinational force should be for a limited period of two
to three months at the most.
If the mission of the proposed multinational force
were to be reconsidered in view of the changing
circumstances on the ground, it should be mandated to
disarm the former Rwandan Government soldiers and the
militia who have held captive thousands of Rwandan
refugees in camps in eastern Zaire. It is further the view
of my Government that the international community
should help by making adequate resources available to
facilitate the rehabilitation and integration of the returning
refugees.
In this regard, the Rwandan Government would like
to urge the Council not to hurry into the adoption of a
resolution before getting the full facts about the changing
circumstances on the ground. In this connection, the
Rwanda Government would have no difficulty.
The humanitarian assistance that is required should
be brought into Rwanda in order to cater for the
humanitarian needs that have just arisen.
I would like to state that I had not expected that the
Council would be subjected to a statement by the
representative of Zaire, but I would like here to deny and
refute the allegations put forward by the delegation of
Zaire.
The historical background indicated by the
representative of Zaire was given to this august body
through you, Sir, in a document that was submitted to the
Security Council — document S/1996/869 of 23 October
1996 — which indicated the root cause of the crisis in
Zaire. We are not responsible for the misery Zaire is
going through. We are not responsible for
“denationalizing” their own citizens. The Rwandan
Government is aware that Zaire is a long-term neighbour,

5

Security Council
Fifty-first year
we have nothing against Zaire, but Zaire should have
nothing against its own citizens.
If I have briefly mentioned this document, it is
because I believe it would save the Council from going into
a long debate that would bore those present here.
I would like to thank you, Sir, for allowing me to
make this statement and to clarify the situation of my
Government in dealing with this urgent problem.
The President: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Burundi, on whom I now call.
Mr. Nsanze (Burundi): First of all, I would like to
recognize, Sir, your code of conduct in your capacity as
President of the Security Council, which reflects the
characteristics of the policy of non-alignment, that is
impartiality, conciliatory behaviour and dedication to the
sacrosanct principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
For this host of high qualities, you deserve our greatest
tribute.
(spoke in Spanish)
Ambassador Martínez Blanco also deserves our
gratitude, but, above all, our congratulations for the success
he achieved during his mandate as President of the Security
Council in October.
(spoke in French)
My three-page statement will highlight the need to
identify and eradicate the causes of the overall problem
existing in the region of the Great Lakes.
All humanity is shuddering at the sight of the horrors
inflicted on a million and a half individuals. A human tidal
wave has been doomed to a collective martyrdom. There
are both remote and immediate causes for this suffering.
The genocide that crushed nearly a million victims in a
period of three months has swept from their homeland yet
another million human beings. This dual and highly tragic
phenomenon is the remote but principal cause of the
horrendous misery that has burst into the two Kivus. In the
ignoble odyssey imposed on the refugees, the greatest
blame must be borne by the former Rwandan Army and its
interahamwe militia, which, retrenched in refugee camps,
have taken the latter hostage to use them as human shields.
There are more immediate causes for this suffering.
For nearly three years now, various international political

6

3713th meeting
15 November 1996
circles, numerous humanitarian organizations, foremost
among them the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), and numerous
Governments, in particular those of Burundi, Rwanda and
Zaire, have vied with each other in issuing warnings
regarding the immense danger presented throughout the
region of the Great Lakes by the million refugees
crowded on the frontiers of these three countries. The
militaristic designs and subversive acts of the former
Rwandan troops and their backers, namely the
interahamwe militia, continued to poison relations among
member States of the Economic Community of the Great
Lakes countries, namely Burundi, Rwanda and Zaire. The
intermittent acts of aggression aimed against Burundi and
Rwanda by the former Rwandan Army troops and the
interahamwe were both warning signs of the general
deterioration of the situation and of an imminent
explosion in the region.
Fully aware of the enormous risk inherent in the
presence of a large number of refugees along their shared
borders, the three States, acting together and backed by
UNHCR in particular, have continually sounded the alarm
and requested the assistance of the international
community for a triple operation they considered
essential: the repatriation of the refugees to their
respective countries; the disarmament of some 40,000
runaway Rwandan soldiers and their adjuncts, the
interahamwe militia; and finally, encampment in areas far
from the frontiers for refugees who opted to remain
abroad.
Various alternatives were proposed, on many
occasions. Although it was convinced of the merits of
these urgent appeals, which were reiterated time and
again, the Security Council refused to cross the Rubicon,
alleging the existence of numerous obstacles, instead of
taking the bull by the horns and neutralizing the former
Rwandese troops and militia. These men, however, were
armed to the teeth and, on top of everything else,
continuously committed acts of aggression against our
States and sowed desolation among our peoples. This
unhealthy climate ultimately degenerated into a dangerous
powder keg, which irreversibly and inevitably led to the
present disaster.
Regarding the interaction between the causes of the
chronic crises in the Great Lakes region, cold, hard
analysis shows that the fates of the peoples of the Great
Lakes region are clearly interrelated, and that,
paradoxically, the interests they desperately pursue in
their search for survival are in mortal conflict. A common

Security Council
Fifty-first year
denominator characterizes the citizens of Burundi, Rwanda
and Kivu: the psychosis of fear, which is the cause of their
bitter struggle to cling to their life raft. Hence, we see that
instead of joining together to achieve the same ultimate
goals, these fellow citizens are tearing each other apart. The
result is a problem which is both shared and chronic; it is,
first and foremost, up to the United Nations to tackle this
issue.
Given the interdependence of their respective plights,
solutions aimed at saving our peoples can no longer be
selective limited to isolated, and therefore limited, areas —
that is, to individual countries. To resolve the recurrent
tragedies which flow from age-old causes, the imperative
obligation to confront them comprehensively in the region
devolves on the Security Council especially, and on all the
protagonists. And, from this point of view, the eradication
of the causes of the overall problem in the Great Lakes
region requires, as the highest priority, solutions
commensurate with the seriousness and tenacity of the
issues. These include, first, an international conference on
finding ways to promote and bring about a massive return
of refugees and expatriates to their respective homelands.
The sponsorship, organization, financing and conduct of
such a forum, preferably on African soil, would be
entrusted to the United Nations and to the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) in close cooperation with the rest of
the international community.
Such a conference would also take up the
establishment of machinery most likely to guarantee
national security for the elements of each country and
regional security for the States of the Great Lakes taken as
a whole. But security on this dual level will remain an
unattained and unattainable dream so long as the major goal
has not been achieved — or rather, so long as the first
sine qua non condition has not been fulfilled: equitable
power sharing providing the necessary balance among
national communities. This is an inescapable condition,
through which shared power, rather than slaking individual
ambitions, would in fact end up serving as a reciprocal
shield for the elements of each nation.
Over the last few weeks, world attention has been
riveted to the unprecedented magnitude of the tragedy
afflicting Kivu. Another human tragedy of great seriousness
has wrongly been consigned to oblivion. Seven million
Burundi citizens have been crushed under the suffocating
weight of a total economic blockade for nearly four months
now. While for two months the new regime has fully
abided by all the conditions imposed by the Governments
that imposed the embargo, and while the ministerial

3713th meeting
15 November 1996
delegation dispatched last 18 October by the third Arusha
summit had a high opinion of the negotiation plan the
Head of State of Burundi proposed to his counterparts,
our people continues to be sacrificed gratuitously and at
great cost. This embargo contravenes the most
fundamental norms of international law and the charters
of both the United Nations and the OAU, and has
subjected an entire nation to the throes of humiliation and
death.
In September, October and November I transmitted
to the successive Presidents of the Security Council and
to the Secretary-General plethora of official documents
demonstrating the complete determination of the present
leaders to negotiate with all groups, including armed
factions. The negotiations have since run up against the
obstacles raised by the rebel camp. We wonder whether
the architects of these economic sanctions are still
inclined to find excuses for maintaining the embargo.
Aside from the heavy tribute paid daily in numerous
human lives — in particular by the hundreds of thousands
of displaced persons — the refugees who are returning
from Zaire by the thousands, fleeing the cataclysm
abroad, are faced with tragic conditions in their own
country, Burundi, and are being throttled by an embargo
which is arbitrary in every way.
The repercussions on the plight of the Burundi
refugees shed additional light on the interrelationship of
which I spoke a while ago among the chronic causes of
the crises which continue to batter the Great Lakes region
and Burundi, which is situated at the crossroads of this
inter-lake region. Our country has been willed by history
and geography to participate as a full-fledged member in
the settlement of conflicts there. At present my
Government is limiting itself to making the Security
Council aware of the problem of squaring the circle
which, sooner or later, a multinational force will run up
against if its mandate does not include the separation of
former Rwandan soldiers and the interahamwe from
innocent refugees.
In the view of my delegation, the primary task of the
multinational force should be above all, to disarm the
former Rwandese troops and at quartering them in areas
remote from the Burundi-Rwanda-Zaire borders.
Without wishing to be a Cassandra, the Burundi
delegation is obliged to warn that failing to carry out the
task of disarming the former Rwandese troops could
means a repetition of the monumental error committed in
1994 when the United Nations Assistance Mission for

7

Security Council
Fifty-first year
Rwanda (UNAMIR) limited itself to standing by passively
at the outbreak of the genocide, then packing up and fleeing
at the height — at the very height — of that scourge.
The President: I thank the representative of Burundi
for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative of
Canada. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and
to make his statement.
Mr. Fowler (Canada) (interpretation from French):
Yesterday, we were informed that 200,000 to 300,000
refugees were on the move over a 9-kilometre stretch of
road in eastern Zaire. Today - fortunately - we know they
were headed in the right direction. Nevertheless, the image
conveyed by this and other, less auspicious, information
from the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
is both familiar and shocking. It is familiar, in that it
reminds us of the human suffering we witnessed in the
same part of the world as recently as 1994, suffering and
brutality of such intensity and on such a scale that it indeed
could be said to approach the greatest horror of the
twentieth century, the Holocaust.
Without any doubt, genocide had been perpetrated to
devastating effect and, equally clearly, the international
community failed to act to stop it. In the aftermath of the
7,000 or 8,000 people slaughtered for each of a hundred
days in Rwanda, we again said, “Never again”. We also
said that we would improve the United Nations capacity to
react, and we have begun to bring changes to the
Organization’s capacity to react quickly to crises by
enhancing its ability to deploy rapidly.
Now, barely two years later, we are again witness to
another human tragedy unfolding in the Great Lakes region.
A million and a half people in dire need have for the past
few weeks been suffering from our inability to come to
their assistance.
The more fortunate, the better-cared-for and healthier
members of the refugee community in the Goma region
may finally be going home, but we must bear in mind that
we have completely lost track of hundreds of thousands of
people dispersed in the mountains and forests of eastern
Zaire. Those people have been suffering a far more cruel
fate than those who were crossing the Rwandese border
today. They are, by all accounts, in truly desperate shape.
Food and medicine sit idly in storage, close at hand yet out
of reach of the needy, for aid agencies are being prevented
from accomplishing their tasks by armed men who seek to

8

3713th meeting
15 November 1996
use the pain and suffering of non-combatants for political
and military purposes.
In its resolution 1078 (1996) of seven days ago, the
Security Council stated clearly that the countries in the
region had a responsibility to create the conditions
necessary for the speedy and peaceful resolution of the
crisis. The Council also declared that the international
community needed urgently to act.
Our Prime Minister has done so, with the strong
support of the Canadian people. One of the results of the
consultations he has held with a score of world leaders
and international organizations, including the Organization
of African Unity, is Canada’s decision to take a
substantial role in mounting a multinational humanitarian
intervention force to make possible the safe delivery of
humanitarian aid and to facilitate the voluntary
repatriation of refugees — that is, to save lives.
(spoke in English)
We did not set out to lead this mission, but we have
been gratified by the response from Member States when
it appeared that an offer of leadership might get such a
force into the field. We bring to this task a combination
of capacity, compassion and commitment. In announcing
our wish to assist, Prime Minister Chrétien explained to
Canadians that, while Canada may not be a super-Power,
we remain a nation that speaks on the international scene
with moral authority. We believe that this is why the
international community has responded to the lead taken
by our Prime Minister.
We have no illusions about the risks and difficulties
involved, but we are absolutely convinced that there is no
alternative but to act. When we said, “Never again”, we
meant it.
Canada cannot begin to act alone in such
circumstances. Clearly, we need not even contemplate
doing so. Countries are responding generously to the
Secretary-General’s call to action in eastern Zaire. A
critical mass is already in place. Over 20 countries have
already committed over 10,000 troops. While the main
body of troops committed to date are from France, the
United Kingdom, the United States and Canada, we now
have firm offers from Europe, North America, Africa and
Latin America, as well as expressions of interest from
Asia.

Security Council
Fifty-first year
In addition, we are only a little less encouraged by our
efforts to find donors to contribute to the United Nations
trust fund that is being established to support the
participation of African countries. More help in this area,
however, is urgently required from those who can afford
such contributions but who are not able to provide direct
assistance.

3713th meeting
15 November 1996
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, as
well as the voluntary return of displaced persons. It will
do no more and no less.

We now know that we have enough to do the basic
job. But putting together the multinational force is still a
work in progress. We need additional elements if that force
is to have the proper balance and the maximum desired
impact on the ground and to allow it to prepare the way for
follow-on forces.

We do not, therefore, envisage disarmament or
interposition as elements of the force’s mandate. Indeed,
disarmament cannot be part of this mandate. If it were,
we would require a much larger and more robust force
and would need to engage in a war with those who most
evidently do not wish to be disarmed. Such a war would
bring enormous and immediate harm to the very people
we are seeking to save, as the elements with guns
continue to find sanctuary within the refugee population
that they continue to hold hostage.

We are especially grateful for the firm offer of
battalions from Senegal, Ethiopia and Malawi. African
participation in the multinational force is, of course, of vital
importance to its legitimacy and to its effectiveness.
Regional leaders and the Organization of African Unity
have played key roles in responding to crises in Central
Africa, and their advice and support in launching this effort
will be crucial. We welcome their vital involvement in this
mission.

In addition, soldiers engaged in disarmament could
not undertake their primary and immediate mission, which
is to make possible the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. If soldiers are fighting, they cannot also be
widely dispersed in humanitarian operations. Put simply,
our intention is to concentrate on the urgent and the
achievable: to save lives, rather than to make a vain and
necessarily imperfect attempt to address all the problems
of the region.

Such participation is, as we know so well, extremely
expensive, and we urge as many other countries as possible
to assist African countries to bear these costs and, in
addition, to provide the strategic transport and equipment
that will be required by our African partners in this venture.
Few countries are truly capable in the field of strategic
transport, and we will be relying heavily on their generosity
and commitment in the coming days. Finally, we could use
a good deal of fairly sophisticated medical support and
would welcome offers in this area.

The proposed multinational force does not constitute
all of the international community’s efforts to bring peace
and stability to Central Africa. The force would be
deployed for four months, and the transition from it to a
longer-term United Nations operation must be carefully
thought out. A civil component, including direct United
Nations involvement, is envisaged alongside the force, in
order to help establish the conditions that must underlie
any long-term solution, including engendering respect for
human rights and for justice in the region.

Lieutenant-General Maurice Baril, the former Military
Adviser to the Secretary-General, who now commands the
Canadian Army, and who would lead this multinational
force, met yesterday with representatives of more than 70
countries to discuss the concept of operations for the
proposed mission.

The Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Raymond Chrétien, is already engaged in
addressing the underlying causes of the conflict and is
offering advice to the Secretary-General on the longerterm role the United Nations might play in the region. If
we are successful in our humanitarian mission, this
second task would focus primarily on civilian peacebuilding, including political reconciliation and the
reinforcement of the institutions of civil society. This is
absolutely essential if the age-old hatred that has fuelled
endless, bitter and bloody conflicts in Central Africa is to
yield to a willingness to coexist, and if the cycle of
violence in the Great Lakes region is to be broken.

Let us be clear about what the countries that make up
the force are seeking to accomplish. Let us be realistic in
our expectations. This force, as noted in paragraph 3 of the
draft resolution before us, will facilitate the immediate
return of humanitarian organizations and the effective
delivery by civilian relief organizations of humanitarian aid
to alleviate the immediate suffering of displaced persons,
refugees and civilians at risk in eastern Zaire, and to
facilitate the voluntary, orderly repatriation of refugees by

Indeed, the welcome prospect of the imminent return
of large numbers of refugees to Rwanda adds both

9

Security Council
Fifty-first year
urgency and immediacy to this process of rebuilding. There
will be an urgent requirement for donors, agencies and
programmes to coordinate their efforts with a view to
ensuring that development activities are tightly focused on
buttressing the orderly and peaceful return of these
refugees. They will need shelter, health care and a wide
variety of other assistance in order to reintegrate smoothly
into Rwandese society. They will also need understanding
and compassion from the Government and people of
Rwanda. Canada will play a full part in helping to facilitate
this huge development challenge. The Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Canada, Lloyd Axworthy, has announced the
establishment of the Canadian Peace-building Framework
to assist with projects of this kind in the area. We
encourage other donors to consider similar initiatives.
Despite the heartening news that up to one third of the
Rwandese refugees in Zaire may finally be going home,
people will continue to die in eastern Zaire in appalling
numbers and their presence there will continue to
destabilize the region. Close to 1 million refugees will
remain at risk in Zaire, even if the reports of current
refugee flows into Gisenye are fully accurate.
The international community is clearly ready to act,
and to act now. In our judgement, therefore, the
international will now exists for the formation and dispatch
of a multinational force. The Government of Canada is
prepared to work diligently with other Governments to
enable the effective deployment of a temporary
humanitarian operation in eastern Zaire. I urge the Security
Council to authorize such an operation, and without delay.
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Argentina and Mali in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Ms.
Ramírez (Argentina) and Mr. Sow (Mali) took the
seats reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.

10

3713th meeting
15 November 1996
The President: Argentina and Mali have also joined
as sponsors of the draft resolution contained in document
S/1996/943.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I shall first call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from
French): The countries of the Great Lakes region are
threatened by a humanitarian catastrophe. The
disturbances that have taken place in eastern Zaire have
caused the exodus of 1.2 million refugees and displaced
persons. Humanitarian agencies have left the region.
Since the beginning of these tragic events, the
French Government has called for an urgent response
from the international community. It proposed the
deployment in eastern Zaire of a multinational force for
strictly humanitarian purposes. On 7 November 1996 the
Secretary-General sent a letter to the Security Council
recommending the deployment of such an operation. The
Organization of African Unity came out in favour of such
a project.
Resolution 1078 (1996), which was adopted on 9
November 1996, actively committed Member States
urgently to make the necessary preparations for the
formation of this force. That resolution marked the
starting point for the mobilization of the international
community. The draft resolution that we shall adopt today
will finally authorize the establishment of this
multinational force, and we hope that its first elements
will be deployed over the next few days.
This force, in which France will participate, has a
strictly humanitarian mandate. Its principal mission is to
allow the effective delivery of humanitarian assistance for
refugees and displaced persons and, to this end, to
promote the return to eastern Zaire of the humanitarian
organizations. The objective of this force is also to
facilitate the voluntary return of refugees and displaced
persons; indeed, the ultimate goal is the free return of
refugees and displaced persons to their country and region
of origin.

Security Council
Fifty-first year
The establishment of this multinational force would
not have been possible if Canada had not made the
courageous decision to agree to lead it and to begin
preparations to that end. As others have done and will do,
we commend Canada’s generous offer, which, we are
pleased to say, will bring together under its command
several American, European and African contingents.
France is particularly concerned that resources be provided
to the Africans so that they can fully participate in this
humanitarian mission. It is for this reason that we have
continued to call for consultations with the Organization of
African Unity.
The multinational force will be in place for a
maximum period of four months, which can be reduced if
the Council so decides. The force should be followed by
another operation, most likely a United Nations operation,
whose mandate will be specifically to pursue the
humanitarian work that will begin in the next few days. We
hope that all of these efforts will provide such help as is
necessary to stabilize the region and to begin, finally to
bring about a lasting solution to the problems that have
afflicted the Great Lakes region for more than two years
now.
But everyone has become aware of the need to deal
with all the region’s problems at the negotiating table, with
the support of all interested countries.
I have heard at that table rather passionate
arguments — an understandable emotional reaction to a
great deal of injustice. But I have also heard measured and
responsible comments. It is this exchange of views that
allows us to hope that dialogue among the countries of the
region will be fully resumed and that understanding and
reconciliation will replace incomprehension, psychosis and
devastation.
We can also work together for reconciliation — a
hope that was expressed earlier by one of us at this table.
Europe has known its share of war, and now it is
experiencing a period of reconciliation and pacification.
Why not do for Africa, through an international conference,
what was done for Europe, which restored peace to
devastated areas? That is why the French Government, as
everyone is well aware, has repeatedly called for the
convening of an international conference on peace, security
and development in the Great Lakes region. We are pleased
to note that this proposal has been formally endorsed, and
on the terms I have just cited, by the Organization of
African Unity. The Security Council — in the draft
resolution that is before us and of which France is a

3713th meeting
15 November 1996
sponsor — has once again emphasized the need for such
a conference. The Secretary-General’s Special Envoy,
Raymond Chrétien, has been mandated by resolution 1078
(1996) to speed up preparations. We hope that the Special
Envoy’s efforts, as well as our own, will allow for the
early convening of this conference. It is the only truly
peaceful and reasonable means for finally, as each of us
hopes, bringing about the reign of peace and
understanding in the Great Lakes region.
Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): There is no
disputing the gravity and complexity of the crisis that has
erupted in eastern Zaire. It is one of the largest and most
challenging tasks the United Nations has faced. The
potential for a humanitarian catastrophe is real. The
international community has a moral obligation to help
where we can, and to do so urgently.
We pay tribute to Canada for offering to take on the
leadership role in the organization of a multinational
force. The United Kingdom is ready to play a full part in
this. We cosponsored the draft resolution before us, and
we intend to vote in favour of it. We have been actively
involved in contingency planning since the Council
adopted resolution 1078 (1996). A multinational force is
not a panacea, but it must be able to meet the task we are
setting for it. What we need is a properly balanced force,
of a size adequate to the task and with a clear and
achievable mandate. In such a force let there be no doubt
that the British contribution would be substantial and
prominent. As the British Defence Secretary told our
Parliament yesterday, we recognize our obligations in the
face of such a call to action. We are among the relatively
few nations with the military capability to help, and we
are proud that the British armed forces can make a
difference. A British military reconnaissance team has
already gone to the region to assess the conditions on the
ground.
The deployment of a multinational force is the only
feasible option if we are to get people on the ground
quickly. But it is important to recognize the temporary
nature of this operation. It is an immediate response to an
immediate crisis. It is also essential that the United
Nations start work immediately on preparations for the
necessary follow-on operation, in the context of an
international humanitarian task force, so that this
follow-on force is ready to take over before the mandate
of the multinational force expires, at the latest on 31
March 1997.

11

Security Council
Fifty-first year
We also need to ensure that these immediate actions
do not render the longer-term tasks more difficult. We do
not want the previous unhappy situation, which led directly
to the present crisis, to occur again. This deployment must
not freeze the situation as it is, nor set back the efforts over
the last two years to resolve the complex humanitarian
situation in the region. Any serious attempt to meet the
humanitarian crisis and to prevent further suffering must try
to ensure that those refugees who want to return to their
homes are not prevented from doing so by armed gangs or
intimidators. Nor should this operation result in the
re-establishment of camps in which armed elements are
allowed to operate. We agree with the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees that the force should be able to
ensure the exclusively humanitarian and civilian character
of all refugee locations under the multinational force’s
control. This means it should be sufficiently large, and
sufficiently well-equipped, to do the job properly.
The geographical scope of the operation must also be
matched to the force’s capability. Many of the refugees
have now spread out into the less-accessible areas of
eastern Zaire. This could reduce the effectiveness of an
operation limited purely to Goma and Bukavu.
This crisis affects the region as a whole. The
Governments of the region recognized this at their Summit
in Nairobi on 5 November and made clear their willingness
to play a full part in helping to resolve the crisis. A
successful operation needs the full strategic consent of all
the Governments concerned. As far as possible, it also need
the acquiescence of the various militias active in the area.
We believe that participation and cooperation by
African States is very important. By authorizing the
establishment of a multinational force, the Security Council
is responding to African calls for a neutral force to alleviate
the suffering and to promote the return of refugees. We
hope that African States will play an important role in the
multinational force and in the follow-on force that will
succeed this operation. It is also important that they
participate actively in the planning for both forces from the
outset.
All States can help in this endeavour. We look to
those nations that are not providing troops to do everything
they can to support it. We encourage them to contribute
urgently to the Secretary-General’s voluntary trust fund,
which is established by this draft resolution.
I said that the multinational force was not a panacea.
It cannot resolve the problems of the region. The political

12

3713th meeting
15 November 1996
dimension of this crisis remains paramount in order to
achieve a lasting solution. We believe the regional
Governments have a key role to play in this, and we
welcome the lead that they took at the Nairobi Summit.
We must help Rwanda create the conditions which
are necessary to encouraging the refugees to return,
including by increasing the number of human rights
monitors working there. As the largest bilateral donor to
the Rwanda Human Rights programme, Britain is playing
a leading role in this, and we encourage others to do so,
too.
We agree with the point just made by the
Ambassador of France that a Great Lakes conference
would have a central role to play in securing a peaceful
and stable future for the region. We agree that
preparations should begin for such a conference under the
auspices of the United Nations and the Organization of
African Unity (OAU). It is only right that the OAU
should be closely involved in the search for a lasting
political solution in the region.
The United Nations has suffered some setbacks in
recent years. It is right that we should learn the lessons of
past mistakes. Now we face, in the challenge presented by
the crisis in eastern Zaire, a new call to live up to the
aims and ideals of the United Nations Charter. There are
pitfalls. We should not underestimate the risks and the
difficulties. Thorough preparation and planning, a clear
mandate, achievable objectives and renewed efforts to
reach a long-term political settlement are essential. But
we should take encouragement from the rapid and
effective work here at United Nations Headquarters over
recent days and from the political signal that the
unanimous adoption of this Security Council resolution
will send. What we are setting in motion today will, I
trust, show that the United Nations and its Member States
are able to make a difference and that we have the
courage and determination to do so.
It was once well said that the only real reason for
doing something is that it is the right thing to do. All the
others are reasons for doing nothing. The United
Kingdom believes that, with the course charted by this
draft resolution, the United Nations is doing the right
thing.
Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from
Chinese): Since the latter part of October, violence and
conflict have been escalating in eastern Zaire, resulting in

Security Council
Fifty-first year
a large-scale humanitarian crisis arousing the concern of the
international community.
The Chinese delegation is gravely concerned and
disturbed by the renewed fighting and the displacement of
millions of refugees in the Great Lakes region.
We appeal to the parties concerned to cease
immediately all hostile actions, ensure the safety of the
lives and property of refugees and innocent civilians and
guarantee the smooth delivery out of international
humanitarian assistance so as to create conditions for the
voluntary and orderly repatriation of the refugees and lay
the foundation for a political settlement in the Great Lakes
region.
The Chinese delegation believes that the international
community, including the Security Council, is duty-bound
to settle the present crisis in the Great Lakes region. The
present task is to defuse the humanitarian crisis. In this
regard, we have noted the communiqué of the Central
Organ of the OAU Mechanism for Conflict Prevention,
Management and Resolution and the letter from its
Secretary General, His Excellency Mr. Salim Ahmed. We
appreciate and support the African countries and the OAU
in their efforts to resolve the present crisis with the help of
the international community.
We believe that it is very necessary to provide
emergency humanitarian assistance to the refugees in
eastern Zaire in view of the fact that Zaire and its
neighbouring countries have already agreed to the
deployment of the multinational humanitarian force. We
will respect the requests of Zaire, the African countries and
the OAU.
The Chinese delegation will therefore vote in favour
of the draft resolution.
The Chinese delegation believes that international
military intervention in eastern Zaire involves many
complicated and sensitive questions. Therefore, when
carrying out such an intervention the following principles
should be observed. First, the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the countries concerned, particularly Zaire,
should be respected and there should be no interference in
the internal affairs of these countries. Secondly, before
initiating this action, there should be full consultations with
the States concerned and their consent obtained. Full
cooperation should be provided during implementation.
Thirdly, this action should be strictly confined to
humanitarian purposes. Fourthly, since the intervention is

3713th meeting
15 November 1996
authorized by the Security Council, the Security Council’s
political guidance must be accepted. Furthermore, there
should be a clear time-frame and terms of reference. I
should also like to point out here that the action mandated
by the draft resolution is strictly confined to humanitarian
purposes. We therefore have reservations about invoking
Chapter VII of the Charter.
The Chinese delegation believes that speedy and
smooth repatriation and settlement of the refugee question
are the bases for the settlement of the question of the
Great Lakes region.
We understand the complexity of the refugee issue
in this region, but so long as the parties involved are
sincerely making serious efforts, with the help of the
international community, all problems, including the issue
of refugees, should in the end be effectively settled.
The Great Lakes region has long witnessed chaos.
All countries face the task of consolidating peace and
economic reconstruction. Therefore, maintaining goodneighbourly relations is vitally important to all countries.
We hope that all countries in the region will adhere to the
principles of mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial
integrity, non-interference in internal affairs, the
settlement of disputes through consultations based on
equality, and non-use of force in relations between
countries. In this way, they will be able to remove
interference, overcome difficulties and achieve peace and
stability in the Great Lakes region.
Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): The authorization of the
deployment of a multinational force for the Great Lakes
region is probably the most important decision to be taken
by the Security Council on the situation in that area. The
draft resolution the Council is about to adopt strikes a
delicate balance between what is desirable and what is
achievable in the complex situation currently prevailing in
eastern Zaire. The most important and immediate action
is the need to gain access to the refugees and displaced
persons so that the international humanitarian community
can render them assistance. The deployment of the force
will certainly avert what was likely to become a human
tragedy of immense proportions. The international
community had to do something or its conscience would
for ever be troubled by the results of its inaction.
It is in view of this reality that Botswana commends
the Government and the people of Canada for their
decision to take the lead in establishing and commanding
a multinational force to respond to the humanitarian

13

Security Council
Fifty-first year
situation in eastern Zaire. We have become accustomed to
Canada’s exemplary leadership and outstanding courage in
peacekeeping operations, but we certainly do not take them
for granted.
Botswana is pleased that the Security Council is in a
position to take a decision on the deployment of a
multinational force within a week after it adopted resolution
1078 (1996). This action will hopefully save hundreds of
thousands of lives and give hope to many more who have
been crying out for help in the wilderness. We are happy to
join the consensus in support of the draft resolution.
Botswana welcomes the establishment of a trust fund
to help African States that are willing to contribute to the
humanitarian operation. It is important that African States,
especially the States neighbouring Zaire, should be involved
in the operation. The response of the countries of the region
as reflected in the communiqué of the summit meeting held
at Nairobi, Kenya, on 5 November 1996 drew the attention
of the international community to the unfortunate situation
that has been unfolding in eastern Zaire. It is significant
that the States affected by the situation in eastern Zaire
have called for the establishment of safe corridors and the
deployment of an international force to ensure access to
displaced persons and refugees by the international
humanitarian personnel. It is therefore our hope that the
international community will respond in a generous and
timely manner to enable African States to participate in the
humanitarian operation.
The situation in eastern Zaire is not simply a refugee
problem. It is in reality a political problem which requires
a political solution. The prolonged stay of the refugees in
camps in Zaire is a source of insecurity and instability to
the country of asylum; even worse, it is a serious threat to
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Zaire. The
refugee camps have become recruitment grounds for those
determined to train and equip an army to fight against the
Government of Rwanda. This can only lead to increased
tension along the Rwanda-Zaire border and transform what
began as an internal conflict into an inter-State
conflict with far-reaching regional ramifications. We are
convinced therefore that a long-term solution to the
prevailing situation lies in the return of the refugees to their
communes in Rwanda. We welcome the fact that some
refugees have spontaneously begun a journey to their
homeland. It is still essential to ensure that they have
immediate access to food, water and medicine and can
return in safety and dignity.

3713th meeting
15 November 1996
As far as we are concerned, the primary objective of
the international community should be the repatriation of
all the refugees to their country of origin. The
Government of Rwanda has declared its commitment to
welcome the refugees. The international community
should now work in close collaboration with Rwanda to
create conditions inside that country which would be
conducive to the voluntary return of the refugees. The
international community should be prepared to provide
financial and material resources to help Rwanda resettle
the returnees. Most of the difficulties experienced by the
returnees centre around property disputes. There is an
urgent need to help them build new homes. It must be
clear to the Government of Rwanda that the refugees will
judge the Government’s public statements on the basis of
what happens on the ground. In this respect, the
international community has a role to play in assuring the
returnees of their safety and security. It is our hope that
the Government of Rwanda will be ready to welcome and
cooperate with an increased international presence.
It has been established beyond a reasonable doubt
that the former Rwandese Government forces and the
interahamwe are preventing the refugees from exercising
their right to return voluntarily. The international
community should not and cannot ignore this reality,
which goes against the fundamental legal principle of
voluntary repatriation. It would be wrong to insist on the
right of refugees to return on a voluntary basis while
ignoring or doing nothing about the actions of those who
obstruct the freedom of the refugees to exercise that
legitimate right.
Botswana strongly supports the mission of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General to the Great
Lakes region. We look forward to his recommendations
on the modalities for convening an international
conference on peace, security and development. We
underscore the need for sound preparations to pave the
way for serious negotiations on concrete issues. The Great
Lakes region has experienced so much bloodshed that the
United Nations cannot afford to organize a conference
that would generate heat rather than light and offer no
solutions to the urgent problems facing the region. This
is not the time for endless debates on the merits or
demerits of convening such a conference. The time has
come for all people of goodwill to work towards
negotiations aimed at finding a permanent political
settlement to the problems of the Great Lakes region.
The international community should be ready to
guarantee a balanced outcome and the effective

14

Security Council
Fifty-first year
implementation of the agreed commitments within a
specific time-frame. We encourage the countries of the
region to offer concrete proposals on the issues the
conference should address. Botswana is optimistic and has
confidence in the capacity of the region to rise to the
challenge of the moment. The leaders of the region have
demonstrated the political will to coordinate and harmonize
their positions in confronting the difficulties facing their
countries and peoples. And they have the unswerving
support of my delegation in this endeavour.
Mr. Henze (Germany): The constantly deteriorating
situation, the great human suffering and the fate of more
than one million refugees in the Great Lakes region have
for quite some time been a matter of deep concern to my
Government.
My Government fully supports the decision the
Security Council is about to take to authorize the
establishment for humanitarian purposes of a temporary
multinational force. It fully shares the sense of urgency that
has guided the actions of the Security Council so far.
Germany will therefore vote in favour of the draft
resolution.
Allow me on behalf of my Government to commend
the Canadian Government for its brave initiative to organize
and command such an operation. I also wish to pay tribute
to all the nations that are ready to commit themselves to
take part in this operation.
My Government, like others, is of the opinion that all
efforts undertaken by the international community in the
region of the Great Lakes should also address prominently
the underlying causes of the conflicts, in particular the
problem of the continued presence of hundreds of
thousands of refugees and internally displaced persons in
eastern Zaire and elsewhere in the region. For that reason,
we welcome the fact that the multinational force that is to
be authorized will not only facilitate the immediate return
of humanitarian organizations and the effective delivery of
humanitarian aid to those in need, but will also facilitate the
voluntary and orderly repatriation of refugees by the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and the voluntary return of displaced persons.
In this context, my Government also welcomes the
announcement by the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Kofi Annan, yesterday that
the Secretariat intends to start to plan in a timely manner a
follow-on operation which, as foreseen in Security Council
resolution 1078 (1996) part C, and paragraph 12 of the

3713th meeting
15 November 1996
draft resolution before us, will help, inter alia, to continue
assisting UNHCR with the protection and voluntary
repatriation of refugees and displaced persons, including
through the establishment of humanitarian corridors.
Germany remains committed to providing funding
for the urgently needed delivery of humanitarian
assistance. Together with the United States of America,
we have been the most significant donor of humanitarian
assistance in the region. In addition to considerable
bilateral contributions, Germany has also contributed more
than 30 per cent of the budget for the humanitarian
assistance delivered by the European Union.
It is our conviction that the international community
will have to assist in finding lasting and sustainable
solutions to the underlying causes of the conflicts in the
region of the Great Lakes, beyond the urgent action on
which the Security Council is about to take a decision.
This requires not only a guarantee of the security of the
refugees at their points of arrival, but also a real chance
for those who were not involved in the genocide to be
fully reintegrated into their respective home communities.
Germany therefore remains committed to efforts
aimed at improving conditions for the return of refugees
to their country of origin, in particular by enhancing the
economic and social situation there through rehabilitation
and development aid and by assisting in the protection of
human rights.
There can be no solution if the countries of the
region do not cooperate. It is, above all, their
responsibility to bring about peace in the region and to
create the conditions for economic and social
development. We welcome the decisions taken at the
Nairobi Regional Summit as a first step and continue to
urge the countries to meet at the regional conference to
lay the foundation for lasting peace and stability.
Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): The international
community has been extremely disheartened and alarmed
at the tragic developments in eastern Zaire over the last
few weeks. Hundreds of thousands of displaced refugees
and inhabitants are facing the danger of mass death by
starvation. The creation of secure conditions for the
immediate delivery of humanitarian assistance in order to
provide food, shelter and security to the displaced persons
is urgently called for. The consequences of failing to do
so would be stark and tragic. The looming humanitarian
catastrophe, unless tackled properly by the international
community now, is bound to have serious consequences,

15

Security Council
Fifty-first year
threatening peace and security in the entire Great Lakes
region.
My delegation highly appreciates the valiant and
expeditious efforts of the Canadian Government in taking
the lead and ensuring broad participation by the
international community in the formation of a temporary
multinational force to facilitate the effective delivery of
humanitarian aid and the voluntary, orderly and safe
repatriation of refugees. We also pay a resounding tribute
to Africa’s readiness to contribute troops to the proposed
international force, as declared by the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) on 11 November, and to all other
members of the international community that have pledged
their firm commitment to this noble humanitarian cause.
The Republic of Korea is poignantly reminded of the
responsibility that each and every member of the
international community must assume in the face of such an
impending humanitarian disaster as we are now witnessing
in the Great Lakes region. In this regard, I wish to state
that my Government stands ready duly to contribute to the
cause of the multinational force. In expressing our full
support for the immediate deployment of a multinational
force on a temporary basis in the Great Lakes region, we
would like to add a few observations.
First, the task of the multinational force will by no
means be easy because of the insecure environment in
which it has to operate. It will therefore be of paramount
importance that all parties concerned provide the fullest
cooperation to the multilateral force. We strongly urge them
not to stand in the way of the multinational operation on
any pretext or in any way whatsoever.
Secondly, we would like to underline that the
precarious situation in the Great Lakes region does not
allow room for partial solutions. We believe that the second
part of the mandate of the multinational force, namely
facilitating the voluntary and orderly repatriation of
refugees, is particularly essential because any long-term
solution to the complex problems in the region would be
inconceivable without the repatriation of refugees to their
country of origin. In addition, although we understand the
difficulty and the risk of translating into reality the need to
separate people who are intimidating others from bona fide
refugees, we still believe that every possible avenue should
be explored in the course of the multinational operation to
help facilitate the non-enforced and gradual separation of
refugees. My delegation is confident that the multinational
force will mark the beginning of a solution to the
multifaceted problems from which the Great Lakes region
has been suffering for many years.

16

3713th meeting
15 November 1996
Thirdly, in devising the operational plan for the
repatriation of refugees, I fully agree with views on the
importance of the treatment the first refugees voluntarily
returning to their home countries will receive, as pointed
out by the representative of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) at
yesterday’s briefing. We have to make every effort to
ensure that conditions in their home countries will be
acceptable for those first returnees so that other refugees
who are more cautious or hesitant to return will be
encouraged to follow suit.
Fourthly, we believe that the international
community, building upon the valuable momentum to be
created by the painstaking efforts of the States
participating in the multinational force, should take timely
and appropriate follow-up action as envisaged in the draft
resolution and through the convening of an international
conference as set out in resolution 1078 (1996). In this
regard, we look forward to the recommendations that the
Secretary-General will make after undertaking the
necessary preparation with Member States and relevant
organizations.
In concluding, we would like to express our sincere
hope that the operation of the planned multinational force
will achieve the objectives of resuming urgently
humanitarian relief and paving the way for the
repatriation of refugees within the planned timetable and
framework. My delegation, as one of the sponsors, will
vote in favour of the draft resolution before the Council.
Mr. Gomaa (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
Egypt, has followed the deteriorating situation in the
Great Lakes region with great concern and regret. This is
an important region for Egypt, as the time-honoured ties
we enjoy with its people are as old as the Nile. Thus,
during recent months and weeks, we have agonized over
this humanitarian tragedy, which has such far-reaching
dimensions.
Egypt has taken part in intensified endeavours within
the African framework to find a way to break this
stalemate, within the context of African brotherhood and
African values and based on our full belief in the
importance of the role of Africa, through the Organization
of African Unity (OAU) and its Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management and Resolution. The latter issued
a communiqué at the Fourth Extraordinary Session of its
Central Organ, held in Addis Ababa on 11 November, in
which it referred to elements involved in the current
international consensus on settling this difficult problem.

Security Council
Fifty-first year
I refer here to the need to play a more effective role at the
international level — which means sending a multinational
force and ensuring the flow of necessary humanitarian aid
to facilitate the voluntary repatriation of refugees on the
basis of full respect for the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Zaire — and to the need for a broad
African participation in any multinational force. It is no
secret that widening African participation will depend on
the mobilization of resources, on a reliable and sustainable
basis, through the voluntary trust fund that was established
for this purpose, as well as through other channels.
My delegation pays tribute to the initiatives that were
undertaken in response to the gravity of the situation,
beginning with the French initiative — which has formed
the basis of the action taken by the Security Council and its
adoption of resolution 1078 (1996) — as well as the
Canadian initiative, which a number of countries took part
in putting into effect in the Council. The Canadian initiative
provides a well-defined framework for the creation of a
temporary force to achieve an urgent, clear, humanitarian
objective, and at the same time reaffirms the importance of
African participation in this force.
We therefore think that, as far as the Security
Council’s debate in recent days is concerned, the action is
compatible with the African viewpoint within the
Organization of African Unity. Accordingly, we
wholeheartedly support the draft resolution (S/1996/943).
Egypt will vote in favour of this draft resolution, of which
it is a sponsor.
Guinea-Bissau and Botswana have also given their
support, as well as other brotherly African countries, most
importantly Zaire — which may shoulder the biggest share
of suffering — and Cameroon, which is the current
Chairman of the Organization of African Unity.
At the same time, the Egyptian delegation has
followed what has been said by the representative of
brotherly Rwanda on the latest positive developments in the
return in great numbers of refugees to their homes. We feel
happy for and pay tribute to this development. At the same
time, we think that adopting the current draft resolution
does not at all contradict these efforts or the developments
that we hope will be enhanced in a way that will alleviate
and end the current tragedy and suffering.
In this connection, it is worth noting that the proposed
multinational force is a temporary force and is limited in
scope. Its nature and mandate presuppose the full and
sincere cooperation of all the countries of the region. It will

3713th meeting
15 November 1996
ultimately reflect a responsible awareness of the
dimensions of the tragedy and the need to find a solution
to it.
We hope that this force will eventually realize its
objective smoothly and in the shortest possible time, in a
way that will consolidate the efforts at reconciliation
among the countries of the region at a conference on the
Great Lakes region to be held under the auspices of the
United Nations, and will ensure the growth of their
economies and the achievement of prosperity for their
peoples.
Mr. Cabral (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from
French): Over the past 50 years, the Security Council has
had its great moments. We believe that this evening’s
meeting will be among those that have best contributed to
giving the concept of collective responsibility its true
meaning. However, our meeting this evening will have
above all contributed to making the Security Council that
prestigious assembly to which millions of human beings
turn and upon which often depends the survival of
millions of human beings like you and me, Sir. The
meeting this evening will have contributed to giving out
Council a human face and a soul.
We have listened very attentively and with great
respect to the statements made here by the countries
involved — Zaire, Rwanda and Burundi — but also to
those made by all the other members of the Council. We
have above all listened very carefully to the statement by
the representative of Canada, a most enlightening and
courageous statement. We salute the delegation of Canada
which has taken a stand in favour of the survival of that
part of humanity formed by the populations living in
misery today in eastern Zaire.
A short time ago the representative of Zaire dwelt on
the circumstances prevailing in his country, a most
regrettable situation whose precariousness is difficult to
exaggerate. However, I think that we need to remember
from what he said that Zaire, an African country we all
respect, has always been committed to championing the
human condition. Because I believe that this evening it is
indeed the human condition that is at stake.
I think, as has been said here, that apart from the
emotions and resentments — which are sometimes
justified — we first need to focus on the desire to achieve
a solution in which human rights will prevail.

17

Security Council
Fifty-first year
We are living today in a world in which centres of
tensions explode all over the globe as a result of racial
hatred, the lack of tolerance, ethnic persecution, the absence
of democratic rule and unbridled political ambition. These
are the cause of confrontations and armed conflicts that
unfortunately create an exodus of thousands of human
beings who take to the roads: men, women, children and
old people are left abandoned, adrift in despair wandering
waves of humanity searching for safe — or supposedly
safe — places, forced to survive crushed together,
sometimes like cattle, in camps where the conditions were
just described by our colleague from Zaire as subhuman.
These mass movements of people, in conditions that
are difficult to control, hamper the socio-economic
development of the host countries and give rise to the
serious consequences we are deploring today. These
consequences have serious implications for the security and
stability of the countries involved, but also for regional and
international security.
The events in eastern Zaire are a clear illustration of
the reality that confronts us today. We are aware that the
magnitude of the population movements is not confined to
a humanitarian aspect. There is also a political aspect that
would be difficult to ignore the major responsibility for
which lies first and foremost with the countries involved.
Nevertheless, the assistance of the international
community is indeed proving to be indispensable. This is
why my delegation welcomes the holding of this meeting
this evening, in which several other members of the United
Nations are participating. This is indeed a collective
responsibility, which we have decided to shoulder.
My country today is more convinced than ever that the
efforts of the international community, and above all the
efforts of the competent bodies of the United Nations, must
be more sharply focused, with much greater determination
and political will, on the major causes of the flow of
refugees and displaced persons. The creation of a healthier
socio-economic and political environment, as well as the
installation of political regimes that respect human rights,
including the creation of institutions based on the principle
of the primacy of law, justice and the equality of citizens,
are fundamental conditions for the mass exodus of refugees
and displaced persons to be halted.
We believe that the countries involved must create
conditions conducive to the voluntary repatriation of
refugees and to the return of the displaced persons to their
permanent homes in full safety and dignity.

18

3713th meeting
15 November 1996
Since 1994, the Great Lakes region has unfortunately
become the greatest hotbed of tension and inter-ethnic
confrontation in the recent experience of Africa. The
assassination of the Presidents of Rwanda and Burundi
exacerbated political violence and stepped up the conflicts
in these countries in addition to causing a massive tidal
wave of displaced persons and refugees into neighbouring
countries. This deplorable situation is at the root of the
present situation and has resulted in the consequences we
are seeing today in eastern Zaire in horrifying television
images, as though broadcasters had committed themselves
to reminding us, as is in fact their duty, that in other
places, somewhere over there in Africa, a part of
humankind is suffering and that their suffering is a matter
for our universal conscience.
Thousands of people — men, women, children and
the elderly — deprived of their properties, their land, and
their livestock, deprived of everything, have fled their
country of origin seeking a safe place to survive. Today
those people are somewhere in the forest because they
have preferred this to the hostility of their compatriots, of
their very brothers, who have decided to massacre them
in the name of ethnic “superiority”, which we condemn.
These people have preferred to live among wild animals,
no matter how dangerous it is, rather than risk the brutal
instincts of their compatriots. For at least three weeks
now, we have been witnessing this intolerable tragedy,
which, according to the estimates of Doctors without
Borders, has been causing more than 1,200 deaths a day.
One might wonder why the Security Council was unable
to take a decision three weeks ago. Of course, there are
reasons why the Security Council was not able to
intervene as we would have hoped, but we need to
welcome the fact that today, at last, we have the
opportunity to adopt a draft resolution in keeping with the
wishes of millions of suffering human beings in that part
of Africa, in that part of the world, which is part of our
common humanity.
There are those who wonder whether there is a
double standard in the application of international
humanitarian law. Is respect for human rights and
humanitarian law in Zaire, somewhere over there in
Africa, not as important as when we need to intervene
elsewhere, in other latitudes? We would like to hope that
this is completely untrue and that, as we have said,
Zairians, Rwandese, Burundians — Africans — are all
human beings and that we all not only deserve the
attention of the Security Council but, above all, we
deserve having the international community as a whole
ponder our fate as human beings.

Security Council
Fifty-first year
It is true that the Security Council will at last be
adopting a draft resolution that will finally authorize the
deployment of a multinational force to facilitate the delivery
of humanitarian aid. But in the meantime, is there not also
reason to ask how many individuals we could have saved?
Three weeks ago, Ms. Ogata presented a horrendous report
on the plight of millions of human beings in that part of the
world. That report, moreover, was largely backed by the
statements of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
and above all by what the Secretary-General himself said to
us to prompt us to act: that, given the urgency of the
situation, we must put aside our differences and act as the
circumstances demand, by giving the Security Council a
soul, a human face.
This is why we welcome the stage at which we have
finally arrived. We welcome the contributions of all
delegations sitting around this table. Finally, we welcome
the fact that a decision has been taken to do something to
help alleviate the torment and suffering of an entire people.
When I say a people, I mean simply the African people,
because when a Zairian, a Rwandese or a Burundian is
suffering, when he prefers to wander in the forest or to die
rather than be killed or massacred, then we simply think —
in our country, Guinea-Bissau, but also in Algeria, Tunisia,
South Africa — that it is an African who is dying, a part of
ourselves. This is why we welcome the fact that, finally, we
have decided to render our assistance to put an end to the
misery in that country.
We thank the Secretary-General for his tireless efforts,
which are commensurate with his responsibilities. These
responsibilities give whoever presides over the fate of the
United Nations the authority and the full weight of the
Charter. We are proud to have an African to guide the
destiny of the United Nations in these times, which are so
difficult for Africa.
We also thank the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), which has met many times to address, responsibly
and with respect for human rights, the situation prevailing
in eastern Zaire. But when we say eastern Zaire, we are not
suggesting that what is taking place in that region of Africa
is a merely Zairian situation. There can be no question of
that. This is a situation in an African country and,
fortunately, we here have all agreed to remember the need
to respect the boundaries it inherited from the colonial
period. Those boundaries were formally sanctioned by the
charter of the OAU, which, through the principle of the
inviolability of borders, has ensured that we in Africa
respect our neighbours and that we live and coexist in
friendship and cooperation. Furthermore, we are pleased

3713th meeting
15 November 1996
that the representative of Zaire reminded us here that for
more than 30 years now peaceful coexistence, friendship
and cooperation have dominated the lives of the brother
peoples who live in that region of the African continent.
We hope that that same coexistence, those virtues
which the African peoples hold so dear, will win out, and
that, on the basis of respect for borders, of the need for
respect for one another and for our political regimes, we
will be able to work towards the advent of an Africa
without the misery that we deplore.
We welcome the intervention of the Organization of
African Unity. We would also like this evening to express
our gratitude to the countries of the Great Lakes region,
which have made tireless efforts to enable dialogue to
prevail, and to enable understanding and harmony to reign
as the fundamental principles for this region of the
African continent.
We would like to thank the members of the Security
Council that took the initiative to present this draft
resolution, I am thinking in particular of the German
delegation, which, it must be said, took the initiative some
three weeks ago. We are also thinking of the French
delegation which, with determination and intelligence,
sought to remind us of our shared humanity. And, of
course, we thank the Canadian Government which, as was
stated earlier, had the courage to take the correct decision
in taking on the leadership as circumstances required to
serve our shared destiny — our shared humanity — in
making the contribution the African peoples deserve: the
peoples involved, who are our brothers and sisters.
This is why we believe that it is important for all of
us around this table and for all who will be speaking later
not only to lend their support but also to voice their
determination to commit themselves to and support the
multinational force, so that it will not only be born but
will also contribute to solving the problem.
I declare here that my country, Guinea-Bissau, is
ready to participate in the multinational force under the
conditions and terms set out in the draft resolution which
will be our responsibility and, above all, our great joy to
adopt very soon. We believe that the adoption of this
draft resolution will contribute to alleviating the suffering
of those people, who nightly fix their gaze on New York
in the hope that an end can finally be brought to their
suffering.

19

Security Council
Fifty-first year
We welcome the participation of a very large number
of United Nations Member States in our deliberations this
evening. When leaving this Chamber this evening,
(spoke in English)
we should all remember, as the Argentine writer Jorge Luis
Borges says, that “Each person is all persons”.
Mr. Włosowicz (Poland): The Polish delegation is
going to vote in favour of the draft resolution authorizing
Member States to conduct the operation of a multinational
force to facilitate the immediate return of humanitarian
organizations and the effective delivery of humanitarian aid
in eastern Zaire, and to facilitate the voluntary, orderly
repatriation of refugees and displaced persons. The
objective of our action today is clear: not to let a great
humanitarian catastrophe occur.
With the state of chaos reigning in eastern Zaire,
urgently needed humanitarian aid cannot be delivered
without assuring basic security. Therefore, we express our
most sincere gratitude to the countries which have taken the
initiative to organize the multinational force on an urgent
basis and to contribute their troops to the operation. Our
special thanks go to the Government of Canada for its
brave and generous decision to lead the operation.
We truly believe that the draft resolution we are about
to adopt will provide these countries and humanitarian
organizations with the necessary framework in which to
perform the tasks they have voluntarily undertaken.
My delegation believes that with the most immediate
problems having been taken care of, the United Nations
will have to step in, and we hope that the appropriate form
for a United Nations presence will be decided soon.
We are fully aware that the operation cannot eliminate
the structural sources of the crisis in the Great Lakes
region. Such a task can be achieved only through the
long-term intensive efforts of the countries concerned,
regional African organizations and the international
community as a whole. Yet we believe that the operation
the Security Council is about to bring into being will
contribute significantly to the achievement of a sustainable
solution based on the principles of sovereignty, territorial
integrity and the inviolability of the borders of all States
concerned, as well as on respect for human rights.
In that context, I would like to stress that the African
countries have a substantial role to play in all phases of the

20

3713th meeting
15 November 1996
process, beginning with the humanitarian operation
currently under discussion. We welcome the results of the
Nairobi Regional Summit held on 5 November, and of the
extraordinary session of the Central Organ of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) Mechanism for
Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution, held on
11 November, which, in our view, constitute a step in that
direction.
Without losing sight of the much broader picture, at
this particular juncture we must help without delay to
ease the human tragedy in eastern Zaire and to prove our
solidarity with those who are suffering from hunger, thirst
and disease. The draft resolution before us opens the way
for action which is so dramatically called for.
Mr. Martínez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation
from Spanish): My delegation would like to express its
deep concern at the serious events in eastern Zaire, which
have caused more than a million Burundian and
Rwandese refugees to abandon their camps, thereby
threatening peace and security in the Great Lakes region.
My delegation considers it necessary for the
international community to take urgent measures to avoid
the loss of thousands of human lives by hunger and
disease. This means that ways and means must be found
to stabilize the situation and to create conditions of
security enabling humanitarian assistance to reach the
region’s refugees and displaced persons, whose situation
results from armed conflict.
Accordingly, my delegation has sponsored and will
vote in favour of the draft resolution before us, which
authorizes a multinational humanitarian force to facilitate
the delivery of humanitarian aid to displaced persons,
refugees and civilians at risk in eastern Zaire, and to
facilitate the repatriation of refugees and the voluntary
return of displaced persons, coordinated by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR).
My delegation considers that for this to occur the
parties to the conflict must declare a ceasefire, and we
appeal to them to cease all hostilities forthwith and to
initiate, as soon as possible, the necessary political
dialogue with a view to resolving the present situation.
My delegation would like to reiterate its support for
the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy to the region and
for the efforts of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), the European Union, the States concerned and the

Security Council
Fifty-first year

3713th meeting
15 November 1996

results of the Regional Summit of African countries held at
Nairobi on 5 November of this year. At the same time, we
would also like to welcome the offer made by the
Government of Canada and other Governments to provide
personnel and equipment to set up the multinational force
described in the draft resolution.

silent and passively allow a real-life inferno to unfold
before our eyes. We are acting, and acting effectively, to
confront the humanitarian emergency in all its difficult
aspects. Let me add that Italian aeroplanes are ready to
fly to the airports in the region to transport the relief
supplies so urgently needed.

My delegation also wishes to emphasize the urgent
need to convene an international conference on peace,
security and development in the Great Lakes region under
the auspices of the United Nations and the OAU to address
and find lasting solutions to the problems of the Great
Lakes region.

We also agree on the need to implement as soon as
possible a credible plan to allow for the voluntary — and
I stress the word “voluntary” — repatriation of millions
of refugees. For that to happen, however, we must have
a strong and sincere commitment from their countries of
origin. We cannot and must not oblige refugees to return
to a place where they may not find the necessary
conditions to lead a normal life. But we hope that reason
will prevail over other considerations and that a lasting
solution to this enormous problem can be rapidly found.

In conclusion, my delegation considers that this draft
resolution sets forth suitable objectives, since it is focused
on meeting the humanitarian needs of the refugees by
deploying a neutral force and favours the establishment of
a plan of action that will reduce tension in the region and
ensure the voluntary repatriation of refugees.
Mr. Ferrarin (Italy): Today, the Security Council is
responding to a cry for help from a region where for far too
long human dignity has been trampled on, human rights
violated and the most basic rights of every human being —
the right to life, food and shelter — have been denied; a
region where men, women, the elderly and children are
dying of starvation, thirst and disease; a region where all
hell has broken loose and a multitude of suffering people
are awaiting a signal, an action that could lend them some
measure of security and comfort and break the chain of
blind violence.
Today, the Security Council is finally answering the
message to “Save our Souls” — SOS — coming out of
eastern Zaire, a signal that is unfortunately growing fainter
with each passing day, and refusing to remain silent before
the unfolding tragedy. We are deciding whether to deploy
a humanitarian force, a force that above all else must be a
true force of peace. The objective we all have in mind is to
bring relief and humanitarian aid to endangered populations
in the region.
Italy is particularly pleased with the decision that the
Security Council is preparing to adopt. Since the start of the
Security Council’s deliberations on this question we have
been arguing for the early deployment of a multinational
force and have been making an active contribution at every
stage of the discussion. We have initiated diplomatic action
with the countries most directly involved, urging them to
choose the road of dialogue. We have said over and over
again that the international community could not remain

In this connection, we are encouraged by the first
reports that we are receiving of a number of refugees
heading home. We strongly hope that that trend will
continue.
Our action today must mark the beginning of a new
phase of cooperation in finding a way out of the
instability that has affected the Great Lakes region in
recent years. Let us face it: it will be a difficult and
demanding task. Nevertheless, we remain convinced that
dialogue should be the main element of this effort. We
therefore reiterate our strong conviction that an
international conference on peace, security and — above
all — development in the Great Lakes region must be
convened urgently to find answers, once and for all, to
the many unsolved issues, and first and foremost, the
refugee question.
It is with heartfelt conviction that Italy will vote in
favour of the draft resolution to deploy a humanitarian
assistance force in eastern Zaire. It is of the utmost
priority that the suffering of the civilian population and
refugees be alleviated. Too much time has already been
wasted.
We are satisfied that the operation we are setting up
today will have strict humanitarian purposes and exclude
more ambitious tasks, such as interposition between the
parties to the conflict. The operation’s time-frame will be
limited and defined to allow for full implementation of its
humanitarian objectives.
The force will have to operate with the consent of
the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the

21

Security Council
Fifty-first year
Governments involved. It will be balanced in composition
in order to represent the international community as a
whole. No country should be predominant. It should reflect
the commitment of the international community as a whole,
and in particular of a wide range of European and African
countries and of the United States. Here, let me express the
sincere appreciation of my Government to the Government
of Canada, which has agreed to take the lead and ensure the
command of this operation.
Italy will participate in this force as an important
contributor of troops. We hope that our commitment, which
follows the many others undertaken by Italy whenever a
humanitarian need has arisen, will help the people in the
region. This is our sincere and primary concern.
Mr. Somavía (Chile)(interpretation from Spanish):
First of all, I wish to welcome the representatives of Zaire,
Rwanda and Burundi to the Council as it considers an item
that affects their national realities so directly in a debate
that I am sure they would all have preferred to be
unnecessary.
Faced with a humanitarian tragedy like the one
unfolding in eastern Zaire, the decision the Security Council
is about to adopt is, as others have said, of the utmost
urgency. It seems important to begin by expressing thanks.
My delegation would first like to thank the SecretaryGeneral, who has kept us constantly abreast of the situation
in the region and has even proposed the formula we will
adopt today. We would thank Mrs. Ogata, who only three
weeks ago, as the Ambassador of Guinea-Bissau has
reminded us, visited the Council and, just before leaving,
spoke a few words that still echo in my mind. She said,
“Do something. Do something so that my people will not
have to leave eastern Zaire.” We thank the Government of
Germany, which initially proposed that the Security Council
discuss this subject, and the Government of France, which
submitted a concrete initiative and was a sponsor of
resolution 1078 (1996).
Most especially, my Government wishes to thank the
Government of Canada for taking the initiative of
coordinating the efforts leading to the creation, deployment
and conduct of a multinational force for humanitarian
assistance in Zaire. Also bestowing honour upon Canada is
the Secretary-General’s appointment of Ambassador
Raymond Chrétien of Canada as Special Envoy to the
region. We also wish to thank all the countries that have
clearly shown interest in contributing to this mission —
important countries with means, some of which have
operational capabilities not possessed by all Members of the

22

3713th meeting
15 November 1996
United Nations. It does them honour that they are ready
to risk their people — officials and soldiers — in this
operation. Countries that have indicated the desire to
participate in the mission include those from Latin
America and the Caribbean, such as Argentina and Brazil,
a fact that I should like to highlight.
Finally, I cannot fail to recognize the heavy burden
that Zaire has had to bear in recent years as a result of
the number of refugees in its territory for reasons beyond
its control.
The Security Council is today shouldering its
responsibilities. With resolution 1078 (1996) and the draft
resolution that will be adopted today, the Security Council
is moving from being an interested observer to becoming
a direct participant, using its powers under the Charter to
deal with a humanitarian crisis of great magnitude, for
which it has the means to act. Those means are now
being put into action.
The tragedy faced by the displaced persons and
refugees who have fled the camps and the confrontations
in eastern Zaire obliged us to act as soon as possible. The
truth is that today we do not know how many are dead
and wounded, or whether, as the Secretary-General said
a few days ago, we are confronting a new genocide, this
time provoked by starvation and disease.
After welcoming the offers of Member States
concerning the establishment of a multinational force for
humanitarian purposes, the draft resolution that we are to
adopt states that, acting under Chapter VII of the United
Nations Charter, the Council authorizes Member States
cooperating with the Secretary-General to carry out the
humanitarian operation. This draft resolution has the
potential to be a historic one. It tries not to repeat the past
inaction of the Council with regard to Rwanda or the
errors made in the case of Somalia. The draft resolution,
we will adopt today could have been adopted earlier —
not only last Friday, but even last month or last year. The
draft resolution is timely and necessary today because of
the crisis being experienced now. However, this is a tardy
draft resolution, which demonstrates again the
international community’s great difficulty in dealing
preventively with the items on the Security Council’s
agenda.
My delegation believes that it is very important to
reiterate the references in resolution 1078 (1996) to the
costs of the operation. They will be met by the
participating States and through other voluntary

Security Council
Fifty-first year
contributions. This, together with a trust fund of voluntary
contributions, will enable the African States to participate
in the multinational force, participation that Chile considers
absolutely indispensable.
Furthermore, in adopting this draft resolution we will
be responding to the request made to the Security Council
by African leaders meeting in Nairobi under the leadership
of President Moi of Kenya. Accordingly, its implementation
should be carried out in close coordination with the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the Governments
of the countries of the Great Lakes region. For us, the
Government of Zaire’s agreement with the mission that is
being authorized has been especially decisive, as it will be
deployed on its territory.
The delegation of Chile reiterates that the most urgent
part of the mission will be to prevent the humanitarian
situation from deteriorating further and provide security to
the thousands of people who are in flight so that they can
have access to protected areas where they can find food,
water and medicine. It will thereby enable the humanitarian
agencies — those of the United Nations and of
non-governmental organizations — to help these people
meet their most essential needs.
However, as previous speakers have said, it is obvious
that the massive presence of refugees in eastern Zaire is
one of the main causes of the crisis in the region. That is
why the draft resolution also seeks the further objective of
facilitating a voluntary, orderly repatriation of refugees. If,
as the representative of Rwanda said, this has already begun
under conditions of security, so much the better. That can
only satisfy the goals of the international community. In
that way, the citizens of Rwanda can begin to come
together again, which is what we all want.
We should recall that resolution 1078 (1996) has some
very important provisions in this connection, which
supplement those we will be adopting today. It calls upon
the Secretary-General, in consultation with his Special
Envoy, to draw up a conceptual framework of the
operations and structure of a humanitarian task force with
the objective, among others, of assisting the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
in the voluntary repatriation of refugees to their countries
of origin, including through the establishment of
humanitarian corridors.
It is well known that the current crisis in eastern Zaire
is not an isolated event, but is intrinsically connected to
situations in other countries of the Great Lakes region. The

3713th meeting
15 November 1996
problem of refugees may be the main element linking
them together. A lasting solution to the situation of the
refugees will be possible only when the political and
security conditions — in Rwanda, Burundi, Zaire or other
countries where they may choose to stay — are such that
they can return to their places of origin. This makes it
necessary for all the regional leaders, together with the
international community, to study jointly the various
problems in the region and find a means of achieving a
definitive and agreed solution. This will be possible by
convening an international conference on peace, security
and development in the Great Lakes region, as proposed
to the international community by France some time ago.
One of the most urgent tasks of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General is to determine, together with the OAU
and regional leaders modalities for convening it.
Along with the aspiration, desire and will for a
useful regional conference, question comes to mind.
When we note the internal situations in the countries, we
can legitimately wonder whether the faction leaders want
a political solution to the problems in the region, or
whether they are simply talking about peace while
preparing final solutions through force and violence.
I believe that a genuinely political solution will be
found only if the leaders have the courage to shake the
hands of their so-called enemies. Without moral courage
on the part of the leaders fighting within each country,
there will be no political solution. That is what history
teaches us, and without such moral courage discussion on
the issue will continue in the Security Council. There can
be no doubt that the international community wants to
help the Great Lakes region, but it can help only those
who wish to take history by the hand and lead it
forward — not reliving the misgivings, anxieties and
mistrust of the past, but believing in the possibility of
envisaging a Great Lakes region in which there is peace
for all. That would not be a mere continuation of the
current situation. It would require a level of courage that
we have not yet seen from the leaders.
In conclusion, I should like to say that Chile feels
close to Africa and to the countries of the Great Lakes
region, as we have shown through our interest in Burundi.
Despite our geographical distance, there is no distance in
our feelings, no distance in our solidarity and no distance
in our political interest in seeking a regional solution.
Although we have only modest means, we nonetheless
wish to make a humanitarian contribution to the
implementation of the draft resolution before us because
we believe that our contribution is a symbol of our sense

23

Security Council
Fifty-first year

3713th meeting
15 November 1996

of closeness with the region. It also indicates how we
understand our responsibilities in the Security Council.

those States that have already expressed their readiness to
participate in the action.

Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from
Russian): The Russian Federation is deeply concerned about
the humanitarian tragedy unfolding in eastern Zaire, the
great loss of human life and the sudden displacement of
nearly 1.5 million Rwandese and Burundian refugees and
of tens of thousands of Zairians who have found themselves
cut off from external aid. The situation threatens to grow
into a regional military conflict that would doom all hopes
for the restoration of peace and stability in the Great Lakes
region.

We trust that, in implementing its mandate, the
multinational force will act impartially and in cooperation
with the Secretary-General, the United Nations
Coordinator for humanitarian assistance and the relevant
humanitarian organizations and that it will regularly
inform the Security Council of the course of the
operation. We expect that all interested countries in the
region will render full support to the actions of the
multinational force and will closely cooperate with it and
with the humanitarian agencies to alleviate the suffering
of hundreds of thousands of people.

Russia, like other members of the Security Council,
urgently calls on all of the belligerent parties to cease
hostilities immediately, enter into political dialogue and
refrain from any actions that might exacerbate the crisis.
The task of the United Nations and of the entire
international community is to promote reconciliation and
stabilization in this region in every possible way and to
ensure the necessary humanitarian assistance to its suffering
population. Russia, for its part, is continuing actively to
render such assistance in cooperation with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
But, of course, the main priority now is the
implementation of emergency humanitarian measures to
save the lives of hundreds of thousands of refugees and
displaced persons and that to promote their voluntary and
orderly return to their homes. That is precisely what the
Security Council has been considering over the past few
days. The solution to this urgent task was also the aim of
resolution 1078 (1996), which the Council adopted a week
ago. It not only clearly highlighted all of the indispensable
political factors, but also in fact approved the very concept
of sending a multinational force to eastern Zaire. That
resolution, which reflected the responsible approach of the
Security Council to this emergency situation, helped hasten
the formation of the multinational force. Now, when the
parameters, format, mandate and objectives of this
operation have been clearly defined, the next logical step is
to adopt the new draft resolution on the basis of the text
submitted, which would immediately launch the deployment
of the force.
I should like to pay a well-deserved tribute to the
Government of Canada, which has undertaken to lead the
multinational force, assuming a difficult burden of
responsibility in carrying out this highly complex
humanitarian action. I should also like to pay tribute to

24

We consider important in all respects the provisions
of the draft resolution providing for the significant
participation of African contingents. If necessary, this
participation will be financed by the voluntary trust fund
established by the Secretary-General. We also attach great
significance to the draft resolution’s reiteration of the
urgent need for an international conference on peace,
security and development in the Great Lakes region under
the auspices of the United Nations and the Organization
of African Unity to ensure a comprehensive political
solution to the problems of the region.
The operation of the multinational force is timebound. Eventually, the Security Council will have to take
a stand regarding further measures. Prejudging these
measures in any way here and now would be premature.
We should not forget the bitter experiences of several past
situations, when the shift from a multinational force to a
United Nations operation was not sufficiently worked out
in detail, with sometimes catastrophic consequences. In
other situations, incidently, the idea of “passing the torch”
from a multinational force to a United Nations operation
has been rejected outright. To avoid ill-considered actions
and double standards, the Security Council must not
hasten to become engaged, but each time must, with a
sense of full responsibility, consider the possibility of
adopting one or more decisions in the light of the
Secretary-General’s recommendations, of the real situation
and, of course, of the positions of the parties directly
involved. It is precisely from that perspective that our
delegation reads operative paragraph 12; on the basis of
this understanding, we shall vote in favour of the draft
resolution.
Mrs. Albright (United States of America): With
great sadness, the world is once again watching tragedy
unfold in Central Africa. None of us can forget the shock

Security Council
Fifty-first year
and horror of the strife in Rwanda in 1994, the hundreds of
thousands of innocent people slaughtered in churches and
schoolyards and in their homes. Millions of refugees fled
the violence across the borders into Zaire and Tanzania.
Thousands died in makeshift camps until the international
community was able to bring water, food and medicine.
Now, in the last few weeks, new fighting again has sent
most refugees and displaced persons into flight, danger and
deprivation and blocked humanitarian support from reaching
them. Their plight is urgent.
The international community is, as always, ready to
assist those most in need — the innocent civilians caught
between fighting and fear. Last week, the Security Council
adopted a resolution which laid the basis for a rapid and
effective international response. In the interim, the
Secretary-General’s special envoy and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
have been working to calm the situation and aid the
refugees. And a lot of nations have been developing
coordinated plans for a temporary humanitarian force, under
the leadership of Canada, to permit restoration of aid and
repatriation of refugees.
But the complexities of the situation in eastern Zaire,
with multiple armed groups and a fragile political
environment, require prudent preparation. The United States
strongly supports the initiative of the Canadian Government
to lead a multinational force to allow the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to the refugees and displaced
persons in the current crisis, with the dual function of
facilitating the voluntary repatriation of refugees to their
home countries. We welcome the offers by nations from
around the world to participate in the multinational force
that the Security Council would be authorizing with this
draft resolution, as well as the many offers of humanitarian
assistance.
The long-term solution is voluntary repatriation of the
refugees. To avert a recurrence of this humanitarian
tragedy, refugees who wish to return to Rwanda must be
able to do so. It appears, as we speak, that perhaps tens of
thousands are finally taking advantage of this opportunity.
We welcome this development and hope it continues. The
Government of Rwanda has taken credible steps and made
further pledges to ensure the security of the refugees and is
working with the international relief agencies to assist them
upon their return. We are consulting with the Governments
of the region on the arrangements necessary for potential
deployment of United States forces.

3713th meeting
15 November 1996
The United States is working closely with the
Canadian and other Governments, the United Nations
agencies and the humanitarian community to determine
precisely the humanitarian requirements and how we
might most usefully participate in these humanitarian
efforts and to facilitate the orderly and successful
repatriation of the refugees. Although considerable
progress has been made, some outstanding questions
concerning the organization and operation of the mission
remain to be worked out. It is a complex effort and
planning for an appropriate operation to follow the
temporary multinational force must also begin right away.
We applaud the effort that the Secretary-General’s
Special Envoy, the Organization of African Unity (OAU),
regional leaders, the European Union and other mediators
are making to address the underlying political problems
that must be resolved before the region can achieve true
peace and stability. We urge all the parties in the region
to cease hostilities directed at one another, cooperate with
the mediation efforts, permit the flow of humanitarian
assistance and support the secure repatriation of refugees.
We also urge all parties to cooperate with the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, which is
authorized to deal with those persons responsible for the
1994 genocide.
The President: I shall now make a statement on
behalf of the Indonesian delegation.
The situation on the ground in eastern Zaire
continues to deteriorate. The plight of over 1 million
refugees who have already suffered from atrocities,
hunger, thirst and miserable conditions demands the
immediate action of the international community. In this
context, Indonesia highly commends the speedy action
taken by the leaders of the region, as manifested in the
communiqué of the Nairobi Summit of 5 November 1996.
The Security Council must take action today in order to
avoid a humanitarian catastrophe that may have serious
repercussions on the stability and security of the whole
Great Lakes region.
It is imperative that a ceasefire be established in
order to end the violence and thereby facilitate a
negotiated solution to the conflict. We also call upon the
various Governments concerned in those territories to
allow access for humanitarian relief organizations to
enable them to distribute food and medical care to the
scattered refugees and the internally displaced persons. It
is in this context that my delegation, pursuant to
paragraph 8 of resolution 1078 (1996), supports the

25

Security Council
Fifty-first year
establishment of a multinational force to carry out the tasks
and to facilitate the voluntary, orderly repatriation of
refugees and displaced persons, as clearly reflected in
paragraph 3 of the present draft resolution. Indonesia pays
tribute to Canada for its commendable decision to take the
initiative to establish the multinational force and to lead the
operation.
There has been much debate on the mandate, sources
and scope of such an operation. Past experience has taught
the international community to be wary of involvement in
a conflict, albeit with humanitarian intentions in mind,
without a clear vision. The present role of the multinational
force, as it is being defined, appears to be addressing this
concern by establishing a targeted and realistic mandate.
Such a force must have the means to defend and protect
itself as well as the international relief personnel. The timeframe of four months may suffice to overcome the
emergency phase of the crisis. Further dimensions of the
conflict need to be addressed as well if a lasting solution is
to be found. However, they should be considered in the
next phase of operations.
In the context of finding a durable and comprehensive
solution for the conflicts in the region, the convening of an
international conference on peace, security and development
in the Great Lakes region can no longer be postponed. It
must be held with the participation of all the Governments
concerned under the joint auspices of the United Nations
and the Organization of African Unity (OAU), as called for
in Security Council resolution 1078 (1996).
In the light of these considerations, Indonesia is ready
to vote in favour of the draft resolution and support the
deployment of a temporary multinational force to eastern
Zaire until 31 March 1997. We wish to emphasize,
however, that the principles of the sovereignty and

3713th meeting
15 November 1996
territorial integrity of Zaire must be upheld throughout the
operation of the multinational force.
In conclusion, we would like to extend our
appreciation to the Special Envoy, Ambassador Raymond
Chrétien, for his tireless efforts and positive contributions
in finding a solution to the current crisis in the Great
Lakes region.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/1996/943.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Botswana, Chile, China, Egypt, France, Germany,
Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, Indonesia, Italy, Poland,
Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1080 (1996).
I have just received a letter dated 15 November 1996
from the Permanent Representative of Brazil to the United
Nations which reads as follows:
“With reference to the discussion on the
situation of eastern Zaire, I have the honour of
informing you that it had been the intention of
Brazil to be a co-sponsor of the draft resolution
contained in document S/1996/943.”
That letter will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/1996/949.
There are no further speakers. The Security Council
has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.
The meeting rose at 7.35 p.m.

26
