S/PV.8901

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8901

st meeting
Wednesday, 10 November 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mexico)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Lipand
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. Maman Sani
Ms. Heimerback
Ms. Evstigneeva
Ms. King
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Mr. Dang

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations
Police Commissioners

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-32894 (E)
*2132894*

S/PV.8901

United Nations peacekeeping operations

attention, and I would welcome hearing members’ own
views in support of the A4P+ agenda.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
Police Commissioners
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate
in this meeting: Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, UnderSecretary-General for Peace Operations; Ms. Violet
Lusala, Police Commissioner, United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei; and Ms. Patricia Boughani,
Police Commissioner, United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

The intention for this meeting is for it to be as
interactive as possible, as we were at the same briefing
last November (see S/2020/1092) and as we are in our
dialogue with Force Commanders. We look forward to
questions from Council members to the Commissioners
and from the Commissioners to the Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix: I thank you, Madam President, for
convening this briefing. I am especially pleased to be
joined by two of our women Police Commissioners,
who currently head our police components in Abyei
and Mali, for this thematic discussion on women and
peace and security in the context of United Nations
police. This annual briefing to the Security Council
is an opportunity to reaffirm the vital role that United
Nations police play across the conflict-prevention
spectrum, from peacekeeping to peacebuilding. It also
provides a forum to discuss our achievements of the
past year as well as priorities for the coming months.
The Action for Peacekeeping initiative continues to
guide our collective responses to the challenges facing
peacekeeping. Action for Peacekeeping Plus (A4P+)
is our implementation strategy to move that forward.
Today I will discuss how, as a key component of the
United Nations peacekeeping, United Nations police
are helping to advance A4P+ priorities and further
strengthen the effectiveness of our peacekeeping
operations. I will also highlight areas in need of greater
2/22

10/11/2021

As we work to advance the priorities 1 and 2 of
A4P+ and show the coherence behind political strategies
and greater strategic and operational integration, I
highlight that the Secretariat recently established the
Inter-agency Task Force on Policing, co-chaired by
the Department of Peace Operations and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. The Task Force
will enable us to unite efforts throughout the United
Nations system and maximize our collective impact
by drawing on our comparative advantages, expertise
and know-how to foster representative, responsive and
accountable policing services.
To that end, United Nations police will also
continue reinforcing its partnerships with regional and
subregional organizations, particularly on strategic
guidance, development and training. The Department
aims to strengthen capabilities and mindsets, which
lie at the core of the A4P+ priority 3, by aligning
predeployment training by Member States with the
Organization’s in-mission training. For example, the
Police Division, together with the Integrated Training
Service, continues to make progress in the development
of curricula under the United Nations Police Training
Architecture Programme. In addition, next week
in Brindisi, the Police Division and the Integrated
Training Service will organize the first police-only
meeting of the Light Coordination Mechanism. The
meeting will bring together capacity providers and
recipients to discuss how best to deliver and receive
capacity-building, share good practices, de-conflict
capacity-building initiatives and target the areas of
greatest need.
To ensure the highest levels of accountability to
peacekeepers, which is A4P+ priority 4, improving
the safety and security of our personnel is critical. The
Action Plan to Improve the Security of United Nations
Peacekeepers, now in its fourth iteration, continues
to structure our efforts to that end. At the same
time, United Nations police carry on efforts to create
an enabling environment, including by promoting
women’s networks within our missions, which advise
mission leadership on living conditions for women
peacekeepers and how to foster gender-responsive
working environments.
In the United Nations Mission in South Sudan,
former Police Commissioner Unaisi Bolatolu21-32894

10/11/2021

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Vuniwaqa, who recently finished her tour of duty and
whom we thank for her outstanding leadership, put in
place an exit analysis strategy that involves mandatory
anonymous surveys of women police officers to gain
insights into their experiences and areas in need of
improvement, in order to foster their meaningful
participation. The Mission is currently working to
correct concrete concerns identified in the survey.
To advance priority 5 — the accountability of
peacekeepers — United Nation police reinforce
zero-tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse,
including through enhanced predeployment and
in-mission training.
Conduct also relates to how we manage the
environmental footprints of our mission, and the United
Nations police continues to refine its Environmental
Management Framework by aligning the initiatives
of police components in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan with their
missions’ environmental risk management plans.
Regarding priority 6, on strategic communications,
in line with the joint initiatives on hate speech
of the Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs and the Department of Peace Operations, the
United Nations police works to amplify the positive
impact of our presence through enhanced strategic
communications, including new engagement on social
media platforms, as well as community-oriented
policing and awareness-raising activities to combat
misinformation/disinformation about the coronavirus
disease pandemic in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, confront sexual and gender-based violence
in South Sudan and encourage dialogue and trust
between Cypriot communities. Further efforts will be
made across all those missions to encourage more a
network type of communication policies involving all
mission components.
And finally, in line with A4P+ priority 7, our
efforts to improve cooperation with host countries
will enable smooth transitions, just as we witnessed
in Darfur, where the United Nations police, in concert
with the Sudan’s police force, helped facilitate the
drawdown of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid

S/PV. 8901

Operation in Darfur and the transition to the United
Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in
the Sudan, providing much-needed interim policing,
police-planning capacities and knowledge transfer.
In addition to integrating more technical tools
and innovation in peacekeeping, the women and peace
and security agenda is infused in all aspects of A4P+
and remains the foundation for improving our overall
effectiveness. Gender-responsive policing efforts by
the United Nations police ensure that the different
security needs of men, women, girls and boys are
considered. With the support of our Member States,
the United Nations police has already achieved its
gender parity targets for 2025, and I am very pleased
that five of our police components are currently headed
by women, including Police Commissioners Lusala and
Boughani. We will continue to count on the Security
Council’s assistance in helping us expand and sustain
those numbers.
A4P aims to refocus peacekeeping on realistic
expectations, make peacekeeping missions stronger
and safer, and mobilize greater support for political
solutions and for well-equipped, well-trained forces.
Through this, we are better placed to address today’s
challenges to peace and security and, ultimately, to
improve the lives of the people we serve.
I thank all Council members for their continued
dedication to implementing their respective A4P and
A4P+ commitments.
We are grateful for the Council’s support for our
efforts, and we hope that we can continue to count on it.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Lacroix for the information he provided.
I now give the floor to Ms. Lusala.
Ms. Lusala: I thank you, Madam President, for the
opportunity to take part in this important briefing.
I will first discuss the most recent developments
in the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA).
UNISFA, which was established in 2011, is in its
tenth year of operations. The improved relationship
between our two host countries — the Sudan and South
Sudan — has not yet translated into progress towards
finding a political solution for the final status of Abyei.

21-328943/22

S/PV.8901

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Challenges to the protection of civilians and
mandate implementation in general remain — among
them, the limited rule of law structures, human rights
violations, impediments to humanitarian assistance and
the impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
The United Nations police (UNPOL) continues to
mitigate the situation in Abyei in line with UNISFA’s
mandate, the Action for Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative
and the women and peace and security agenda.
I will provide a brief analysis of the situation.
Resolution 1990 (2011) initially mandated UNPOL
to help establish the Abyei police service, but that has
not been realized to date as several invitations to the
relevant parties to jointly plan for the police service
have not been honoured. In the absence of the Abyei
police service, resolution 2205 (2015) authorized
UNISFA to enhance the capacities of the voluntary
community protection committees. UNPOL currently
works with 31 community protection committees and
one joint protection committee station comprising 767
members, including 132 females, in the delivery of
the protection of civilians. Activities include genderresponsive community interactive patrols; prevention
and protection for women and girls from sexual and
gender-based violence; the monitoring of human rights
compliance; as well as training and capacity-building
for the maintenance of law and order, respect for human
rights, gender and child protection and communityoriented policing.
With regard to progress in the implementation of the
protection of civilians mandate, the presence of armed
elements, intercommunal clashes and cattle-rustling
continue to negatively impact the implementation of
the mission’s mandate, despite UNISFA’s continued
role in the maintenance of public order, the prevention
of crime and the protection of vulnerable populations.
The transhumance migratory season, which is between
October and April, is especially problematic.
The mission’s response to those threats includes
ground and aerial patrols conducted by UNPOL and the
military, checkpoints and engagement with the local
communities to foster dialogue and conflict resolution.
UNPOL personnel, deployed in 7 out of 15 team sites,
monitor and report on human rights violations and
foster the maintenance of public law and order.
The mission’s efforts have resulted in a reduction
of acts of criminality and human rights violations.
4/22

10/11/2021

For instance, compared to last year, the current year
saw a 60 per cent reduction in arms-related incidents,
including a 62 per cent reduction in the number of
civilians killed.
UNPOL’s efforts are hampered by the unwillingness
of South Sudan to participate in a joint integrated
planning exercise for the establishment of the Abyei
police service; the failure of both parties to review
and endorse the memorandum of understanding on
the handing over of suspects; the reluctance of the
Sudan to issue visas for UNPOL personnel to enable
the component to reach the authorized ceiling of 148
individual police officers (IPOs) and to deploy three
formed police units (FPUs). That has hampered the
mission’s efforts to address criminality. The continued
non-existence of the Abyei police service has created
a vacuum for local law enforcement. The lack of basic
services, such as water, health and education, is also a
criminogenic factor.
Regarding the situation in the three temporary
detention facilities in Abyei, dilapidated structures and
limited legal services have resulted in overcrowding,
poor living conditions and prolonged detention periods.
Services for survivors of sexual and gender-based
violence remain non-existent, hence the need for the
establishment of a referral pathway so that psychosocial,
counselling and legal services are made available to
survivors, most of whom are women and minors.
Concerning options for UNISFA to address the
evolving situation, building on the gains made by
UNISFA so far, UNPOL continues to actively engage
the leaders of both communities in Abyei and encourage
them to resume dialogue for intercommunal peace.
In terms of recommendations, there is a need for
increased UNPOL capacity, through the deployment of
the three FPUs and the additional IPOs, from the current
strength of 50 to the authorized ceiling of 148 IPOs. I look
forward to a situation where a significant proportion of
the anticipated FPU deployment will be female, as that
will enhance the response to the concerns and priorities
of women and girls. In appreciation of the impact of the
Secretary-General’s Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy,
I am pleased to report that the proportion of women in
police components in UNISFA has reached 60 per cent
deployed in professional positions, including the sexual
and gender-based violence adviser, and 34.7 percent of
individual police officers.
21-32894

10/11/2021

United Nations peacekeeping operations

I urge the Council to impress upon the two
Governments the need to immediately establish the
Abyei police service. Moreover, the establishment of
a public defender’s office in Abyei would facilitate
judicial action and alleviate conditions in the detention
centres. The Governments of the Sudan and South
Sudan should be encouraged to provide basic services
across the Abyei Area.
Meanwhile, UNPOL continues to deliver on its
mandate, adapting to the realities on the ground.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Lusala for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Boughani.
Ms. Boughani (spoke in French): I am very
honoured to address the Security Council on the topic
of action on mainstreaming a gender perspective in
support operations.
The concept of equality is old, but its application
in the field of gender is more recent. The 1995
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, as well
as resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2122 (2013), lay the
foundation for the integration of women into the heart
of peace and security processes. The Security Council
addressed this need by establishing a gender strategy
for uniformed personnel in peacekeeping operations. In
addition, resolution 2242 (2015) calls on the SecretaryGeneral to implement a strategy to double the number
of women in military and police contingents by 2020.
Furthermore, in the context of the twentieth anniversary
of resolution 1325 (2000), the Secretary-General urged
that peacekeeping partners recommit to the women and
peace and security agenda.
Gender is an evolving concept. I will focus on
gender relations, without ignoring other aspects of
gender, such as transgender. This is a key topic, and
the police component has put in place certain actions.
I would like to first give the Council an overview of
the situation, both internally at the United Nations
police (UNPOL) component in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) and in our support to the Malian
security forces.
At the UNPOL level, as of 22 October, 71 of 306
individual police officers — 20.58 per cent — and 200
of the 1,450 members of formed police units — 12.70 per
cent — are women. Women are deployed in Bamako
and in the regions of operation, and they hold various

S/PV. 8901

posts and carry out diverse activities. The visibility
of women within UNPOL should help the Malian
population and the Malian security forces to see the
skills and strengths of women, and even to encourage
women to pursue positions traditionally considered
as male-only. Although substantial efforts have been
made by police-contributing countries (PCCs) to deploy
women, they are still under-represented in formed
police units and command positions.
With regard to our support of the Malian security
forces, the gender dimension is manifested through
our joint patrols; co-location, which concretely
demonstrates women’s competence; our training
courses, for which we systematically request women’s
participation; and education on gender issues during
each training course. In addition, we also organize
sessions on specific topics, such as the role of women
in securing elections. Finally, at each of our strategic
meetings, we stress the importance of recruiting and
deploying female staff in central and northern Mali.
In addition to this general outlook, several actions
are currently being carried out. Within UNPOL, there
are three main areas of work.
The first is the monitoring of infrastructure in the
regions. I remind the Council that, in the framework
of the Elsie Initiative, the goal is to deploy a formed
police unit with 30 women with a view to mobilizing
PCCs in that regard. The second area, the fight
against impunity, is also one of our priorities. We
have finalized our judicial police chain with the
deployment of specially trained police officers as the
first responders for victims of sexual violence. We have
also made the regional directors of the Malian security
forces aware of the technical support we can provide in
that connection. The third area is a change of mindset.
Creativity is needed for creating greater synergy with
the other substantive Mission sections in order to
promote a gender perspective.
Given the cultural dynamics and considering the
limited number of women from the Malian security
forces deployed in the centre and the north, UNPOL is
developing several strategies.
One such strategy is strengthening the capacities of
the Malian security forces, especially through projects
to build women’s dormitories in certain regions,
equipped with an adjoining office to improve our victim
response. In addition, boreholes are always required
alongside the construction of infrastructure — both

21-328945/22

S/PV.8901

United Nations peacekeeping operations

in the field and at Headquarters — in order to meet
the water needs of the population and, by extension,
of women.
Other measures include training courses carried
out as part of a global project and the financial
empowerment of women through quick-impact projects.
I would be remiss if I did not mention community
policing. As part of the implementation of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation on Mali, we are helping
to establish community policing and operationalize
advisory security committees, which are a consultative
framework connecting representatives of the State, the
security services and the local population. The end goal
is inclusive management and the development of local
crime prevention and security strategies.
MINUSMA and UNPOL are making great efforts
to promote a gender perspective. We know that this is a
major undertaking. I would like to end my presentation
by expressing two wishes — the mobilization of PCCs
for the deployment of even more female police officers,
and to see the number of UNPOL staff increase in the
near future.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Boughani for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): I
have the pleasure to deliver this statement on behalf
of the three African States members of the Security
Council — the Republics of Kenya, the Niger and
Tunisia — as well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
(A3+1).
Our delegations attach great importance to the
theme of today’s discussion and to our briefers — UnderSecretary-General Lacroix, Commissioner Lusala of
the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
and Commissioner Boughani of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), whom we thank for their insightful
remarks. We value this opportunity to interact with
each of them today, to learn more about the strategic
vision for United Nations police components and to
benefit from the operational perspectives of women’s
participation in the Abyei peace processes and of
gender mainstreaming in MINUSMA. We thank the
United Nations police serving in the field for their
6/22

10/11/2021

commitment to peace, and to those at Headquarters for
providing leadership and motivation.
It is an undeniable certitude, grounded in both
historical fact and the contemporary political reality,
that women are indispensable stakeholders in effective
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. As
we continue to bear witness, women are fundamental
partners for just, peaceful and prosperous outcomes in
all countries and for all peoples.
United Nations police peacekeeping has expanded
considerably in the past few years, and its activities
have become increasingly wide-ranging and complex.
The A3+1 commends the work of United Nations police
in maintaining peace and security. They are central
to multilateral efforts to prevent, mitigate and resolve
violent conflict.
The A3+1 remains committed to all efforts aimed
at ensuring the full, equal and meaningful participation
and leadership of women in United Nations policing,
as well as in peacekeeping more broadly. The immense
expertise, competitive advantages and wider societal
benefits that women bring to peace operations in all
roles, both uniformed and civilian, and at all levels at
Headquarters and in the field are critical. Women’s
contributions are also essential to special political
missions, peacebuilding initiatives and across the wider
spectrum of development projects and programmes
required to deliver lasting peace.
It is imperative that all those activities be wellcoordinated to establish best practices for gender
mainstreaming, successfully confront implementation
gaps in the women and peace and security agenda and
fully address the structural and systemic inequalities
that continue to affect women and girls.
In addition, as we work to enhance women’s
participation in peacekeeping and United Nations
policing, we must avoid assumptions that position
women as limited to caring and nurturing, thereby
restricting their participation in the sexual and
gender-based violence response. Instead, we must
consistently ensure women’s meaningful participation
and leadership in all aspects of peacekeeping, including
police patrols, operations and planning, responding to
the growing threat of small arms and light weapons,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
security sector reform.
21-32894

10/11/2021

United Nations peacekeeping operations

We commend the demonstrated commitment to
increasing the number of women in United Nations
policing and the broader efforts to ensure genderresponsive policing and peacekeeping. In particular, the
progress made in women’s participation in the police
components of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force
in Cyprus and the establishment by the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali of its gender unit are indicative of good practices
among United Nations peacekeeping operations. In both
instances, the wider commitment to gender analysis and
gender responsive peacekeeping are evident. However,
that must become the norm among all United Nations
peacekeeping operations and special political missions.
With that in mind, I would like to ask UnderSecretary-General Lacroix how he envisions
the delivery of a more comprehensive gendermainstreaming strategy across all United Nations
special political missions and peacekeeping operations.
We seek more concrete proposals, as they are needed
to enhance gender responsive policing and all other
aspects of the women and peace and security agenda in
relation to peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
The A3+1 welcomes continued progress by all
peacekeeping missions towards implementing the
United Nations zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse. Those standards and codes
of conduct deliver protective mechanisms not only to
women who serve in United Nations peace operations,
but they also deliver positive normative changes to the
most marginalized communities where peacekeeping
personnel are deployed. All allegations of sexual
exploitation and abuse, wheresoever and by whomsoever
committed, should be thoroughly investigated and the
perpetrators brought to justice. Furthermore, we urge
all stakeholders to fully implement all provisions of
resolutions 2518 (2020), 2538 (2020), 2594 (2021)
and other Security Council decisions that address the
interlinkages between peacekeeping and the women
and peace and security agenda.
The A3+1 reiterates its support for the various
efforts of the Secretary-General, including the Action
for Peacekeeping and Action for Peacekeeping Plus
initiatives, aimed at strengthening partnerships,
enhancing effectiveness and accountability, boosting
safety and security, improving conduct and delivering
political solutions through peacekeeping. We also
commend the continued efforts to further develop
and implement the Strategic Guidance Framework for

S/PV. 8901

International Policing, which reinforces and enriches
all peacekeeping, rule-of-law, protection-of-civilians
and peacebuilding activities.
Women are crucial participants in achieving all
those noble ambitions. In all contexts and under all
circumstances, we must ensure that women not only
meaningfully participate, but also lead in building
consensus, advancing reconciliation and establishing
stable and resilient democratic societies. Without the
greater mobilization, participation, leadership and
promotion of women, from all backgrounds and in their
full diversity, the successful mission transitions and
sustainable exit strategies that we all look forward to
will be hard to envisage, and even harder to attain.
The simple truth is that women are not only
effective peacekeepers and police officers; they are
also powerful peace advocates, diligent community
organizers, conscientious political leaders and
tireless nation-builders. We must therefore redouble
our efforts to ensure that women are always fully
represented at each decision-making table and level,
without discrimination or bias, as equal participants,
key decision-makers and primary beneficiaries. Any
obstacle to women’s engagement provides a barrier to
lasting peace. Let us remove those barriers and build a
more peaceful and prosperous world, to the benefit of
all countries and peoples.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I thank Mexico for
convening today’s briefing. I want to also thank Mexico
for the important focus that your country, Madam
President, is putting on women and peace and security.
Ireland is truly proud to work together with
Kenya and Mexico in forming a trio of presidencies
committed not just to highlighting but to amplifying
and mainstreaming the women and peace and security
agenda in the work of the Council. Highlighting
and giving priority to the importance of women’s
participation, particularly in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, is key to that initiative. United Nations
policing is no different. We know the essential
contribution women make as United Nations police
and the important role that the United Nations police
(UNPOL) plays in enhancing the protection of
women on the ground, importantly enabling women’s
participation in peacemaking and peacebuilding.
I would like to say a sincere thank you to UnderSecretary-General Lacroix, as well as to the Police
Commissioners, for their insightful and informative

21-328947/22

S/PV.8901

United Nations peacekeeping operations

briefings. I am delighted to once again to see
Ms. Boughani, with whom we met during our recent
visit to Mali.
We receive regular reports of the important work
that the Commissioners and their teams carry out on
the ground. Their work is critical. From their working
with communities in Abyei to preventing genderbased violence and working with national police forces
in Mali, we know that they operate in challenging
environments. Their work is sincerely appreciated, and
we thank them for their continued commitment.
Their contributions to the advancement of the
overall women and peace and security agenda are
fully recognized. Indeed, they act as real role models
for women in policing everywhere. Ireland has been a
proud peacekeeping nation for more than 60 years. That
includes more than 30 years contributing to UNPOL,
including through our current deployment to the
United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus. We put
a premium on our policing contributions.
We acknowledge that UNPOL has made significant
strides in relation to gender, with women making up
more than 14 per cent of deployed officers, but the
truth is that we can and must do better. That means
looking beyond the numbers, addressing the structural
barriers that we have heard about in the briefings
earlier and creating enabling environments for women’s
participation. We know that continued efforts to combat
gender stereotypes will help advance us further along
the road towards better gender balance in policing.
The mainstreaming approach to women and peace and
security, set out in the Action for Peacekeeping Plus
(A4P+) initiative, offers UNPOL the opportunity to
both enhance its role in peacekeeping and advance
gender equality more broadly.
I also want to take this opportunity to commend
UNPOL for its work in conflict prevention and postconflict peacebuilding. The work of UNPOL in
deterring violence, defusing tensions, while addressing
deficits in training and mentoring, and advising host
State police allows for the development of effective,
legitimate and credible mechanisms and structures
that can help societies on the ground and communities
to rebuild.
UNPOL can also play a critical role in transitions
contexts. As we have said before, when the time
comes for peacekeepers to leave or for a peacekeeping
operation to be reconfigured, the wider United
8/22

10/11/2021

Nations system needs to be ready to step up and to
step in. We know from experience that the move from
a peacekeeping to a peacebuilding presence is most
successful when the process is inclusive — that means
including women — nationally owned, financially
supported and, crucially, when there is a strong focus
on the protection of civilians.
Resolution 2594 (2021), on United Nations
transitions, places a particular focus on the need to
enhance States’ capacity to protect their own civilians,
emphasizing the importance of quality security sector
reform. That is an area where UNPOL has a pivotal role
to play through training and support, with a focus, of
course, on ensuring compliance with international law.
While States bear primary responsibility for the
protection of their populations, the Council also has a
responsibility to encourage and support Governments
in developing and implementing national strategies
to do that job. For that to happen, we need the full
participation of local communities and stakeholders,
especially women, youth and civil society. We need a
continued focus on human rights.
It is vital that we view the reconfiguration of the
United Nations presence in the field as a strategic process
that enables and supports long-term peacebuilding
efforts. That means considering and integrating the
roles and responsibilities of UNPOL in early transition
planning. In particular, we believe that that should
focus on the bridge-building role that UNPOL can play
between the United Nations and local communities on
the ground, as well as on training and coordination.
In conclusion, we believe that we must highlight
the critical role that UNPOL can play in the protection
of the most vulnerable — children. That requires
specialized predeployment and in-mission training,
as well as appropriate comprehensive child-sensitive
prevention and protection responses. We see the
enhanced coordination between police components and
child protection advisers, as well as the inclusion of
gender and women protection advisers in missions, as
of particular importance in delivering on that.
I just want to ask Under-Secretary-General Lacroix
if he could say a little more to us about which areas of
the recently launched A4P+ initiative he would like to
see UNPOL prioritize and how we in the Council can
assist him in that work.
21-32894

10/11/2021

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix; Ms. Boughani,
Police Commissioner, United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA);
and Ms. Lusala, Police Commissioner, United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA).
I take this opportunity to pay my highest tribute
to all peacekeepers and peacekeeping police officers
working on the front lines and delivering their
mandates. I also congratulate Superintendent Malla of
Nepal on being presented with the Woman Police Offer
of the Year Award for 2021.
Police are an important force in ensuring the safety
and security of citizens and maintaining social order.
Over the past decades, the role of United Nations police
in United Nations peacekeeping operations has gained
more and more prominence, and its place in the United
Nations peace and security architecture has become
increasingly important. Currently, the international
security situation is more complex and security threats
are much more diverse. The United Nations should
therefore make better use of its police components.
In that regard, I would like to make the
following points.
First, it is important to have the positioning right.
The Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping
initiative makes political solutions to hotspot issues a
top priority. When designing the police mandates of
peacekeeping operations, it is always necessary to bear
that point in mind and to see it reflected throughout
its actual work. China hopes that the police component
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali will continue to assist
with the implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali in restoring the Malian
Government State authority in the central region of the
country. The police component of the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei has made outstanding
contributions to the maintenance of local public order.
Efforts on the part of the Sudan and South Sudan should
continue to promote the establishment of a joint police
service in Abyei.
The ultimate goal of the work of United Nations
police is to prepare its local counterpart to resume
policing responsibilities, rather than acting as a
substitute. In Haiti for nearly three decades, the United
Nations has made significant efforts in that regard.
However, as the host Government has not shouldered

S/PV. 8901

its responsibility, those efforts have failed for some
time to achieve the desired results. The international
community should learn from past lessons and
conduct more robust training for the Haitian National
Police to assist them in effectively fulfilling their
responsibilities and progressively addressing the
problem of local gangsterism.
Secondly, it is essential to strengthen capacitybuilding. In accordance with the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations, the Secretariat, the host States, troop- and
police-contributing countries and financial contributors
should effectively honour their commitments, shoulder
their respective responsibilities, provide comprehensive
training and secure sufficient resources to ensure that
every member of the United Nations police has the skills
and equipment needed for mandate-implementation and
self-defence.
The ultimate purpose of a performance assessment
is also to improve capabilities. The Comprehensive
Planning and Performance Assessment System is being
rolled out in all peacekeeping operations. On the basis
of the assessment, we hope that targeted measures will
be taken to address weaknesses and shortcomings.
With regard to protecting vulnerable groups,
promoting women’s participation and strengthening
community engagement, female police peacekeepers
have a unique advantage. Peacekeeping operations
should provide equal opportunities for women in the
areas of training, recruitment and promotion. With
respect to logistics and security, steps should be taken to
gradually increase the number of female police officers.
Thirdly, it is imperative to ensure the safety and
security of personnel. As Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix often states, one death is one too many among
peacekeepers. As with other peacekeeping personnel,
the security risks faced by United Nations police
have increased considerably in recent years. China
calls for the full implementation of resolution 2518
(2020) to enhance safety and security support for
peacekeepers in a comprehensive way. China welcomes
the establishment by the Secretariat of a Safety and
Security Focal Point for Peacekeepers, as requested by
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.
We believe that that will help the Secretariat strengthen
internal and external coordination and improve
emergency response capacity. As Chair of the Group
of Friends on the Safety and Security of United Nations

21-328949/22

S/PV.8901

United Nations peacekeeping operations

10/11/2021

Peacekeepers, China will convene a meeting of the
Group this month to discuss how to better strengthen
camp security in peacekeeping missions.

of peacekeeping missions to support host countries and
local populations in leading and owning their destiny,
through the relevant assistance in peacebuilding efforts.

Since their initial deployment in peacekeeping
operations in 2000, Chinese police peacekeepers
have accomplished various mission tasks in difficult
circumstances. They have set the record for no
violations, no repatriations and no combat casualties.
Since 2015, through the China Peacekeeping Police
Training Centre, China has also assisted other
police-contributing countries and trained thousands
of peacekeeping police officers. China stands ready to
continue to support, promote and participate in United
Nations peacekeeping operations and work together
with all peace-loving countries around the world to
help maintain international peace and security and
build a safe world for all.

In that pursuit, the contribution of United Nations
female police officers cannot be overemphasized.
Women have an indispensable role in increasing the
overall performance and effectiveness of peacekeeping
operations. Their presence can contribute to building
the credibility and reputation of missions among the
population, closer and more effective community
engagement and enhanced protection responses.

In conclusion, I have a few questions for the two
Police Commissioners. The mandate of peacekeeping
police is different from that of peacekeeping forces, and
associated risks are also quite unique. The specificities
of Mali and Abyei are somehow representative. What
are the weakest links with regard to enhancing security
for peacekeeping police? What areas need to be
strengthened most? What measures should be taken?
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I would like to join other
colleagues in thanking the Mexican presidency for
organizing this annual briefing. I also thank UnderSecretary-General
Jean-Pierre
Lacroix,
Police
Commissioner Lusala of the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei and Police Commissioner
Boughani of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali for their
briefings. We express our appreciation for their work
on the ground at this very challenging time.
Peacekeeping is a critical tool in the maintenance
of international peace and security. Viet Nam has been
a steadfast supporter of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, including the work of United Nations
police. We highly value their contribution to the
common objectives of missions and the promotion of
international peace and security. Over the past 60 years,
police components have made commendable efforts
in carrying out mandated responsibilities and built
up their capacities and experience. In the context of
increasingly complex challenges and mandates, United
Nations police have demonstrated strong potential as
they work with the civilian and military components
10/22

We commend the increasing number of women
police officers and, especially, the six women currently
serving as heads or deputy heads of United Nations
police components in United Nations peacekeeping and
special political missions. We are delighted to welcome
two of them to today’s meeting. Their briefings are clear
examples of the effectiveness of women’s leadership
and reflect the potential of women police officers’
contribution to gender equality and the advancement of
women, as well as the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda in host countries.
It is therefore crucial that greater attention and
resources be given to the promotion of women in
peacekeeping operations, including policing activities.
The international community should also enhance
training and capacity-building support to developing
countries, including for women police officers,
overcome challenges and create a safer and more
women-friendly working environment.
Viet Nam reaffirms its commitment to actively
engaging in United Nations peacekeeping. We also
continue to support the implementation of the Action for
Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative, the A4P Plus initiative
and the women and peace and security agenda. Bearing
that in mind, we are preparing to increase and diversify
our participation in United Nations peacekeeping in
terms of missions and unit types.
Viet Nam’s police officers are actively trained,
in line with United Nations standards, in order to
participate in peacekeeping missions at the earliest
opportunity. I would like to take this opportunity to
express our appreciation to the Department of Peace
Operations, in particular the Police Division and
related divisions, as well as regional partners that have
provided us with valuable assistance.
21-32894

10/11/2021

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Acknowledging that women and their empowerment
are crucial to advancing the culture of peace, we have
integrated the role of women in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding into our legal framework and policies.
In practice, the percentage of Vietnamese female
peacekeepers in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic and the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan has increased to 20.6 per cent, well above the
Secretary-General’s target of 15 per cent for uniform
gender parity before 2028. In preparation for future
deployment, we also take into consideration the call
for greater nomination of women, including women
police officers.
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate our
readiness to join efforts with the international
community in contributing to peacekeeping operations
and ensure full, equal and meaningful women’s
participation in peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General JeanPierre Lacroix, Police Commissioner Violet Lusala of
the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei and
Police Commissioner Patricia Boughani of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali for their briefings. Through their
commanders, we would also like to thank all those who
report to them for being conscientious in the conduct of
their duties to support peace and security in difficult
conflict situations.
We view police components as an integral part of
United Nations peacekeeping operations. They help
improve the unique mandate for each mission, which is
determined by the specific situation in the country of
deployment. That pertains in particular to the United
Nations peacekeeping operations that our briefers
represent today.
The challenges faced by the United Nations in
Abyei and Mali are very different. However, in both
regions there is work for the Blue Helmets. The majority
of peacekeeping missions are deployed in countries
where there is considerable weakening or, indeed, the
total absence of national law enforcement agencies. In
such circumstances, crime surges — organized crime,
trafficking in persons, drug trafficking, sexual violence
and violence against children. United Nations police are
therefore better trained to deal with such circumstances
and can make a significant contribution to the important

S/PV. 8901

job of protecting civilians from direct security threats.
They can also provide temporary assistance to national
law enforcement bodies and, in some cases, even act as
a substitute for them.
However, it is important to avoid situations in which
the long-term presence of missions essentially leads
to a long-term replacement of local police authorities
by the United Nations. It is vital that United Nations
police officers impartially fulfil their mandates, have
an understanding of the political aspects of conflicts
and maintain close cooperation with the authorities and
the local population. Any potential mistakes can prove
costly for both peacekeepers and the peace process.
Sometimes, an in-depth explanation of the mandate
is necessary in order to simultaneously win the trust
of local residents and avoid creating unrealistic or
incorrect expectations. It is also important to take into
account possible ethnic, religious and other factors, as
well as the national specificities of the people living in
the area of deployment.
In addition, those who are often in greatest
need are women and children, who require a special
approach to be taken. In that regard, the ranks of
United Nations police must include both men and
women officers. We are confident that the main focus
in that regard should not be on the achievement of
percentage-based gender indicators, but rather on
the effective implementation of mandated tasks and
assessments of the deployment circumstances and the
security situation. It is also important for women to
fill commander and leadership roles in line with the
principle of geographical distribution.
Another important task being conducted successfully
by the Blue Berets is the provision of assistance in the
post-conflict reform of law enforcement institutions
and building the national capacities of host States. That
includes sharing experiences, defining work to be done
and training personnel. The more effectively that task
is carried out, the sooner responsibility for maintaining
law and order can be fully transferred to national forces.
Of course, United Nations police officers must
be properly and professionally trained and supplied
with the necessary equipment, but they also need to
be highly motivated to train others. In that regard, we
support the efforts of the Secretariat, as well as the
initiatives of many regional organizations, primarily
the African Union, to improve the level of training
among police peacekeepers.

21-3289411/22

S/PV.8901

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Russia is actively contributing to that common
cause. For over 20 years, hundreds of foreign police
peacekeepers, including five commanders and a
large number of women, from more than 50 countries
around the world, mainly from Africa, have been
trained at the United Nations-certified Russian
National Peacekeeping Training Centre in the city of
Domodedovo under the auspices of the Russian Defense
Ministry. Russia has unique experience in the field of
professional training for peacekeepers, which we stand
ready to share. Hundreds of Blue Berets from Russia
have contributed to the maintenance of peace and
security around the world. Approximately 40 Russian
officers, more than a third of whom are women, serve
in various United Nations missions today. I would like
to take this opportunity to congratulate them today,
10 November, when Police Day is celebrated in Russia.
We are convinced that the police component
of peacekeeping warrants greater attention from
States Members of the United Nations, both in the
Security Council, when it comes to individual country
situations, and in the General Assembly. We believe
that the best forums for discussing general police
matters are the Security Council Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations and the General Assembly
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, where
all police-contributing countries are represented and
which is mandated to comprehensively consider issues
related to peacekeeping.
Mr. Lipand (Estonia): I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Lacroix and Police Commissioners
Lusala and Boughani, of the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, respectively, for their comprehensive
presentations and a thorough overview of the current
situation on the ground and challenges in United
Nations policing.
At the outset, I would like to recognize the
contribution of United Nations police (UNPOL) to
United Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding
processes, as well as their continued operational
readiness throughout the coronavirus disease pandemic.
United Nations police have a pivotal role in ensuring
increased security, the protection of civilians and the
return of law and order, whether in cooperation with host
State law enforcement agencies or, in some instances,
unilaterally, responding to public order issues.
12/22

10/11/2021

Estonia believes that the efforts of UNPOL in
strengthening the rule of law, building the capacities
of people-oriented national police services and
assisting in security sector reform based on human
rights are fundamental in establishing lasting stability
in conflict-affected countries. We will continue to
support the Action for Peacekeeping Plus initiative,
and place high importance on its goals of improving
the performance and accountability of peacekeeping,
implementing the women and peace and security
agenda and addressing capability and integration gaps.
It is likewise imperative to remain vigilant on zero
tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse.
Estonia welcomes the specific focus today on
accelerating the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda in United Nations policing.
A more gender-equal composition of United Nations
police components plays a critical role in effective
policing and ultimately strengthening the effectiveness
of peacekeeping operations. It is also crucial in
increasing the effectiveness of community policing,
countering the spread of misinformation and preventing
and eliminating conflict-related sexual and genderbased violence.
Estonia will continue to underline the importance
of implementing the women and peace and security
agenda, in particular in ensuring the full, equal and
meaningful participation of women in peace processes,
but also in UNPOL by emphasizing the importance of
the implementation of resolution 2538 (2020).
We note with appreciation the fulfilment and
surpassing of the intermediate gender parity targets
for 2020. In view of the goal of the Uniformed Gender
Parity Strategy to create an enabling environment for
uniformed women in peacekeeping operations, today’s
briefings have been insightful. It has been enlightening
to hear from the Commissioners about their priorities in
creating a safe, enabling and gender-sensitive working
environment for women.
I would like to conclude by expressing
gratitude and strong support to all United Nations
peacekeepers — women and men — whose dedication
and sacrifice bring hope to all of us. Like others, we
extend our particular congratulations to the winner of
the 2021 United Nations Woman Police Officer of the
Year award, Superintendent Sangya Malla of Nepal
from the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
21-32894

10/11/2021

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Lacroix and the Police Commissioners for their
briefings. I would like to stress three points.
United Nations police have taken on a leading role
that will only continue to grow. That role has evolved
significantly over the past 20 years: one only has to
look at the increase in deployment requirements, the
diversity of missions, the doctrine developed since
the year 2000 and the place of police in the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative.
United Nations policing is essential, and the
participation of women in that regard is indispensable,
not only for reasons of representation within the
Organization but also for reasons of equality. The
unique contribution of women in internal security
forces is widely recognized. United Nations police
are involved in a variety of community-based projects
to combat various types of violence, including
sexual and gender-based violence, and to support the
empowerment of women. In Mali, for example, United
Nations police contribute to the protection of civilians
and help to maintain relations between the State and the
population through its presence alongside the internal
security forces.
United Nations police are also a key component
of transitions, supporting national capacity-building
and security sector reform, as they are doing in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo through their
support for the implementation of the national police
reform plan and the formation of community policing
in the east of the country. We call on the national
authorities to mobilize the means necessary for the
success of these efforts.

S/PV. 8901

The implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda is a priority for France. Through its
feminist diplomacy, it promotes the full participation of
women in peace processes. France calls on all partners
to support the women and peace and security agenda
and to adopt a national action plan. It also reiterates
the need for women to participate in peace operations.
The briefings this morning confirm the importance and
relevance of such participation. In the three missions
in which it is deploying 21 gendarmes and one police
officer of all ranks, France is making sure that it
brings the skills of women. I would like to salute their
action in positions that are particularly important for
the fulfilment of the mandates, and in which they are
demonstrating remarkable professional efficiency.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): At the outset, let me
begin by thanking the Under-Secretary-General for
Peace Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, for his
annual briefing on United Nations policing.
Police everywhere are the most important law
enforcement organ and, more importantly, the public
face of security institutions. People’s faith in the police
or lack thereof substantially affects the security and
law and order situation in any society.
Their role is even more important in the situations
of armed conflict on which the Security Council deal is
focused. They play an important role in implementing
the mandates generated by the Council. In addition,
United Nations police help in capacity-building in
host States, especially in such areas as rule of law and
civilian policing.

I would like to stress that the linguistic difficulties
encountered by personnel who have not mastered the
language used in the host State can be an obstacle to the
performance of missions. I am therefore pleased with
the results of the partnership between the International
Organization of la Francophonie and the United Nations
Police Division.

We appreciate the focus of today’s briefing on the
contribution of United Nations police to the women
and peace and security agenda. I also thank the Police
Commissioner of the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA), Ms. Violet Lusala, and
the Police Commissioner of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, Ms. Patricia Boughani, for their insights from
the ground.

The United Nations police has demonstrated its
ability to adapt so as to increase the participation of
women, including at the highest level. Currently,
the targets set by the Organization for women’s
participation in United Nations policing are being met
and even exceeded. But more needs to be done.

I take this opportunity to pay tribute to all women
and men peacekeepers, including the 14 police officers
from India, who sacrificed their lives in the line of duty
and for their remarkable contribution to the restoration
of peace and stability in their respective places
of deployment.

21-3289413/22

S/PV.8901

United Nations peacekeeping operations

India is also one of the leading police contributors,
having deployed close to 3,000 police officers in
approximately 24 United Nations peacekeeping
operations. In fact, India is a pioneer in this field,
as the first country to deploy a formed police unit in
Liberia, in 2007. At present, around 175 Indian police
personnel are serving in UNISFA, the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the United
Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus. Indian police
officers have served with distinction in each of their
assignments, which has also been acknowledged by the
United Nations and the host countries themselves. A
number of current or former officers in Indian police
services are also serving in various capacities in United
Nations missions.
India has been an active participant in the
deliberations on issues focusing on women’s
empowerment and gender mainstreaming in various
United Nations bodies. India fully supports the
Secretary-General’s call to action for accelerated
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda in implementing the Declaration of Shared
Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations and work towards fulfilling Action for
Peacekeeping Plus priorities. We also welcome the
Secretary-General’s uniformed gender parity strategy,
and we are committed to complying with that strategy
so that women’s participation and their role in
peacekeeping can be enhanced.
Women police officers and peacekeepers play an
indispensable role in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, in particular during high visibility patrols
and search operations and in reaching out to communities
where only female police officers are allowed to interact
with female members of the community. They are better
able to gain the trust of a large but marginalized section
of society and help promote gender equality. They can
also act as role models by inspiring local women and
girls to pursue careers, including in law enforcement.
The Indian Female Engagement Team with
MONUSCO has been instrumental in enhancing local
women’s engagement in Goma. The Team initiated,
organized and provided security for local protection
committee meetings, enabling women to share
concerns, organize themselves more systematically
and allow the force to incorporate women’s inputs into
operational planning. The information received from
14/22

10/11/2021

women in the community has been utilized to focus on
patrolling in high-risk areas and to plan civil-military
coordination activities based on communities’ needs.
Earlier, the Indian female formed unit in the
United Nations Mission in Liberia, which I mentioned
previously, helped increase participation of Liberian
women in the security sector from 6 per cent in 2007,
when they were first deployed, to 17 per cent when
they left the mission in 2016. This contribution was
repeatedly acknowledged by the then-President of
Liberia and Nobel laureate Ms. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf.
India’s individual police officers, particularly
women officers, have also contributed immensely to
United Nations peacekeeping. An Indian women police
officer, Inspector Shakti Devi, who was deployed in the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, was
awarded the International Female Police Peacekeeper
Award in 2014 for her contribution in the creation of
a women’s police council in Herat, and more recently,
Major Suman Gawani, deployed with UNMISS,
received the United Nations Military Gender Advocate
of the Year Award for 2019.
The contribution of United Nations police
in supporting reforms in and restructuring and
development of host State police administrations and
other law enforcement institutions is critical. Women
peacekeepers, particularly women police officers, can
play an important role in understanding and responding
to the specific needs of women in conflict and postconflict environments, including the need for protection
from sexual and gender-based violence.
We need to increase the share of women in
United Nations police components. In this regard,
I submit three specific suggestions. First, there is a
need to identify and resolve the structural problems
that prevent increased numbers of uniformed women
in both United Nations and civilian peacekeeping
roles. These impediments include logistics, barracks
facilities and related working conditions, especially
in difficult security environments. Providing basic
physical infrastructure and a safe working environment
is an essential imperative to ensure police components’
smooth functioning.
Secondly, women need to be given equal
opportunities. We often see women in leadershipsupport roles, like administrative work. They should
be engaged in key roles as well, such as community
engagement and outreach.
21-32894

10/11/2021

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Thirdly, it goes without saying that we need to
observe a strict zero-tolerance policy towards sexual
harassment and abuse. Strengthening the conduct
of peacekeepers through such preventive measures
as adequate training and workplace monitoring and
reporting mechanisms for allowing complaints to
be addressed is key to tackling these issues. Such
initiatives as deploying gender peace and security
advisors to peacekeeping missions would also help to
prevent sexual harassment and related violence.
Implementation of these suggestions will go a long
way to further strengthening the role of the United
Nations police in the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda and inspire more women
to contribute to conflict resolution and peacebuilding
missions.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): We are really grateful to Mexico for promoting
sustained engagement at the Security Council on the
women and peace and security agenda. I thank UnderSecretary-General Lacroix for his presentation, and the
United Nations Police Commissioners — both of whom
are women, I note. I really appreciate the insightful
briefings that they bring to us directly from the field.
At the outset, allow me to express my condolences
to the Government of Egypt for the recent shooting
injuries of its police officers who had newly arrived in
Bangui on 1 November to serve in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic. We hope that they will
make a full recovery, and we urge a full investigation
of the circumstances and context in which those
peacekeepers found themselves wounded in a so-called
friendly fire incident.
Today I would like to address three aspects of United
Nations police: areas where we have achieved progress
on the women and peace and security agenda, areas
where there is more work to be done and measuring
both by implementing an integrated performance and
accountability policy.
First, we are pleased to see United Nations police
make clear how they are advancing the women and peace
and security agenda. Ten years ago, women represented
15 per cent of individual police officers deployed with
the United Nations. Today that has doubled to 30 per
cent, and while a significant increase, it is simply not
enough. In 2011, only 5 per cent of police officers in
formed police units were women; today it is 14 per cent.

S/PV. 8901

Again, that is a significant increase, but much more
needs to be done. This is important, however; women
police play leading roles in rebuilding communities
and trust among citizens and the security institutions
that serve them. The United States strongly supports
the Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy, and we urge
police-contributing countries to embrace policies that
increase women’s participation in all levels of policing.
That leads me to my second point. As I noted, we
still have more work to do to ensure that women are
afforded equal opportunities to excel and lead across
the full spectrum of United Nations policing. For
example, very few formed police units have female
commanders. We are therefore pleased to hear from
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix that this continues to
be a top priority for the United Nations. The Action for
Peacekeeping Plus (A4P+) initiative, launched earlier
this year, rightly calls for accelerated implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda, and a key
pillar of that agenda is increasing women’s participation
at all levels of peacekeeping.
At this point, I want to commend my Indian
colleagues for the police units that they provided in
Liberia, where I served as Ambassador. I was witness
to their professionalism and their commitment, which
made all of us proud to see them in uniform. I can tell
Council members that they were effective role models
for Liberian women and girls. I therefore thank them
very much.
Thirdly and finally, three years after the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2436 (2018), we
repeat our strong support for the United Nations
commitment to implement an integrated performance
and accountability policy. That policy should be based
on clear standards for all United Nations civilian and
uniformed personnel working in, and supporting,
peacekeeping operations. When peacekeepers fail to
protect civilians or commit instances of abuse, that
erodes trust with the local population and undermines
mission effectiveness and damages the image of
the United Nations and peacekeeping itself. The
United Nations must hold those who serve in peace
operations to the highest standards. We must hold
ourselves accountable, address underperformance and
misconduct, and select only those who are qualified
and ready for deployment. Just as important, the United
Nations should recognize outstanding performance.
The annual United Nations Woman Police Officer of
the Year Award is a great initiative. We would welcome

21-3289415/22

S/PV.8901

United Nations peacekeeping operations

similar ideas from the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Police Division.
We need United Nations police to be effective, we
need them to be successful, and we need to hold them
accountable and above reproach. The United States
remains committed to supporting United Nations police
and to helping it meet the challenges that lie ahead. We
look forward to continuing to engage on these important
topics at the United Nations police Light Coordination
Mechanism meeting next week in Brindisi, Italy, and in
the 2021 Peacekeeping Ministerial next week in Seoul.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Madam President, for this debate and for the focus that
Mexico is putting on women and peace and security this
month. I also thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix
for his briefing, and in particular Ms. Boughani and
Ms. Lusala for their perspectives from their respective
field locations, two of the most difficult environments
for United Nations police (UNPOL) and peacekeepers.
Let me pay tribute to the men and women in
United Nations police components around the world
who protect and serve vulnerable communities. As
our United States colleague just said, the recent
incident in the Central African Republic at the start of
this month, in which a police contingent from Egypt
was attacked, is just a stark reminder of the difficult
circumstances in which we deploy our peacekeepers
and of their dedication and courage. Host States have
a responsibility to observe status-of-forces agreements
and to ensure the safety and security of peacekeepers
serving within their borders. We urge the United
Nations and the Government of the Central African
Republic to share the results of their investigations with
the Council and police-contributing countries as soon
as they are finalized, so that the lessons can be learned.
United Nations police are often the first and the
last to meet with the local population, including women
and girls, in response to a crisis. Political solutions and
long-term peace cannot be achieved without strong
relations with those populations, founded on trust. That
is why we welcome the focus of today’s discussion
on the contribution UNPOL can make to women and
peace and security. The full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in United Nations policing is
not only a moral imperative, but also critical to mission
effectiveness. By reflecting the local communities
they serve, police can build trust and empower women
and girls, and even inspire them to join their national
16/22

10/11/2021

police services, paving the way to sustaining peace. We
want to see more female officers across the full range
of roles at all levels. The United Kingdom welcomes
the steps taken by police contributors to meet the
Secretary-General’s Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy
targets, and we continue to support the work of the
Elsie Initiative, having contributed over $6.3 million to
it since 2019.
Police Week gives us an opportunity to look at
the full range of United Nations policing challenges.
Policing is a central cog of peacekeeping: it helps to
establish a protective environment for civilians, restore
security and justice and re-establish the rule of law in
conflict-affected areas.
We owe it to our policing personnel to bring the
same resolve to ensuring their safety and supporting
their effectiveness as we do with their military
counterparts. That includes addressing the outstanding
recommendations from the 2016 external review of
the United Nations Police Division and finalizing
the strategic guidance framework and the roll-out of
training courses.
As such, I would like to draw attention to three
issues that we think are critical to delivering on the
Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping agenda
and Action for Peacekeeping Plus priorities.
First, police experts need to be at the top
table in missions, treated as an essential part of
integrated mission planning throughout the life of a
mission — from inception to transition — drawing on
relevant intelligence, reporting and data.
Secondly, recruitment needs to be fair, timely and
merit-based, selecting the right skills, capabilities and
expertise that particular missions need, and ensuring
this is deployed appropriately by those missions.
Thirdly, police need to be fully integrated into
United Nations systems, including the Peacekeeping
Capability Readiness System, the Light Coordination
Mechanism, the Integrated Peacekeeping Performance
and Accountability Framework and the Comprehensive
Planning and Performance Assessment System.
Finally, I would like to ask two specific questions
to Mr. Lacroix.
First, what is the United Nations Police Division
doing to support better coordination between civilian,
military and police components, such as through
21-32894

10/11/2021

United Nations peacekeeping operations

integrated operational planning and intra-mission
dedicated coordination mechanisms?
Secondly, like others, we are concerned about
allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse — nine in
the past year against UNPOL personnel in peacekeeping
mission. Nearly all cases are still pending an outcome
by the United Nations and all cases are pending action
by police contributing countries. What steps is UNPOL
taking to tackle sexual exploitation and abuse, including
in-mission awareness training and police leadership?
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I would like to thank
Mexico for its consistent focus on women, peace and
security, including within the Security Council. I
thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and the Police
Commissioners for their thorough and informative
briefings today.
Norway has been a police-contributing country
since 1989. Our support to United Nations policing
is consistent and comprehensive. It includes the
deployment of highly qualified personnel, as well as
financial contributions and policy input.
We welcome the remarkable development of
United Nations police (UNPOL), who now undertake
a broader spectrum of duties, including capacitybuilding, operational support and strengthening policy
and formal guidance. That reflects the increasingly
complex security situations facing peace operations,
including terrorism and transnational organized crime.
Publications from the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and INTERPOL have also
acknowledged the nexus between international security
threats and law enforcement matters, such as the fight
against impunity.
An independent and well-functioning justice
sector is fundamental to ensuring sustainable peace
and good governance. That is also well reflected in the
Sustainable Development Goals.
Norway advocates for robust police components.
Mandates should draw on the full capabilities of the
United Nations police to support the protection of
civilians, including children, strengthen the rule of
law, safeguard human rights and enhance the capacity
of police and judicial institutions in the host State.
Professionalizing the police and the judicial chain must
also be emphasized in Security Council mandates. In
that respect, we underline the importance of providing
adequate resources and staffing to the Police Division

S/PV. 8901

and the United Nations Office of Rule of Law and
Security Institutions, especially as new, non-military
challenges, demand a proactive and innovative approach.
Norway is among the world’s most genderbalanced police services, and we support parity efforts
in an international context through our funding of the
programme led by the United Nations Police Division,
which aims to increase the number of female United
Nations police in a concrete and measurable way. Yet
gender balance is not only about numbers, it is also
about full, equal and meaningful participation.
In Norway we do not set out to recruit female
police officers to UNPOL. We recruit the best and
most competent police officers, regardless of gender.
Our female participation is usually around fifty per
cent of contingent commanders. That is thanks to a
long-term national gender strategy that has resulted in
a solid base of female police who can empower, build
trust and be role models to women and girls in the field.
We would also like to highlight the Police Division’s
implementation of the Secretary-General’s Uniformed
Gender Parity Strategy, an important tool where gender
and competence go hand in hand.
We also welcome the fact that the specialized
police teams have now become an established tool in
United Nations policing. First deployed in 2010, we
now see specialized police teams in most missions. We
encourage the Department of Peace Operations and the
Police Division to continue developing this model when
reviewing the guidelines next year, including making
use of new technological developments and ensuring
that the Strategic Guidance Framework for International
Police Peacekeeping reflects new challenges through
innovation and new technical standards.
We would also like to see technology included as
a cross-cutting theme — not only for the Seoul United
Nations Peacekeeping Ministerial, but also in the
general follow-up to the Secretary-General’s Action for
Peacekeeping initiative.
In conclusion, we strongly encourage the United
Nations and all Member States to focus on the important
role of the police in conflict and post-conflict settings,
including through strong partnerships with regional
and non-United Nations organizations, in particular the
African Union and INTERPOL. This can ensure smooth
transitions and help to establish sustainable solutions.

21-3289417/22

S/PV.8901

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Mexico.
At the outset, I thank Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Pierre Lacroix and Police Commissioners
Violet Lusala and Patricia Boughani for their very
helpful briefings.
Today’s meeting is particularly important because
the work of the police in United Nations peacekeeping
missions is often little known and sometimes even
overshadowed by the visibility of military components.
I congratulate Ms. Sangya Malla, of Nepal, who
was named United Nations Police Woman of the
Year yesterday.
Today we will focus on the essential role that women
play as part of United Nations police components. The
statements delivered by the Police Commissioners today
are a clear testimony of the role that women play on the
ground in the communities in Abyei and Mali. Police
components have undergone significant changes since
their first deployment in 1960. Currently, around 11,000
police men and women from 88 countries participate
in 12 United Nations peacekeeping operations and
100 additional police officers participate in special
political missions.
After many years of experience, it is undeniable
that policing has a key role to play in achieving and
maintaining sustainable peace. The prevention and
investigation of crime, the protection of persons and the
maintenance of public order and security have become
fundamental components for long-term stability.
Formed police units and individual police officers
contribute to the development of national institutional
capacities for the strengthening of the rule of law,
including police, prosecutorial, judicial and penitentiary
institutions. That role is further enhanced in special
political missions, such as those in Latin America and
the Caribbean, namely, the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia and the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti.
The work of the police component is also central
to transitions, supporting countries in their security
responsibilities, as well as building trust in State
institutions. The work of women police officers,
as part of those components, is key in tasks such as
the protection of civilians, the provision of essential
services to women and children, the development and
18/22

10/11/2021

strengthening of strategic alliances with civil society
and the general implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda. The elements set forth recently
by the Security Council in resolution 2594 (2021), on
transitions, specifically include a vision directly linked
to the police components of the missions mandated by
the Council.
Within the operational framework, Mexico
supports the fulfilment of the objectives of the Action
for Peacekeeping initiative, which is also essential to
ensure the full, equal and meaningful participation of
women police officers in peace missions. In conjunction
with the Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy, we have
promoted women police officers’ leadership and their
increasing participation in decision-making. However,
female police officers continue to face structural
barriers to the optimal development of their careers,
which also makes it difficult for them to ensure a
balance between their personal and professional lives.
We must therefore mainstream a gender approach in all
aspects of the design and operation of United Nations
police components.
Those components must be dynamic and flexible
to meet the kind of challenges that arise, especially
in increasingly complex environments, such as those
resulting from the coronavirus disease pandemic, to
ensure that the concerns and requirements of each of
its members, including the diversity of policewomen,
are addressed. Mexico therefore recognizes the need
to promote effective gender-sensitive training and
education programmes for police personnel soon to
be deployed by taking into account the needs on the
ground and the objectives of each mission.
We
must
strengthen
partnerships
with
police-contributing countries and ensure the
deployment of more women, while enhancing synergies
with regional and subregional organizations and other
actors, such as INTERPOL, in reviewing the functions
of the police component in peace operations in order
to ensure maximum effectiveness and efficiency in
the field.
Finally, I would like to ask the briefers this morning
how they believe they can advance the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda through
their work, in particular with regard to the protection
of women peacebuilders from local communities and
women human rights defenders. What lessons have they
21-32894

10/11/2021

United Nations peacekeeping operations

learned regarding setting up early-warning systems to
prevent massive human rights violations?
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to Mr. Lacroix to respond to the
comments and questions raised.
Mr. Lacroix: I would like to thank all Security
Council members for the support that they have
expressed for United Nations police (UNPOL). I
also take this opportunity to express our gratitude
to all UNPOL personnel serving in the field and
at Headquarters.
I want to concur with the speakers who highlighted
the increasing importance of United Nations police
in peacekeeping for a number of reasons. First, the
kind of challenges facing our missions on the ground,
particularly the emerging drivers of conflicts, such
as organized crime, multilingual issues, the illegal
exploitation of natural resources, increasingly call for
a police response. Secondly, our operations deal with
situations with a higher population density, either in
urban areas or refugee or internally displaced persons
camps. That also raises issues that should be better
dealt with by United Nations police. Thirdly, we have
an increasing role in capacity-building. Of course, the
key capacity that we seek to build in host countries
relates to the rule of law, justice, police and correction.
Regarding the question from the representative of
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, who asked what kind
of proposal we would have to enhance gender-sensitive
policing in peacekeeping operation, there are a couple
of points that need to be highlighted.
First, we should continue our efforts to increase
the number of women in peacekeeping within
United Nations police. As was mentioned by
several speakers, that raises the question not only of
resources — and we of course call on Member States,
particularly police-contributing countries, to increase
the number of female police officers that they can
provide, including in formed police units — but also as
to what more we can do to ensure that there is be a more
welcoming environment in our peacekeeping missions,
including by working on improving facilities.
The second point concerns the importance of
continuing our efforts to involve more women in our
work to resolve local conflicts and to protect civilians.
The role of United Nations police, in particular female

S/PV. 8901

officers, is extremely important in ensuring that we
involve more local women in those efforts. A number
of innovative practices are being implemented in
several missions, resulting in female community
liaison assistants, counting on local networks of
women interacting with their association, all of which
constitute best practices that I believe must be enhanced
and applied in as many missions as is relevant.
Thirdly, it is also important to emphasize the
importance of combating gender-based violence. That
implies more efforts to sensitize our own police forces
and personnel, as well as how we train local police and
our emphasis on accountability, which also has to do
with their training of the local judiciaries. The role
that we play in building local police capacities and,
through such efforts, putting an emphasis on building
gender-sensitive local and national police capacities,
with a focus on combating gender-based violence, is
critically important.
The fourth aspect is clearly to keep enhancing and
strengthening our efforts to fight sexual exploitation
and abuse in peacekeeping. As members know, we
recently had to make a difficult decision, concerning
not the police but the military, with the repatriation
of an entire contingent in one of our peacekeeping
operations as a result of a very serious allegation. That
was a stark reminder of the fact that we are far from
solving problems of sexual exploitation and abuse. I
believe that our efforts must be reinforced, and we are
looking at ways in which that could be achieved.
As far as UNPOL is concerned, as was mentioned by
our colleague from the United Kingdom, we currently
have seven pending allegations for this year. They are
pending because they are currently being investigated.
Unfortunately, we have the same number as in 2020,
which is not encouraging because we would have liked
to see fewer allegations this year. However, some of the
2020 allegations were substantiated, while others were
not. That is to say that the investigations of allegations
this year of sexual exploitation and abuse regarding
United Nations police are ongoing. But I will say that
the United Nations Police Division is intensifying its
efforts, together with other relevant departments, in
particular the Department of Management Strategy,
Policy and Compliance and the Department of
Operational Support, and of course the Victims’ Rights
Advocate, so that we step up our efforts, including on
the question of sexual exploitation and abuse in United
Nations police. I can say that now more than ever that

21-3289419/22

S/PV.8901

United Nations peacekeeping operations

is our top priority, especially in the context of what I
said earlier.
Finally, it is also important to recognize the role of
women in UNPOL. The role played by the Woman Police
Officer of the Year award is important in that regard.
We are looking at ways to enhance our recognition
of outstanding performance. We are currently in
the process of working out several proposals. I want
to join those who, as I did yesterday, congratulated
Superintendent Sangya Malla, of Nepal, as the awardee
for this year.
On the question posed by the representative of
Ireland regarding which area of Action for Peacekeeping
Plus (A4P+) would be particularly relevant to UNPOL’s
efforts, all of them are of course extremely relevant. I
mentioned safety and security, performance, mindset,
capacities, conduct and discipline, as well as the crosscutting priority of A4P+, which is the women and peace
and security agenda.
However, I would like to highlight but a few
aspects. One of them is integration. One of the top
priorities of the A4P+ initiative is the enhancement of
our efforts related to integration within our missions
and beyond, together with the other components
of the United Nations system in the field and other
non-United Nations partners. We currently have a tool
for the improvement of integrated planning, that is, the
Comprehensive Planning and Performance Assessment
System, to ensure that, within missions, there is a
shared understanding of the key priorities relevant to
the mandate implementation.
We need to ensure that we fully roll out and make
the best use of that instrument, but it is also important
to enhance joint planning, the joint collection and
processing of information, joint action, particularly
in the area of the protection of civilians, and a joint
presence, as too often, in the context of the protection of
civilians, we tend to rely only on the military presence.
I believe that we need to increase the joint presence of
police, civilian and military components, especially in
remote areas with protection-of-civilian challenges.
I would also highlight the importance of a more
integrated and networked communication policy at the
level of our missions.
Another aspect, which is also a top priority for the
A4P+ initiative, concerns the relation with the host
country. The relation of United Nations police with the
20/22

10/11/2021

host countries is very specific in the sense that UNPOL
does a lot in terms of building relevant, credible and
strong rule of law-related national capacities.
That is absolutely the key condition to creating the
context of withdrawal and the gradual drawdown of our
peacekeeping operations. I believe it to be an important
aspect that I would like to highlight. Of course, we need
the support of the Council when we have issues with
host countries. I am highlighting this aspect in the light
of the recent and unacceptable incidents that some our
United Nations police personnel have been facing in the
Central African Republic.
Lastly, I would like to highlight the fact that we need
our police-contributing countries, and Members States
in general, to provide us with the capacities we need.
The next ministerial-level meeting on peacekeeping,
to be held in the Republic of Korea, will be a very
important opportunity for Member States to do that.
We have circulated a list of expected pledges, which
includes a number of pledges related to UNPOL. We
certainly look forward to Member States doing their
best to help us meet those needs.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Lacroix for the clarifications he has provided.
I now give the floor to Ms. Lusala so that she can
also respond to the comments and questions raised.
Ms. Lusala: In response to the question posed
by you, Madam President, with regard to how we feel
as the Heads of police components concerning the
protection of civilians, I will start by saying that, first,
I will enhance the protection of civilians by conducting
effective operations through intelligence-led policing
to sustain work in relation with all stakeholders. In that
case, by gathering intelligence, I will be able to head
off criminal incidents before they happen.
The second point concerns reducing overcrowding
in detention centres, especially at this point in time when
we are faced by coronavirus disease, by implementing a
dispute-resolution alternative mechanism with respect
to our justice system. Another aspect involves the
reduction of the human rights abuses of detainees, such
as the release of minors and juveniles from prison.
Another point concerns raising awareness and
responding to prevent sexual and gender-based violence
and conflict-related and sexual violence within the host
community. Another issue involves encouraging the
reporting of cases of sexual and gender-based violence
21-32894

10/11/2021

United Nations peacekeeping operations

within the community, especially in areas where we
do not have community protection committees or
joint protection committees, as we do in the northern
part of the country, such as those in Diffra. Another
point concerns monitoring and supporting community
protection committees and joint protection committees
by building their capacities through training workshops
and co-locating with respect to law enforcement, as
community protection committees and joint protection
committees are the only law enforcement entities on the
ground with which we are collaborating with regard to
their communities.
The next point involves enhancing gendersensitivity capacities by encouraging women to
embrace peace and security. That especially relates to
women in community protection committees where we
have established a gender desk at every community
protection committee station. Another issue concerns
enhancing United Nations police operational coverage
in the area under my responsibility. As I mentioned
earlier, we are currently operating at seven team sites,
but I intend to open the eighth team site. It is already
in place. I am just waiting for the weather conditions to
improve so that I can deploy officers at that team site.
Concerning lessons learned from the establishment
of the early-warning system, I would like to report
that the early-warning system, as documented, has
enhanced the effective response to, and the prevention
of, sexual and gender-based violence and other elements
of criminality within my area of responsibility. It has
also enhanced collaboration and integration among the
mission’s components, the host community and other
stakeholders, especially when it comes to the issues of
cattle rustling, migration in my area of responsibility
and issues of sexual and gender-based violence and
conflict-related cases.
It has also enhanced a timely response to crime
and incidents fuelling human rights violations. With
the early-warning system and responses, we get
information and react before the incident can happen.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Lusala for responding to the questions raised.
I now give the floor to Ms. Boughani so that she
can also respond to the comments and questions raised.
Ms. Boughani (spoke in French): With regard to
the question raised by the representative of China as
to the areas in which we deliver our mandate, I have

S/PV. 8901

chosen two areas to talk about. The first concerns
community policing and its counterpart, the local
security committee, which truly make up a body
within which security stakeholders, as well as the
local population, can meet and discuss their concerns
relating to crime and gain an understanding of each
other’s issues. Community policing is obviously the
best tool to build and reinforce trust between the local
population and security forces.
The second main area consists of co-location, which
goes beyond the subject of training. With co-location,
we seek to promote national ownership. An individual
police officer goes to a unit and shares in the work with
the unit and can provide it with various kinds of advice
on the daily work of the Malian security forces.
With regard to the question about difficulties
and challenges, in my opinion, the main challenge
is freedom of movement. Formed police units and
individual police officers conduct patrols. However,
in central Mali in particular, there are challenges to
freedom of movement, and we cannot reach all areas.
We are trying to meet that challenge with assessments
and information-sharing, for example, on protecting the
population. We conduct assessments within the civilian
component, the police component and the military
component to better understand the current challenges
and how we can meet them. Freedom of movement is
indeed a problem.
To address that issue, Malian security forces have
been redeployed in northern and central Mali. Female
units in the Malian security forces have also been
redeployed. We therefore request the Security Council
to encourage Mali to continue and step up deployment
in the north and the centre of the country.
With regard to the question from the representative
of Mexico on progress made by women in the
area of safety and security, there is an eight-week
predeployment training course for formed police units
before they go on mission. There is induction training
for individual police officers. We have set up ongoing
training on safety and security. We also work closely
with the United Nations Mine Action Service and the
force on the issue of explosive ordnance disposal.
Concerning our response to sexual and genderbased violence in conflict and women in the force, in
general, we developed an awareness-raising training
course. It is a one-week training course on a specific
issue. It might not always be focused on the issue of

21-3289421/22

S/PV.8901

United Nations peacekeeping operations

sexual violence. It is awareness-raising training focused
on three issues. All members of the Malian security
forces systematically receive such training on human
rights, sexual violence and election security. If none of
those three issues is the focus of a particular training
session, the session still seeks to raise awareness.
With regard to the early-warning system and lessons
learned, a regular presence on the ground and building
trust with the population are essential, as that allows
us to gather information. When United Nations police
receive information, it is immediately transmitted via an
integrated system. Integration of that kind is essential
within the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, as it allows for immediate

22/22

10/11/2021

information-sharing. Each component — military,
civilian or police — has its strengths. For example,
when there is intelligence about a potential attack, the
force can respond. When intelligence is gathered, it is
shared instantly among United Nations police, the force
and the civilian component so that we can provide an
immediate response.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Boughani for her responses and clarifications.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

21-32894
