UNITED

NATIONS

SECURITY
COUNCIL

Distr.
GENERAL
S/14414
19 March 1981
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

Nm'E BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL
The President of the Security Council read out the following statement at the
2266th meeting of the Security Council on 19 March 1981, in connexion with the
Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation in the Middle East":
"Taking account of an earlier complaint by the Government of Lebanon,
which is alreadY being considered by the Security Council, and of the report
submitted by the Secretary-General on 16 March 1981 (S/14407), I have been
authorized, as President of the Security Council, to make the following
statement on behalf of its members:
'The members of the Security Council are deeply shocked and outraged
at the report received about the repeated attacks on UNIFIL and the
continuing killings of peace-keeping soldiers in southern Lebanon,
These renewed barbaric acts against a peace-keeping force are a
direct defiance of the authority of the Security Council and a
challenge to the mission of the United Nations in maintaining
international peace and security, which cannot be tolerated.
The Council condemns these outrageous actions by the so-called
de facto forces which have caused the death and injury of UNIFIL
personnel present in Lebanon under international mandate. In strongly
condemning these latest outrageous acts of the so-called de facto forces,
the Council calls on all those who share in the responsibility for this
tense situation to put an end to any act which might increase the threat
to international peace and security and to put an end to military
assistance to any forces which interfere with UNIFIL in the exercise of
its mandate.
The Council addresses a serious warning to all the forces
responsible for these dangerous acts violating the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Lebanon, preventing the full deployment of
UNIFIL, including the deployment of the Lebanese armed forces in the
area, and severely hampering UNIFIL in the fulfilment of the mandate
as expressed in Security Council resolution 425 (1978), which states:

81-07653

I ...

•

S/14414
English
Page 2

The Security CoW1cil,
Taking note of the letters from the Permanent Representative of
Lebanon 1/ and from the Permanent Representative of Israel, ?J
Having heard the statements of the Permanent Representatives
of Lebanon ancl Israel, ]_/
Gravely concerned at the deterioration of the situation in the
Middle East and its consequences to the maintenance of international
peace~

Convinced that the present situation impedes the achievement
of a just peace in the Middle East,

cans
- - for strict respect for the territorial integrity,
sovereignty and
l.

political independence of Lebanon within its
internationally recognized boundaries;

2.
Calls upon Israel immediately to cease its military action
against Lebanese territorial integrity and withdraw forthwith its
forces from all Lebanese territory;

3.
Decides, in the light of the request of the Government of
Lebanon, to e,stablish immediately under its authority a United
Nations interim force for Southern Lebanon for the purpose of
confirming the withdrawal of Israeli forces, restoring international
peace and security and assisting the Government of Lebanon in
ensuring the return of its effective authority in the area, the
force to be composed of personnel drawn from Member States;

4.
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Council
within twenty--four hours on the implementation of the present
resolution.
The Council emphasizes that it is essential that UJ\!IFIL receive
the full co-operation of all parties to enable it to carry out its
mandate in the entire area of operations up to the internationally
recognized boW1daries, thus contributing to full implementation of
Security Council resolution 425 (1978).
The Council calls for the immediate release of Lebanese military
personnel and of all those persons who were kidnapped by the so~called
de facto forces during the recent hostilities.

1/ s/12600 and s/12606.
?J S/12607.
1/ S/PV. 2071.

S/14414
English
Page 3
The Council extends its sympathy and deep-felt condolences to the
Government of the Federal Republic of Nigeria and the families of the
victims.
The Council also commends the valiant action and the courage, under
the most adverse circumstances, of the commanders and soldiers of UNIFIL
and expresses full support for their efforts.'"
