A/66/PV.93

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-sixth session

93rd plenary meeting

Saturday, 24 December 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Al-Nasser. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

In the absence of the President, Mr. Quinlan
(Australia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.35 a.m.
Agenda item 69 (continued)
Promotion and protection of human rights
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments
Report of the Third Committee (A/66/462/Add.1)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/66/640)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it draft resolution IV, recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 22 of its report. The report
of the Fifth Committee on the programme budget
implications of the draft resolution is contained in
document A/66/640.
We will now take a decision on draft resolution
IV, entitled “Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities and the Optional Protocol thereto”. The
Third Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution
66/229).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 69?
It was so decided.

(Qatar)

(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives
Report of the Third Committee (A/66/462/Add.3)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/66/639)
The Acting President: We will now take action
on draft resolution II, recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 33 of its report. The report
of the Fifth Committee on the programme budget
implications of the draft resolution in contained in
document A/66/639.
We will now take a decision on draft resolution II,
entitled “Situation of human rights in Myanmar”. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan,
Albania,
Andorra,
Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Barbados,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Bulgaria, Burundi, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Namibia,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau,
Panama, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa,

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

11-65191 (E)

*1165191*

A/66/PV.93

San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tonga, Tunisia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
United States of America, Uruguay
Against:
Algeria, Bangladesh, Belarus, Brunei Darussalam,
Cambodia, China, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Myanmar, Nicaragua, Oman, Russian
Federation, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam
Abstaining:
Antigua and Barbuda, Bahrain, Benin, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Brazil, Burkina Faso,
Cameroon, Colombia, Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Guatemala, Indonesia, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Morocco,
Nepal, Pakistan, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Singapore,
South Africa, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad
and Tobago, Turkmenistan, United Arab Emirates,
Yemen, Zambia
Draft resolution II was adopted by 83 votes to 21,
with 39 abstentions (resolution 66/230).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Georgia and Libya
advised the Secretariat that they had intended to
vote in favour; the delegation of India advised the
Secretariat that it had intended to vote against; and
the delegations of Ecuador, Eritrea and Namibia
advised the Secretariat that they had intended to
abstain.]
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Myanmar, who wishes to speak in
explanation of vote on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Thu (Myanmar): My delegation would like to
express its sincere appreciation to the Member States
that have stood in principled opposition and abstained
or voted against the country-specific resolution on the
situation of human rights in Myanmar (66/230). My
Government is now in the process of transforming
our country into a democratic State with fundamental
human rights values, and has, in fact, already taken
concrete, visible and irreversible initiatives. The

2

international community has duly recognized and
encouraged the developments taking place in Myanmar.
We are therefore determined to move forward in a
dynamic and sustainable manner, with the international
community’s cooperation.
In our view, the Universal Periodic Review is the
best option for improving the human rights situation
in any individual country. In these circumstances, the
country-specific solution proposed by the European
Union does not promote the values of human rights
and is counter-productive to our coordinated efforts.
For that reason, we voted against the resolution and
dissociate ourselves from it.
Despite those views, we would like to reaffirm that,
in conformity with its foreign policy, Myanmar will
continue to cooperate fully with the United Nations and
the good-offices role of the Secretary-General.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (c) of agenda item 69 and of
agenda item 69 as a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 76 (continued)
Oceans and the law of the sea
(a) Oceans and the law of the sea
Draft resolution (A/66/L.21)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/66/641)
The Acting President: We shall now take action
draft resolution A/66/L.21. The report of the Fifth
Committee on the programme budget implications of
the draft resolution is contained in document A/66/641.
Members will recall that the Assembly held
a debate on sub-item (a) of agenda item 76 jointly
with sub-item (b) of the same agenda item, entitled
“Sustainable fisheries, including through the 1995
Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions
of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation
and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly
Migratory Fish Stocks, and related instruments”, at its
75th and 76th plenary meetings, on 6 December.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/66/L.21.

11-65191

A/66/PV.93

An explanation of vote before the voting has been
requested. Before giving the floor to the speaker
in explanation of vote before the voting, I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mrs. Cabello de Daboin (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation would like
to speak in explanation of its vote on draft resolution
A/66/L.21, entitled “Oceans and the law of the sea”.
Venezuela reaffirms before the Assembly its
commitment to cooperating with initiatives and efforts
aimed at promoting coordination on issues related to
the area of oceans and the law of the sea, in conformity
with international law. Within that legal framework,
we also affirm our obligation and willingness to
support any effort aimed at the conservation, integrated
management and sustainable use of the oceans and
seas, particularly the marine ecosystem, due to its vital
importance to peoples’ development and well-being.
Nevertheless, the State of Venezuela emphasizes
its position, expressed in various international forums,
that the Convention on the Law of the Sea should not be
considered as the only source of law on the sea. Likewise,
it does not have universal authority, since a significant
number of States are not party to it. Considering that
the reasons that have prevented the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela from becoming party to the Treaty still
exist, my delegation declares that it will not vote in
favour of draft resolution A/66/L.21 under sub-item
(a) of agenda item 76, since my country is not party
to the 1982 Convention on the Law of the Sea and is
therefore not bound by its provisions or by the norms
of customary law, except for those that Venezuela has
recognized or will in the future recognize expressly by
incorporating them into its domestic legislation.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela would like to
stress its historically held position regarding the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea insofar as
the content of the draft resolution submitted to the
Assembly today for adoption compels my delegation to
abstain in the voting.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/66/L.21.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.

Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of draft
resolution A/66/L.21: Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Cameroon, Canada, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, the
Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Greece,
Guatemala, Honduras, Indonesia, Ireland, Jamaica,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco,
Montenegro, the Netherlands, the Philippines, Portugal,
Romania, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Tuvalu, Ukraine and the United States
of America.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Djibouti, Egypt, Estonia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Palau, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain

11-651913

A/66/PV.93

and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
United States of America, Uruguay, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia
Against:
Turkey
Abstaining:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of)
Draft resolution A/66/L.21 was adopted by 134
votes to 1, with 6 abstentions (resolution 66/231).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Eritrea, Ethiopia
and Georgia advised the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: I now give the floor to those
representatives wishing to speak in explanation of vote
on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Maza Martelli (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): On behalf of my delegation, it is a pleasure to
address this plenary meeting of the General Assembly
at its sixty-sixth session as we discuss resolution 66/231
on oceans and the law of the sea.
The Republic of El Salvador is aware of the
importance of the oceans, and in particular of the
rational exploration thereof in the framework of
sustainable development, which is necessary to ensure,
in an orderly fashion, the food security of all human
beings on our planet.
Moreover, we understand that, to date, progress
has been made in such areas as the sustainability of
fisheries, transport, conservation and sustainable use of
marine biological diversity, pollution control, the need
to generate and develop capacity in marine science,
marine technology transfer and specific developments
rights, but it is not enough. That is why we must
continue to work on and to analyse each of those issues
with a view to achieving greater progress and reaching
better political and legal agreements among all States.
However, as the Republic of El Salvador is not
a State party to the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), it believes that any
agreement and resolution signed by States or adopted
by this General Assembly should be adhered to in the
context of the broad framework of the principles, norms
and treaties of international law.

4

In regard to the statement delivered to the General
Assembly by the Permanent Representative of
Honduras on 6 December on oceans and the law of the
sea (see A/66/PV.75), the Republic of El Salvador does
not share the views expressed therein, as the Permanent
Representative made statements that contravene El
Salvador’s rights of sovereignty and jurisdiction over
its maritime territory.
El Salvador urges all States to pursue the work
undertaken towards the use, conservation and
protection of the oceans and seas of our planet, with the
ultimate goal of ensuring that future generations have
food and sustainable means of subsistence. That can
be achieved only with the cooperation of all countries
in the world, be it at the bilateral, regional or global
level. Those actions will, in turn, strengthen peace,
security and friendly relations among all nations, in
accordance with the principles of justice and equal
rights and economic and social progress for all peoples
in a manner consistent with the purposes and principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. Şahinol (Turkey): Turkey voted against
resolution 66/231, entitled “Oceans and the law of the
sea”, under sub-item (a) of agenda item 76. I would
like to recall that the reasons that have prevented
Turkey from becoming a party to the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea remain valid. Turkey
supports international efforts to establish a regime of
the sea that is based on the principle of equity and is
acceptable to all States.
In our opinion, however, the Convention does not
provide sufficient safeguards for special geographical
situations and, as a consequence, does not take into
consideration conflicting interests and sensitivities
stemming from special circumstances. Furthermore,
the Convention does not allow States to register
reservations to its articles.
Although we agree with the Convention in its
general intent and with most of its provisions, we are
unable to become a party to it owing to those prominent
shortcomings. That being the case, we cannot support
a resolution that calls upon States to become parties
to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea and harmonize their national legislation with its
provisions.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its

11-65191

A/66/PV.93

consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 76 and of
agenda item 76 as a whole?
It was so decided.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The Acting President: The General Assembly will
now consider the reports of the Fifth Committee on
agenda items 129, 131 to 134, 137, 139, 141 to 145, 147,
149, 152, 161 and 162.
Before proceeding further, however, I have the
honour to give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: I am here to thank
all delegations. I am here to thank them for their
dedication, their flexibility and their hard work. Above
all, I am here to thank them for solidifying, with me,
our compact to make the most of our resources, to cut
fat and to continue fulfilling every one of the critical
global mandates entrusted to the United Nations.
We have fulfilled the compact between the Member
States and the Secretariat, but it is also a compact with
all United Nations staff. I am grateful for their hard
work and dedication, even at grave risk, to ensure that
the United Nations delivers for the world’s people.
All budget years are tough, but this year was
especially difficult. Governments and people
everywhere are struggling. It is a time of global
financial austerity. We rose to this challenge with
energy, creativity and the indispensible willingness to
make hard choices. We found savings while protecting
our ability to get the job done.
We worked together and we made history.
The budget approved by the Fifth Committee is
smaller than that of the previous biennium. This was a
collective achievement of all the Member States. Their
hard work, their late nights and their round-the-clock
negotiations all paid off. This keeps our promises to the
Member States and to the world’s people.
The task at hand is complete, but the imperative to
do more and better with less remains. That is why I give
my pledge: I will instruct all of my managers to continue
finding new ways to make the most of our precious
resources. I will ensure that we optimize Members’
contributions. I will ensure that all mandates given to
the Secretariat are delivered in full and with efficiency.

And one year from now, I will return with greater cost
savings. Members can count on my commitment.
Allow me to wish you all Merry Christmas and a
very healthy, happy and prosperous New Year.
The Acting President: I thank the Secretary-General
for his statement.
I now request the Rapporteur of the Fifth
Committee, Mr. Noel González Segura of Mexico, to
introduce in one intervention the reports of the Fifth
Committee that are before the Assembly.
Mr. González Segura (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
I have the honour today to introduce to the General
Assembly the reports of the Fifth Committee, which
contains recommendations on items that required
action during the main part of the sixty-sixth session.
The Fifth Committee met from 3 October to
23 December and held plenary meetings and more than
90 rounds of informal consultations, and innumerable
informal/informal consultations.
Before I begin, I would like to draw the Assembly’s
attention to the fact that Fifth Committee reports
A/66/492 and A/66/525 were considered by the General
Assembly at its 32nd and 58th plenary meetings, held on
11 October and 11 November, respectively, as reflected
in documents A/66/PV.32 and A/66/PV.58 respectively.
Agenda item 135, “Programme planning”, and agenda
item 138, “Scale of assessments for the apportionment
of the expenses of the United Nations”, the latter
specifically with reference to Article 19 of the Charter,
were considered at those meetings.
I will now introduce the additional reports of the
Fifth Committee containing recommendations on
issues that required action during the main part of the
sixty-session session of the General Assembly.
Under agenda item 131, entitled “Financial reports
and audited financial statements and reports of the
Board of Auditors”, the Committee recommends to the
General Assembly in paragraph 7 of its report A/66/626
the adoption of a draft resolution, the text of which is
contained for the time being in document A/C.5/66/L.9,
which was adopted approved by the Committee without
a vote.
Under agenda item 137, entitled “Pattern of
Conferences”, the Committee recommends to the
General Assembly in paragraph 6 of its report A/66/642
the adoption of a draft resolution, the text of which is

11-651915

A/66/PV.93

contained for the time being in document A/C.5/66/L.25,
which was adopted by the Committee without a vote.
Under agenda item 139, entitled “Human resources
management”, the Committee recommends in paragraph
6 its report A/66/627 that the General Assembly adopt
a draft resolution, the text of which is contained for
the time being in document A/C.5/66/L.4, which was
adopted by the Committee without a vote.
Under agenda item 141, entitled “United Nations
common system”, the Committee recommends in
paragraph 7 of its report A/66/644 that the Assembly
adopt a draft resolution, the text of which is contained
for the time being in document A/C.5/66/L.27, which
was adopted by the Committee without a vote.
Under agenda items 132 and 142, jointly and
respectively entitled “Review of the efficiency of
the administrative and financial functioning of the
United Nations” and “Report on the activities of the
Office of Internal Oversight Services”, the Committee
recommends in paragraph 6 of its report A/66/643
that the Assembly adopt a draft resolution, the text
of which is contained for the time being in document
A/C.5/66/L.26, which the Committee adopted without
a vote.
Under agenda item 143, entitled “Administration
of justice at the United Nations”, the Committee
recommends in paragraph 6 of its report A/66/628 that
the General Assembly adopt a draft resolution, the text
of which is contained for the time being in document
A/C.5/66/L.10, which the Committee adopted without
a vote.
Under agenda item 144, entitled “Financing of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan
Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January and 31 December
1994”; agenda item 145, entitled “Financing of the
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991”; and agenda item 129,
entitled “International residual mechanism for criminal
tribunals”, the Committee, in paragraph 6 of each of its
reports A/66/629, A/66/630 and A/66/631, recommends
that the General Assembly adopt three draft resolutions,

6

the texts of which are contained for the time being
in documents A/C.5/66/L.11, A/C.5/66/L.12 and
A/C.5/66/L.13, respectively, which were adopted by the
Committee without a vote.
With respect to the draft resolutions on the financing
of peacekeeping operations, I should like to inform the
General Assembly that all the draft resolutions were
adopted by the Committee without a vote.
The reports of the Fifth Committee on the financing
of peacekeeping operations are presented under agenda
item 147, “Financing of the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei”, in document A/66/632; item
149, “Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire, in document A/66/633; item 152, “Financing of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo”, in document
A/66/584; item 161, entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Mission in the South Sudan”, in document
A/66/634; and item 162, “Financing of the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan”, in document A/66/635.
Under agenda item 133, entitled “Programme
budget for the biennium 2010-2011”, in paragraph 7
of its report A/66/636 the Committee recommends
that the Assembly adopt a draft resolution, the text
of which is contained for the time being in document
A/C.5/66/L.17, which the Committee adopted without a
vote. The Committee also recommends, in paragraph 8
of the same report, the adoption of a draft decision that
the Committee also adopted without a vote.
Under agenda item 134, entitled “Proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013”,
the Committee considered five draft resolutions in
document A/66/637. The Committee adopted draft
resolution I, the text of which is contained for the time
being in document A/C.5/66/L.18, without a vote. On
draft resolution II, the text of which is contained for
the time being in document A/C.5/66/L.19, a recorded
vote was requested by the delegation of the Netherlands
on section IX on an oral amendment proposed by the
delegation of Cuba. The Committee voted to reject
the oral amendment. Following a request by the
delegation of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, the
Committee took a recorded vote on section IX of the
draft resolution, which was retained. The Committee
subsequently approved draft resolution A/C.5/66/L.19
as a whole without a vote.
The Committee recommends the adoption of all
other draft resolutions without a vote. The Committee

11-65191

A/66/PV.93

also recommends the adoption of a draft decision that
was approved by the Committee without a vote.

The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to explanations of vote.

Also under agenda item 134, the Committee
considered and recommended the adoption of three
statements of programme budget implications. The
reports of the Fifth Committee on these statements are
issued in documents A/66/639, A/66/640 and A/66/641.
The Committee recommends the adoption of the draft
report of the proposed programme budget for the
biennium 2012-2013.

The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Fifth Committee have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the
relevant official records.

Finally, under agenda item 132, entitled “Review
of the efficiency of the administrative and financial
functioning of the United Nations”, in paragraph 6 of its
report A/66/638, the Committee recommends that the
General Assembly adopt the draft decision relating to
questions deferred for future consideration, which was
adopted by the Committee without a vote.
I wish to thank all delegations for their cooperation,
and to assure them that the changes made in the course
of the Fifth Committee’s 25th formal meeting were duly
taken into account and will be reflected in the draft
resolutions and reports that will be issued shortly.
Before concluding, allow me, on a brief personal
note, to thank the Chairman of the Fifth Committee,
Ambassador Tommo Monthe, for the wise and noble
way in which he guided us through our difficult work,
as well as to express my thanks to my fellow Bureau
members, working with whom is always a truly
gratifying experience.
On behalf of us all, I would like to express our
profound thanks to the representatives of the Secretariat
for their patience and support, and most especially to
the staff of the Secretariat of the Fifth Committee.
Last but not least, we extend our most sincere thanks
to Mr. Collen Kelapile, Chairman of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions.
To all those beside whom I have had the privilege and
honour to be seated at the podium of Conference Room
3, I express my thanks for their camaraderie.
I wish everyone a wonderful and well-deserved
holiday.
The Acting President: If there is no proposal under
rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the
General Assembly decides not to discuss the reports of
the Fifth Committee that are before the Assembly today.

May I remind Members that under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, i.e., either in the Committee or in
plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote in
plenary meeting is different from its vote in the
Committee.”
May I remind delegations that, also in accordance
with decision 34/401, explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Fifth Committee, unless
the Secretariat is notified otherwise in advance. That
means that, where recorded votes were taken, we will
do the same. I should also hope that we will proceed to
adopt without a vote those recommendations that were
adopted without a vote in the Committee.
Agenda item 131
Financial reports and audited financial statements,
and reports of the Board of Auditors
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/66/626)
The Acting President: We will now take action on
the draft resolution recommended by the Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report. For the time being, the text
of the draft resolution, entitled “Financial reports and
audited financial statements, and reports of the Board
of Auditors”, is contained in document A/C.5/66/L.9.
The Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
66/232).

It was so decided.

11-651917

A/66/PV.93

The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 131.
Agenda item 137 (continued)
Pattern of conferences
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/66/642)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. For
the time being, the text of the draft resolution, entitled
“Pattern of conferences”, is contained in document
A/C.5/66/L.25. The Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
66/233).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 137.
Agenda item 139
Human resources management
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/66/627)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on the draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. For the
time being, the text of the draft resolution is contained
in document A/C.5/66/L.4. The Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
66/234).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 139.
Agenda item 141
United Nations common system
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/66/644)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
action on the draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. For the time
being, the text of the draft resolution, entitled “United

8

Nations common system: report of the International
Civil Service Commission”, is contained in document
A/C.5/66/L.27. The Fifth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
66/235).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 141.
Agenda items 132 and 142
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Report on the activities of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/66/643)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. For
the time being, the text of draft resolution, entitled
“Report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on
its activities”, is contained in document A/C.5.66/L.26.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
66/236).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
items 132 and 142.
Agenda item 143 (continued)
Administration of justice at the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/66/628)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. For
the time being, the text of the draft resolution, entitled
“Administration of justice at the United Nations”,
is contained in document A/C.5/66/L.10. The Fifth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
66/237).

11-65191

A/66/PV.93

The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 143.
Agenda item 144
Financing of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in
the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens
Responsible Genocide and Other Such Violations
Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States
between 1 January and 31 December 1994
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/66/629)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. For
the time being, the text of the draft resolution, entitled
“Financing of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and
Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian
Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and
Rwandan Citizens Responsible Genocide and Other Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January and 31 December 1994”,
is contained in document A/C.5/66/L.11. The Fifth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
66/238).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 144.
Agenda item 145
Financing of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/66/630)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
For the time being, the text of the draft resolution,
entitled “Financing of the International Tribunal for

the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991”, is contained in document A/C.5/66/L.12.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
66/239).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 145.
Agenda items 129, 144 and 145 (continued)
International residual mechanism for
criminal tribunals
Financing of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian law Committed in
the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens
Responsible Genocide and Other Such Violations
Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States
between 1 January and 31 December 1994
Financing of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/66/631)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on the draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. For the
time being, the text of the draft resolution is contained
in document A/C.5/66/L.13. The Fifth Committee
adopted without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
66/240).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
items 129, 144 and 145.

11-651919

A/66/PV.93

Agenda item 147
Financing of the United Nations Interim Security
Force in Abyei
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/66/632)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. For the
time being, the text of the draft resolution is contained in
document A/C.5/66/L.6. The Fifth Committee adopted
it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
66/241).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 147.
Agenda item 149
Financing of the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/66/633)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. For the
time being, the text of the draft resolution is contained
in document A/C.5/66/L.14. The Fifth Committee
adopted without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
66/242).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 149.
Agenda item 161
Financing of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/66/634)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
action on the draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time
being, the text of the draft resolution is contained in
document A/C.5/66/L.15. The Fifth Committee adopted

10

it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
66/243).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 161.
Agenda item 162
Financing of the United Nations Mission in
the Sudan
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/66/635)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
action on the draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time
being, the text of the draft resolution is contained in
document A/C.5/66/L.16. The Fifth Committee adopted
it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
66/244).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 162.
Agenda item 133
Programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/66/636)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
consider the draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report, as well as on
the draft decision recommended in paragraph 8 of the
same report.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution, the text of which, for the time being,
is contained in document A/C.5/66/L.17. The Fifth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
66/245).
The Acting President: We will now take action on
the draft decision, entitled “United Nations Office for
Partnerships”. The Fifth Committee adopted it without

11-65191

A/66/PV.93

a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 133.
Agenda item 134
Proposed programme budget for the
biennium 2012-2013
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/66/637)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it five draft resolutions recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 30 of its report. For the time
being, the text of the draft resolutions is contained in
document A/C.5/66/L.23. The Assembly also has before
it a draft decision recommended in paragraph 31 of the
same report.
I shall now give the floor to represenatives who
wish to speak in explanation of vote or position prior to
the adoption of the drafts.
Mr. Cumberbatch Miguen (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): This explanation of vote refers only to section
IX of draft resolution II, the text of which, for the time
being, is contained in document A/C.5/66/L.19, in
particular the issue of the inclusion of the concept of
activities regarding the responsibility to protect within
the logical framework of the Office of the Special
Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide.
My delegation would like to reiterate its commitment
to international law with respect to the prevention of
genocide. However, allow me to clearly express our
serious reservations with regard to the inclusion of
the concept of the responsibility to protect under the
framework of the activities of that Office.
The changes to the logical framework to create
artificial mandates and ensure the adoption of
resources for concepts that have not been adopted
is counter-productive and violates the rules and
regulations of the General Assembly on administrative
and budgetary matters.
We therefore wish to express our disagreement
with the intention to use budgetary documents to
establish functions that have not been mandated by the
General Assembly, as was the case in the situation that

concerns us here. The potential for the concept of the
responsibility to protect to be manipulated has already
been demonstrated. Our delegation therefore expresses
its serious concerns as to the manner in which that
concept has been imposed on the General Assembly.
Mrs. Cabello de Daboin (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela wishes to state for the record of the
General Assembly that our vote against section IX of
draft resolution II, the text of which, for the time being,
is contained in document A/C.5/66/L.19, pertains only
to the concerns stemming from the incorporation of the
Office of the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General
on the Prevention of Genocide and from the activities
thereof related to the so-called responsibility to protect.
Accordingly, my delegation express its concern
over the modification of the logical framework of the
Office of the Special Adviser contained in document
A/66/354/Add.1, which has sought to include as part of
its mandate the concept of the responsibility to protect,
which does not enjoy intergovernmental consensus. That
constitutes a serious failure in administrative procedures
with respect to the allocation of the Organization’s
resources. As we understand it, resources should only
be devoted to fulfilling intergovernmentally agreed
upon mandates.
The States Members of the United Nations have
agreed on a single point regarding that concept, namely
the need to continue to evaluate and consider the
definition of the responsibility to protect. However,
the presentation of the strategic framework for the
Office of the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General
on the Prevention of Genocide gives practical
effect to suggestions set forth in the report of the
Secretary-General entitled “Early warning, assessment
and the responsibility to protect” (A/64/864). That
document was not acted upon by the General Assembly
in any way and it is now reflected in the Office of the
Special Adviser as a fait accompli, with activities that
establish priorities and broaden the mandate of the
Special Adviser.
Once again, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
wishes to reiterate that the primary responsibility
to protect remains in the hands of the States. The
international community can play a constructive role
in support of national efforts, while always respecting
what is set forth in the United Nations Charter and
preserving the sovereignty and territorial integrity of

11-6519111

A/66/PV.93

countries and the principle of non-interference in their
internal affairs.
Mr. Bayat Mokhtari (Islamic Republic of Iran):
This explanation of vote pertains to section IX of draft
resolution II, the text of which, for the time being, is
contained in document A/C.5/66/L.19.
My delegation wishes to reiterate its commitment
to adhering to internationally recognized laws, rules
and regulations aimed at the prevention of genocide.
Nevertheless, it should be clearly understood that the
concept of the responsibility to protect has not been
adopted by the General Assembly. The change in
the logical framework to create artificial mandates
and posts to entertain an unapproved concept is
counterproductive, in violation of current rules and
regulations and a breach of the good faith expected
from an international organization of the calibre of the
United Nations.
The Iranian delegation would therefore like to
express its disagreement with any attempt to misuse the
budgetary process to falsely establish functions that are
not mandated by the General Assembly, namely, using
the logical framework for the functions of the Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention
of Genocide for the so-called Special Adviser for the
Responsibility to Protect — a function that has not seen
the light of approval by the General Assembly.
On the issue of the sanctions monitoring teams,
groups and panels, my delegation firmly believes that
the Security Council’s sanctions against the Islamic
Republic of Iran are unlawful and target the civilian
population of the country. The sanctions are based
on unfounded and baseless allegations and are levied
against the nation based on sheer political motivations
by certain countries. The Islamic Republic of Iran
rejects such sanctions and views them as measures
aimed at depriving the Iranian nation of its inalienable
right of access to nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
It is against that background that my delegation
asked for the floor to state that the Islamic Republic of
Iran rejects the sanctions and any related attempts to
fund their apparatus of support, including the so-called
Panel of Experts, and considers them equally unlawful.
The Acting President: We will now take action on
draft resolutions I to V and on the draft decision, one
by one.

12

We first turn to draft resolution I, entitled
“Questions relating to the proposed programme budget
for the biennium 2012-2013”, the text of which, for the
time being, is contained in document A/C.5/66/L.18.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 66/246).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Special subjects relating to the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013”,
the text of which, for the time being, is contained in
document A/C.5/66/L.19.
A separate vote has been requested on section IX
of draft resolution II. Member States are reminded that,
in accordance with rule 83 of the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly, budgetary questions require a
majority of two-thirds of those present and voting.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Egypt, El
Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Myanmar, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway,
Panama, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Viet Nam

11-65191

A/66/PV.93

Against:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Cuba, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Nicaragua, Sudan, Syrian
Arab Republic, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)

For the time being, the text of the draft resolution is
contained in document A/C.5/66/L.22. The Fifth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?

Abstaining:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Congo, Côte
d’Ivoire, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Grenada,
Indonesia, Jamaica, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Libya, Mongolia, Morocco, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar,
Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Yemen, Zambia

Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution 66/250).

Section IX of draft resolution II was retained by
104 votes to 8, with 27 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegations of Algeria, Brazil,
Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Morocco, Oman,
Pakistan, Qatar, Tanzania, Tunisia, the United Arab
Emirates and Yemen advised the Secretariat that
they had intended to vote in favour; the delegation
of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines had intended
to vote against; and the delegation of Eritrea had
intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution II as a whole. The
Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II, as a whole, was adopted
(resolution 66/247).
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is
entitled “Programme budget for the biennium 20122013”. For the time being, the text of the draft resolution
is contained in document A/C.5/66/L.20. The Fifth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
66/248).
The Acting President: Draft resolution IV is
entitled “Unforeseen extraordinary expenses for the
biennium 2012-2013”. For the time being, the text of the
draft resolution is contained in document A/C.5/66/L.21.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution 66/249).
The Acting President: Draft resolution V is entitled
“Working Capital Fund for the biennium 2012-2013”.

The Acting President: We will now take action on
the draft decision entitled “Capital Master Plan”. For the
time being, the text of the draft decision is contained in
document A/C.5/66/L.8. The Fifth Committee adopted
it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: I shall now give the floor
to representatives who wish to speak in explanation
of vote or position following the adoption of the draft
resolutions and the decision.
Mr. Ayzouki (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation voted against section IX, on
special political missions, of resolution 66/247 owing
to our concerns about the resources to be allocated
in accordance with the provisions of that part of the
resolution.
The Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Terje Roed-Larsen, is continuing to exceed the
scope of his mandate under Security Council resolution
1559 (2004) to monitor bilateral issues between two
sovereign States, Syria and Lebanon, in particular
as regards the establishment of diplomatic relations
and the delineation of a common border between the
two countries. He also demonstrated a flagrant bias
towards Israel when he mocked and even concealed
Israel’s non-compliance with its obligations under
resolution 1559 (2004), in particular its withdrawal
from the occupied Lebanese territories. Moreover, the
Special Envoy deliberately turned a blind eye to the
real problem, which is within the scope of his mandate.
I refer to the Israel’s ongoing occupation of Lebanese
territory and its practices in that regard, in addition to
its interference in the internal affairs of Lebanon. The
Special Envoy is seeking to exacerbate conflicts instead
of resolving them and to perpetuate the occupation
by Israel instead of ending it and implementing the
resolutions that are relevant to the issue and part of his
mandate. Therefore, Mr. Roed-Larsen is not respecting
the provisions of paragraph 12 of resolution 63/261,
which states that the Secretary-General must continue
to seek the highest standards of integrity, competency,

11-6519113

A/66/PV.93

impartiality and professionalism when appointing his
special representatives and envoys.

accordance with the real needs and priorities of Member
States as they build their capacity for development.

With regard to section VIII, on revised estimates
resulting from resolutions and decisions adopted by
the Human Rights Council, of resolution 66/247, my
delegation has reservations about the allocation of
resources pursuant to the provisions of Human Rights
Council resolutions S-16/1 and S-17/1 during the
reporting period. We are especially concerned as the
special national judicial commission of inquiry, which
is responsible for investigating all incidents leading to
the deaths of civilians and military staff in all Syrian
provinces, has yet to complete its work. Such financing
is therefore unjustified and is the result of a political
decision made by some States that are known for their
hostile stance towards Syria and other countries.

Mr. Prokhorov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like make a statement with regard
to resolution 66/248, on the proposed programme
budget for the biennium 2012-2013.

Mr. Ovsyanko (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): My
delegation would like to explain its vote on section VIII
of resolution 66/247. Belarus supports the efforts of the
Fifth Committee and the General Assembly to closely
study the programmes that have financial implications
for the regular budget of the United Nations. Our country
joined in the overall consensus on the resolution just
adopted so as to support valuable proposals and ideas
that, if implemented, would contribute substantially to
efforts to address a number of important issues on the
United Nations agenda.
At the same time, Belarus would also like to reserve
its position on the part of document A/66/586 referring
to the programme budget implications arising from the
implementation of resolution 17/24, on the human rights
situation in Belarus, which was adopted by the Human
Rights Council at its seventeenth session, held in June.
In principle, Belarus does not support country
resolutions, as we have stated on many occasions in
the Human Rights Council and in the Third Committee
of the General Assembly. Moreover, such resolutions,
including the resolution on Belarus, have financial
implications for the United Nations budget. That is
very relevant, especially in this period of difficult
economic conditions and lack of funds, including for
implementing the decisions and resolutions of the
Human Rights Council.

We note the importance and the necessity of adopting
today’s resolution for the work of the Organization over
the next two years. At the same time, we would like to
state our position on the interpretation of section 24 of
the budget, on human rights. We view as unacceptable
a situation in which a proposed programme budget does
not confirm to strategic frameworks.
We are concerned at the fact that doubts exist
as to the views of the Committee for Programme
and Coordination. In other words, the Secretariat is
ignoring the views of States by advancing elements that
are to its own advantage. Here I would recall that the
United Nations is an intergovernmental Organization
mandated to carry out the will of its Member States. It
was only so as not to disrupt our consensus — achieved
after lengthy and complex consultations — that we
decided not to force a vote on the United Nations budget
as a whole.
However, we would like to state that the Russian
Federation, in assessing the implementation of section
24, on human rights, will proceed on the basis of
the wording of the strategic frameworks previously
approved at the intergovernmental level. We ask that
our position be recorded in the official records of this
meeting.
Mr. Beck (Solomon Islands): Solomon Islands would
like to explain its vote on section IX of draft resolution
A/C.5/66/L.19, on the concept of the responsibility
to protect. This is a subject that is currently, in our
view, under discussion in the General Assembly. The
Assembly remains the chief policymaking body of
the United Nations, and we would like to see funds
allocated on the basis of to General Assembly-mandated
activities.
Solomon Islands abstained in the voting on section
IX in the name of transparency and accountability.

This anti-Belarus resolution has many drawbacks,
including the financing of activities that have nothing
to do with the subject of the resolution and or even with
the resolution itself. Belarus calls for the careful use of
budgetary resources, which should be allocated solely in

14

11-65191

A/66/PV.93

Agenda item 132
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/66/638)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft decision recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 5 of its report. The text of the draft
decision, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/66/L.24.
The Assembly will now take action on the draft
decision, entitled “Questions deferred for further
consideration”. The Fifth Committee adopted the draft
decision without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
132.
Agenda item 152
Financing of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/66/584)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The Assembly will now take
a decision on the draft resolution. The Fifth Committee
adopted the draft resolution without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
66/251).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
152.
May I, on behalf of the General Assembly, express
my deep gratitude for the extraordinary efforts of His

Excellency Mr. Michel Tommo Monthe, Permanent
Representative of Cameroon to the United Nations and
Chair of the Fifth Committee. I wish also to thank the
members of the Bureau, the Secretary of the Committee
and, of course, representatives for their dedicated
efforts to allow for the adoption of the budget and the
finalization of this stage of the activities of the General
Assembly for this year.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Fifth Committee
before it today.
Programme of work
The Acting President: With regard to the
programme of work of the General Assembly, apart
from organizational matters and items that may have to
be considered by operation of the rules of procedure of
the Assembly, and bearing in mind that consideration
and action have already been taken by the Assembly
on a majority of items thus far, I should like to inform
members that the following items on the agenda remain
open for consideration during the sixty-sixth session of
the General Assembly: agenda items 9, 10, 11 (a), 12 to
15, 19 (a), 22 (a), 30 to 33, 34 (a), 35 to 37, 39, 40, 42 to
48, 63 (a) and (b), 70 (a), (b) and (c), 72, 75, 76 (a), 110,
111, 113 (c), 114 (a) and (c), 115 (f), (g), (h), (i) and (j),
116 to 122, 123 (a) and (b), 124, 125, 127 to 159, 160
(a) and (b), and 161 to 165. May I take that the General
Assembly wishes to take note of those items on the
agenda that remain open for consideration during the
sixty-sixth session of the Assembly?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: I believe that we should
collectively thank one another for the extraordinary
efforts made to get us to this point. I should like to wish
everyone happy holidays, and, for those who observe
Christmas, happy Christmas. I hope that everyone will
go home and get a little bit of sleep. I look forward to
working with all present in 2012.
The meeting rose at noon.

11-6519115
