A/RES/59/95

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
10 December 2004

Fifty-ninth session
Agenda item 65 (k)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 3 December 2004
[on the report of the First Committee (A/59/459)]

59/95. Improving the effectiveness of the methods of work of the
First Committee
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 48/87 of 16 December 1993, 49/85 of 15 December
1994, 57/300 of 20 December 2002, 58/41 of 8 December 2003, 58/126 of
19 December 2003 and 58/316 of 1 July 2004,
Affirming that its rules of procedure permit the Main Committees to undertake
organizational refinements to improve the effectiveness of their methods of work,
and noting with satisfaction that the First Committee already has done so,
Emphasizing that improved functioning of the First Committee should be
considered in an integrated and comprehensive manner through the existing three
stages, namely general debate, thematic/structured debate, and consideration of and
action on draft resolutions,
Determining to continue its efforts to improve the efficiency and effectiveness
of the methods of work of the First Committee, as a means to enhance the role of the
General Assembly in promoting international peace and security,
Invites Member States to consider the biennialization or triennialization
1.
of the agenda items discussed in the First Committee, on a voluntary basis, and
particularly when no specific action is required for the implementation of relevant
resolutions;
Also invites Member States to continue to hold interactive debates based
2.
on a programme and format elaborated through informal consultations between the
Bureau and Member States in advance of each First Committee session;
Further invites Member States to submit draft resolutions in a more
3.
concise, focused and action-oriented manner and, where practical, to consider the
possibility of submitting draft decisions;
Recommends that the respective sponsors of draft resolutions hold
4.
informal consultations, both before and during First Committee meetings, with the
participation of all interested Member States for furthering discussions on draft
resolutions already submitted or yet to be submitted to the Committee;

04-48196

A/RES/59/95

5.
Encourages Member States to introduce draft resolutions on related or
complementary issues to find commonalities in the language and purpose of those
draft resolutions, and invites Member States to consider pursuing mergers of such
texts through consultations with all sponsors;
Also encourages Member States, in particular those that present any draft
6.
resolution, to follow up on the agreed resolution in order to contribute to the
achievement of the objective of such resolution;
Encourages the First Committee to introduce presentations of, and focus
7.
discussions on, reports on the work of expert groups, the United Nations regional
centres for peace and disarmament, the United Nations Institute for Disarmament
Research and the Advisory Board on Disarmament Matters initiated by the
Committee;
Reiterates that the Secretary-General, in accordance with rule 154 of the
8.
rules of procedure of the General Assembly, shall keep all Committees, including
the First Committee, informed of the detailed estimated cost of all resolutions and
decisions that have been recommended by the Committees for approval by the
Assembly;
Requests the First Committee, in the light of the growing
9.
interconnectedness of issues before the General Assembly, to explore the forms of
mutual cooperation with other Main Committees;
10. Decides to develop further, within existing resources, the electronic
support for the work of the First Committee, in particular through the existing web
sites;
11. Decides also to review regularly the implementation of the present
resolution.
66th plenary meeting
3 December 2004

2
