A/63/PV.95

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-third session

95

th plenary meeting
Thursday, 9 July 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. D’Escoto Brockmann . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nicaragua)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Tommo Monthe
(Cameroon), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Agenda items 44 and 107 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation of and
follow-up to the outcomes of the major United
Nations conferences and summits in the economic,
social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Draft resolution (A/63/L.76)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the General Assembly held the debate on agenda item
44 jointly with agenda item 40 at the 36th plenary
meeting, on 3 November 2008, as well as jointly with
agenda items 107 and 112 at the 51st plenary meeting,
on 17 November 2008. Members will also recall that
the Assembly adopted two resolutions under agenda
item 44, namely, resolution 63/9 and resolution 63/199,
on 3 November and 19 December 2008, respectively,
and four resolutions under agenda item 107, namely,
resolutions 63/23, 63/142, 63/235 and 63/281, on
17 November, 11 and 22 December 2008, and 3 June
2009, respectively.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/63/L.76.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): In connection with draft
resolution A/63/L.76, entitled “2010 high-level plenary
meeting of the Assembly”, I wish to put on record the
following statement of financial implications on behalf
of the Secretary-General. This oral statement is made
in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of procedure
of the General Assembly.
Under the terms of operative paragraphs 1 and 2
of the draft resolution, the General Assembly would:
“[Decide] to convene in 2010, at the
commencement of the sixty-fifth session of the
General Assembly, a high-level plenary meeting
of the Assembly, on dates to be decided, with the
participation of heads of State and Government
and [encourage] all Member States to be
represented at that level;
“Also [decide] to hold consultations on the
scope, modalities, format and organization of the
high-level plenary meeting of the Assembly with
a view to concluding consultations before the end
of 2009 and in this regard, [request] the
Secretary-General to submit a report to the
General Assembly at the beginning of its sixtyfourth session.”
In the absence of information on the duration and
modalities of the high-level plenary meeting to be held
in 2010, which has yet to be determined through
consultation, as decided by the Assembly in operative
paragraph 2, it is the understanding of the Secretariat
that the meeting would be held during the sixty-fifth

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

09-39845 (E)

*0939845*

A/63/PV.95

session of the Assembly and that its requirements for
conference
servicing,
including
meeting
and
documentation services, would be within the overall
workload and entitlements of the General Assembly,
such as only two meetings per day — one in the
morning and one in the afternoon — using the
meetings entitlements from those allocated to the
Assembly.
Based on that understanding, should the General
Assembly adopt the draft resolution, no additional
conference servicing resources would be required since
the aforementioned high-level plenary meeting would
be part of the regular work programme of the General
Assembly, and therefore utilize meeting and
documentation resources that have already been
planned and budgeted for according to their
entitlements.
As regards the substantive work requirements, the
current draft resolution does not provide adequate
details to allow the determination of the precise scope
of the preparatory process for the high-level plenary
meeting of the Assembly.
On the basis of the outcome of the consultations
on the scope, modalities, format and organization of
the high-level plenary meeting of the Assembly
requested in operative paragraph 2 of the draft
resolution, the Secretary-General would report to the
General Assembly at the beginning of its sixty-fourth
session as to any potential financial requirements,
provided that sufficient details regarding the scope,
modalities, format and organization of the meeting are
available by that time.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft A/63/L.76, entitled “2010 highlevel plenary meeting of the Assembly”. May I take it
that the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/63/L.76?
Draft resolution A/63/L.76
(resolution 63/302).

was

adopted

The Acting President: I would like to express
my sincere thanks to Ms. Kirsti Lintonen in her
capacity as Permanent Representative of Finland,
together
with
Mr.
Paul
Badji,
Permanent
Representative of Senegal, who so ably and patiently
conducted the discussions and complex negotiations in
the informal consultations to bring them to a successful

2

conclusion. I am sure that members of the Assembly
join me in extending to them our sincere appreciation.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda items 44 and 107.
Agenda item 48 (continued)
Follow-up to and implementation of the outcome of
the 2002 International Conference on Financing for
Development and the preparation of the 2008
Review Conference
Draft resolution (A/63/L.75)
The Acting President: Members will recall that,
at its 74th plenary meeting on 23 December 2008, the
Assembly decided to also consider agenda item 48
directly in plenary meeting. Members will further
recall that, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 63/277 of 7 April 2009 and decision 63/556
of 26 May 2009, the Assembly decided to hold a
Conference on the World Financial and Economic
Crisis and Its Impact on Development from 24 to
26 June 2009 at United Nations Headquarters.
In connection with this item, the General
Assembly now has before it a draft resolution issued as
document A/63/L.75. I have been informed that the
President of the General Assembly would like to make
the following oral revision to the draft resolution,
which has also been distributed desk to desk in this
Hall. I will now read out the change.
From the titles of the draft resolution and its
annex, the word “document” should be deleted and the
word “its” in the second line should be capitalized. The
new title should therefore read “Outcome of the
Conference on the World Financial and Economic
Crisis and Its Impact on Development”. This new title
should also be used in the operative paragraph between
the words “endorse the” and “annexed”.
The dates of the Conference cited in the
preambular paragraph of the draft resolution and in the
chapeau paragraph of the annex should read “24 to
30 June”, instead of “24 to 26 June”. As the Assembly
will recall, the debate of the Conference had to be
prolonged by four days, so we must be correct in terms
of the dates.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/63/L.75, as orally revised.

09-39845

A/63/PV.95

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.

experts on the world economic and financial crisis and
its impact on development.

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): In connection with draft
resolution A/63/L.75, entitled “Outcome of the
Conference on the World Financial and Economic
Crisis and Its Impact on Development”, I wish to put
on record the following statement of financial
implications on behalf of the Secretary-General.

Therefore, in the absence of respective decisions
of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council at this stage, the Secretariat is unable to
determine the full extent of the programme budget
implications arising from the draft resolution.

This oral statement is made in accordance with
rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly.
In the draft resolution, the General Assembly
would decide:
“to endorse the outcome of the Conference on the
World Financial and Economic Crisis and its
Impact on Development, annexed to the present
resolution”.
Under the terms of paragraphs 54 and 56 (e) of
the outcome document, the General Assembly is
invited to establish an ad hoc open-ended working
group of the General Assembly to follow up on the
issues contained in the present outcome document, and
to submit a report on the progress of its work to the
General Assembly before the end of the sixty-fourth
session; the Economic and Social Council is requested
to consider and make recommendations to the General
Assembly regarding the possible establishment of an
ad hoc panel of experts on the world economic and
financial crisis and its impact on development. The
panel could provide independent technical expertise
and analysis, which would contribute to informing
international action and political decision-making and
fostering constructive dialogues and exchanges among
policymakers, academics, institutions and civil society.
Since there is no express General Assembly
decision taken on the establishment of an ad hoc openended working group of the General Assembly,
requested in paragraph 54 of the outcome document,
and the Economic and Social Council has, to date, not
considered the matter outlined in paragraph 56 (e) of
the outcome document, there is insufficient
information available to the Secretariat at this time to
determine the scope, modalities, format and
organization of the ad hoc open-ended working group
of the General Assembly and the ad hoc panel of

09-39845

Should the General Assembly adopt the draft
resolution, the Secretary-General would submit
statements of programme budget implications, if any,
to the General Assembly and to the Economic and
Social Council, respectively, as soon as specific
decisions are taken on the ad hoc open-ended working
group of the General Assembly and on the ad hoc panel
of experts on the world economic and financial crisis
and its impact on development, provided that sufficient
details regarding the scope, modalities, format and
organization of the two bodies are available.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on draft resolution A/63/L.75, entitled
“Outcome of the Conference on the World Financial
and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development”,
as orally revised. May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/63/L.75, as orally
revised?
Draft resolution A/63/L.75
(resolution 63/303).

was

adopted

The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mrs. Masot Planas (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The delegation of Cuba joined the consensus on the
outcome document that has just been adopted as in
recognition of the importance of the Conference.
However, we believe that the text not only does not
meet the expectations of the countries most affected by
this serious crisis, but that it also includes elements
that, in our judgment, set precedents that could be
harmful to the work of the Organization.
We must not forget that the current global crisis
began in the major developed countries and is the
result of a series of serious structural and systemic
problems that go beyond the failures in the
implementation of monetary policies and financial
sector regulation. The crisis also highlights the failure

3

A/63/PV.95

of neoliberal economic doctrine and the myths
regarding the benevolence of the market and its
deregulation, as well as the soundness and reliability of
the current international financial institutions.
However, the document just adopted lacks any
serious analysis of the root causes of the current crisis.
It does not include any commitment to devoting the
new and additional resources that developing countries
urgently need to deal with the serious impact of this
critical situation. In addition, the stale and still
insufficient commitments on the part of the developed
countries to devote 0.7 per cent of their gross national
product to official development assistance have not
been adequately reflected. The way in which the matter
is addressed seems to require us to resign ourselves to
receiving a humiliating handout loaded with conditions
and aimed at interference in our affairs.
The financial crisis increases the risk of a
renewed aggravation of the debt crisis. Most
developing countries are vulnerable to a reduction in
their foreign reserves, which would affect their ability
to fulfil their repayment commitments. The rich world
must cancel the debt. The efforts of developing
countries to achieve the Millennium Development
Goals will not translate into real benefits for their
people if they are not accompanied by a profound
restructuring of the prevailing economic, financial and
trade order founded on justice, equity and solidarity.
We must rethink everything that has been
established since Bretton Woods, and in this endeavour
the United Nations must play a central role. The
comprehensive solutions required to address the
current crisis can be decided neither by the richest
countries alone, although they are primarily
responsible for the crisis, nor behind closed doors and
in forums with limited participation, as in the case of
the most recent summit of the Group of 20. Neither the
fundamental causes of the current crisis nor the need to
radically transform the international financial
architecture were even discussed there.
The text just adopted does not address the reform
of the international financial institutions in the in-depth
manner required. It only attempts to prop up a system
that would permit the principal rich countries to
preserve the power, prerogative and benefits they enjoy
to this day.
As my delegation stated during the plenary
debate of the Conference, the international financial

4

system must be rebuilt from its foundations. Its failures
do not lie simply in its regulation. The current system
is antidemocratic, and its norms and principles were
established with a view to the interests of a few
industrialized Powers.
In addition, our delegation would like to call
attention to certain issues addressed in the text that we
find to be of particular concern. In particular, we reject
the reference to the controversial concept of human
security, which not only does not have an agreed
intergovernmental definition, but also is interpreted in
many contexts as clearly allowing for interference and
is easily manipulated to justify any type of attack
against the principles of sovereignty, territorial
integrity and non-interference in the internal affairs of
States.
The document also makes reference to the
so-called fundamental principles of aid effectiveness
and associates them with South-South cooperation.
Cuba does not recognize such so-called principles,
which attempt to divert attention from the hackneyed
statements of certain donors on the need to make
“effective” use of aid to resolve the problems of the
developing world. The invocation of such principles is
an attempt to avoid explicit recognition of the lack of
commitment and real political will to provide the
countries of the South with the financial resources they
need without requirements or conditions, especially in
critical situations such as the current one.
In the same way, we reject the attempt to use such
“principles” as a basis for South-South cooperation,
which is being carried out in our developing countries
in the spirit of solidarity and respect. I would like to
state clearly that Cuba will continue to work in this
forum and in every other possible context to advance
the fundamental interests of the countries of the South,
which, unfortunately, have not been reflected in this
text in the in-depth manner required.
Allow me to conclude by reaffirming that the
solutions to the financial, economic, food, energy and
environmental crises affecting the entire planet will be
found only through efforts to ensure full participation
and attention to the needs of all nations big and small,
rich and poor.
Mr. Escalona Ojeda (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to
reiterate the reservations and observations that we
expressed in the Conference when this outcome

09-39845

A/63/PV.95

document was adopted. We would express our support
for the observations just made by the delegation of
Cuba in this connection. Venezuela stresses the need
for reform of the international financial system and for
this debate to be open to all countries and all Member
States. We would also like to highlight our views on
the concept of human security. In that respect, we
reiterate what we have already stated in a number of
meetings on this subject.

09-39845

The Acting President (spoke in French): We
have heard the last speaker in explanation of vote.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 48.
The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.

5
