14,

General Auembly-Twenty-Hcond SeMlon

N oling the Secretary-General's report on the subject,1
Taking into account the views expressed at its
twenty-second session, during the discussion of the
training of national technical personnel for the accelerated industrialization of the developing countries,
concerning the importance of considering the problem of
the drain of such personnel at all levels from the developing countries,
1. Requests Governments which have not done so,
the specialized agencies, the International Atomic
Energy Agency, the United Nations Development Programme and the regional economic commissions to
communicate to the Secretary-General their observations and comments on his report, 2 in the light of the
results of the first half of the United Nations Development Decade;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare the
report called for in General Assembly resolution 2090
(XX), including in it-in the light of the studies
carried out by the appropriate organs in the United
Nations system-the question of the drain of national
technical personnel at all levels from the developing
countries, and to submit that report to the General
Assembly at its twenty-third session ;
3. Invites the United Nations Industrial Development Organization to make a substantial contribution
to the preparation of the above-mentioned report.
1594th plenary muting,
3 November 1967.
2274 (XXII). Flow of extemal reeoUl'cea to
developing countrie1

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2170 (XXI) of 6 December 1966,
Recalling further Economic and Social Council
resolution 1183 (XLI) of S August 1966,
Reaffirming the need to increase progressively, to the
greatest extent possible, the flow of external resources
to the developing countries, both through multilateral
and bilateral assistance programmes and through private capital transfers, and to ease the terms and conditions on which such resources are provided, in accordance with Economic and Social Council resolution
1183 (XLI),
Noting with appreciation that some developed countries have already taken steps to increase the flow of
resources to developing countries and to provide such
resources on easier terms and conditions,
Noting with concern the decreased flow of resources
from other developed countries and the lack of improvement in their terms 'and conditions,
Having considered the report submitted by the Secretary-General on factors affecting the ability of developed countries to provide resources to the developing
countries,•
1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-second
Session, Annexes, agenda item 44, document A/6855.
2 For the observations and comments already published, see
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, ThirtyS<''l't'nth Srssion, Annexes, agenda item 12, documents E/3901/
Rev.I and Add.I and 2.
8 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, Fortythird Session, Annezes, agenda item 5, document E/4375.

1. Notes with appreciation the report of the Secretary-General on factors affecting the ability of developed countries to provide resources to the developing
countries;

2. Draws the attention of the developed countries
to the need to increase substantially the assistance
which they provide in various forms to the developing
countries both bilaterally and multilaterally;
3. Notes the ideas put forward in the SecretaryGeneral's report on the resource transfer targets and
the progress made in their implementation, in particular
the following :
(a) The possibility of diminishing the risk of conflict between the volume and quality of transfers by appropriate changes in the procedures and machinery for
effecting the transfer of resources to the developing
countries;
(b) The setting of a secondary volume target for
the transfers to developing countries net, not only of
amortization, but also of income receipts;

( c) The establishment of a subsidiary target for
transfers in untied cash ;4
4. Requests the developed countries to study the
possibility of implementing the measures suggested in
the report with a view to overcoming the factors which
affect their ability to increase the transfer of resources
to the developing countries;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its twenty-third session, through
the Economic and Social Council at its forty-fifth session, a report on the implementation of Council resolution 1183 ( XLI) and on the action taken in accordance
with paragraph 4 above.
1618th plenary meeting,
4 December 1967.
2275 (XXII). RepleniBbment of the reaouree1 of
the International Development Auociation

The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1272 (XLIII) of 4 August 1967 on the international
flow of capital and assistance,
Recalling further Trade and Development Board
resolution 37 (V) of 7 September 1967 on the replenishment of the resources of the International Development Association, 6
Noting with concern the continued delay in the replenishment of the resources of the International
Development Association,
Reaffirms the appeals made in Economic and Social
Council resolution 1272 (XLIII) and in Trade and
Development Board resolution 37 (V) to Governments
members of the International Development Association
to treat the question of further increasing the resources
of the Association as a matter of high priority.
1618th plenary meeting.
4 Dtcc11rhcr 1967.
4

Ibid., paras. I 6, 20 and 21.
Official Records of the General Assembl1•, Twent}•·
ucond Session, Supr,lemcnt No. 14 (A/6714), part one, annex I.
6 See
