United Nations

A/RES/62/218

General Assembly

Distr.: General
12 February 2008

Sixty-second session
Agenda item 63 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 December 2007
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/62/433 (Part II))]

62/218. Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 60/230 of 23 December 2005 and its previous
resolutions on the elimination of discrimination against women,
Bearing in mind that one of the purposes of the United Nations, as stated in
Articles 1 and 55 of the Charter, is to promote universal respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction of any kind, including
distinction as to sex,
Reiterating the need to intensify efforts to eliminate all forms of
discrimination against women throughout the world,
Affirming that women and men should participate equally in social, economic
and political development, should contribute equally to such development and
should share equally in improved conditions of life,
Recalling the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the
World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993, 1 in which the Conference
reaffirmed that the human rights of women and the girl child were an inalienable,
integral and indivisible part of universal human rights,
0F

Acknowledging the need for a comprehensive and integrated approach to the
promotion and protection of the human rights of women, which includes the
integration of the human rights of women into the mainstream of United Nations
activities system-wide,
Reaffirming the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action 2 and the outcome
documents of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly entitled
“Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace for the twenty-first
1F

_______________
1

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.

2

07-47685

A/RES/62/218

century”, 3 in particular those paragraphs concerning the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women 4 and the Optional
Protocol thereto, 5
2F

3F

4F

Welcoming the declaration of the Commission on the Status of Women on the
occasion of the tenth anniversary of the Fourth World Conference on Women, 6 in
which the Commission recognized that the implementation of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action and the fulfilment of the obligations under the
Convention are mutually reinforcing in achieving gender equality and the
empowerment of women,
5F

Recalling that, in the United Nations Millennium Declaration, 7 Heads of State
and Government resolved to implement the Convention, and recalling also that the
2005 World Summit Outcome 8 reaffirmed that gender equality and the promotion
and protection of the full enjoyment of all human rights and fundamental freedoms
for all are essential to advance development and peace and security,
6F

7F

Recognizing that the equal enjoyment by women of all human rights and
fundamental freedoms will promote the realization of the rights of the child, bearing
in mind the special needs of girls, and acknowledging the mutual reinforcement of
the implementation of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women and the Convention on the Rights of the Child 9 and
the Optional Protocols thereto, 10
8F

9F

Noting that on 23 July 2007, at its 792nd meeting, the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women marked the twenty-fifth anniversary
of its work,
Bearing in mind the recommendation of the Committee that national reports
should contain information on the implementation of the Beijing Platform for
Action, in accordance with paragraph 323 of the Platform,
Having considered the reports of the Committee on its thirty-fourth, thirtyfifth and thirty-sixth 11 and thirty-seventh, thirty-eighth and thirty-ninth 12 sessions,
10F

1F

Expressing concern at the great number of reports that are overdue
(two hundred and fifteen), in particular initial reports, which constitutes an obstacle
to the full implementation of the Convention,
Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on the status of the
1.
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women; 13
12F

_______________
3

Resolution S-23/2, annex, and resolution S-23/3, annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
5
Ibid., vol. 2131, No. 20378.
6
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2005, Supplement No. 7 and corrigendum
(E/2005/27 and Corr.1), chap. I, sect. A; see also Economic and Social Council decision 2005/232.
7
See resolution 55/2.
8
See resolution 60/1.
9
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
10
Ibid., vols. 2171 and 2173, No. 27531.
11
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 38 (A/61/38).
12
Ibid., Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 38 (A/62/38).
13
A/62/290.
4

2

A/RES/62/218

2.
Also welcomes the growing number of States parties to the Convention,4
which now stands at one hundred and eighty-five, while expressing disappointment
that universal ratification of the Convention was not achieved by 2000, and urges all
States that have not yet ratified or acceded to the Convention to do so;
Further welcomes the growing number of States parties to the Optional
3.
Protocol to the Convention,5 which now stands at ninety, and urges other States
parties to the Convention to consider signing and ratifying or acceding to the
Optional Protocol;
Urges States parties to comply fully with their obligations under the
4.
Convention and the Optional Protocol thereto and to take into consideration the
concluding comments as well as the general recommendations of the Committee on
the Elimination of Discrimination against Women;
Encourages all relevant entities of the United Nations system, within
5.
their mandates, as well as Governments and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations, in particular women’s organizations, as
appropriate, to strengthen assistance to States parties, upon their request, in
implementing the Convention;
Notes that some States parties have modified their reservations, expresses
6.
satisfaction that some reservations have been withdrawn, and urges States parties to
limit the extent of any reservations that they lodge to the Convention, to formulate
any such reservations as precisely and as narrowly as possible, to ensure that no
reservations are incompatible with the object and purpose of the Convention, to
review their reservations regularly with a view to withdrawing them and to
withdraw reservations that are contrary to the object and purpose of the Convention;
Welcomes the adoption by the Committee of revised reporting
7.
guidelines, 14 and urges States parties to adhere to the revised guidelines, in
particular with regard to the content and length of reports;
13F

Recalls the great number of overdue reports, in particular initial reports,
8.
and urges States parties to the Convention to make every possible effort to submit
their reports on the implementation of the Convention in a timely manner, in
accordance with article 18 thereof;
Also recalls its resolution 50/202 of 22 December 1995, in which it took
9.
note with approval of the amendment to article 20, paragraph 1, of the Convention,
which has yet to enter into force;
10. Strongly urges States parties to the Convention to take appropriate
measures so that acceptance of the amendment to article 20, paragraph 1, of the
Convention by a two-thirds majority of States parties can be reached as soon as
possible and the amendment can enter into force;
11. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts made by the Committee to
improve the efficiency of its working methods, inter alia, pertaining to its meetings
in parallel chambers, following its fifth informal meeting, held in Berlin from
2 to 4 May 2006, 15 and invites the Committee to consider further improvements to
its working methods, especially with the aim of achieving timely and effective
consideration of reports submitted by States parties;
14F

_______________
14
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 38 (A/57/38), part two,
annex.
15
Ibid., Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 38 (A/61/38), part two, chap. VI.

3

A/RES/62/218

12. Notes decision 39/I of the Committee, 16 in which it requested the General
Assembly to authorize an extension of its meeting time;
15F

13. Also notes that a backlog of reports of thirty-four States parties to be
considered by the Committee persists;
14. Decides to authorize the Committee to hold three annual sessions of three
weeks each, with a one-week pre-sessional working group for each session, for an
interim period effective from January 2010, pending the entry into force of the
amendment to article 20, paragraph 1, of the Convention, and to authorize three
annual sessions of the Working Group on Communications under the Optional
Protocol to the Convention;
15. Also decides to authorize the Committee to meet on an exceptional and
temporary basis in the biennium 2008–2009 in a total of five sessions, of which
three would occur in parallel chambers, taking due account of equitable
geographical distribution, for the purpose of considering reports of States parties
submitted under article 18 of the Convention; and further decides that two of the
five sessions shall be held at United Nations Headquarters in New York;
16. Urges the Committee to evaluate progress, and decides to assess the
situation with regard to the location of the sessions of the Committee after two
years, also taking into account the wider context of treaty body reform;
17. Encourages the Secretariat to extend further technical assistance to States
parties, upon their request, to strengthen their capacity in the preparation of reports,
in particular initial reports, and invites Governments to contribute to those efforts;
18. Invites States parties to make use of the technical assistance provided by
the Secretariat to facilitate the preparation of reports, in particular initial reports;
19. Encourages the continued participation of members of the Committee in
inter-committee meetings and meetings of persons chairing the human rights treaty
bodies, including those on methods of work relating to the State reporting system;
20. Encourages the Committee, within its mandate, to continue to contribute
to the efforts to strengthen cooperation and coordination between the treaty bodies;
21. Requests the Secretary-General, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 54/4 of 6 October 1999, to provide the resources, including staff and
facilities, necessary for the effective functioning of the Committee within its full
mandate, taking into account in particular the entry into force of the Optional
Protocol to the Convention;
22. Urges Governments, organizations and bodies of the United Nations
system and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to disseminate
the Convention and the Optional Protocol thereto;
23. Encourages States parties to disseminate the concluding comments
adopted in relation to the consideration of their reports, as well as the general
recommendations of the Committee;
24. Encourages all relevant entities of the United Nations system to continue
to build women’s knowledge and understanding of and capacity to utilize human
rights instruments, in particular the Convention and the Optional Protocol thereto;

_______________
16

4

Ibid., Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 38 (A/62/38), part three, chap. I.

A/RES/62/218

25. Urges the specialized agencies, at the invitation of the Committee, to
submit reports on the implementation of the Convention in areas falling within the
scope of their activities;
26. Welcomes the contribution of non-governmental organizations to the
work of the Committee;
27. Invites the Chairperson of the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women to address the General Assembly at its sixty-third
and sixty-fourth sessions under the item on the advancement of women;
28. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
sixty-fourth session a report on the status of the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women and the implementation of the present
resolution.
79th plenary meeting
22 December 2007

5
