General Assembly-Forty-second Session

270

2. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a final financial report on the project to the General Assembly at
its forty-third session.
99th plenary meeting
21 December 1987

42/217.

Feasibility of establishing a single administrative tribunal

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General entitled "Feasibility of establishing a single administrative
tribunal", 48
Noting that the International Labour Organisation has
under consideration proposals corresponding to those appearing in the report of the Secretary-General,
1. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To arrange for consultations among Member
States to take place in New York during the first part of
1988 for the purpose of examining the proposals included
in his report entitled "Feasibility of establishing a single
administrative tribunal", bearing in mind the technical, legal and administrative aspects of the matter;
(b) To invite the Director-General of the International
Labour Office to be represented at such consultations;
(c) To report to the General Assembly at its fortythird session on the outcome of such consultations and to
present proposals designed to enable the Assembly to conclude its consideration of this item at that session;
2. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-third session under the item entitled "Administrative and budgetary co-ordination of the United Nations
with the specialized agencies and the International
Atomic Energy Agency" a sub-item entitled "Harmonization of the statutes, rules and practices of the administrative tribunals of the International Labour Organisation
and of the United Nations".
99th plenary meeting
21 December 1987

42/218.

Joint Inspection Unit

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 40/259 of 18 December 1985
and 41/213 of 19 December 1986,
Having considered the report of the Joint Inspection
Unit on its activities during the period l July 1986 to
30 June 1987, 49 welcoming the recommendations for selfimprovement contained in section VI thereof, and noting
the observations and suggestions of Member States
thereon,
Recognizing the need to avoid duplication and overlapping in the activities of subsidiary organs of the General
Assembly,
Convinced that the General Assembly should give the
Joint Inspection Unit greater guidance on its programme
of work with respect to the United Nations,
Convinced also that more systematic follow-up activity
regarding the implementation of recommendations of the
Joint Inspection Unit would increase the usefulness of the
48 A/42/328.
49 Official Records of the

General A.ssembly, Forty-.second Session.
Supplement No. 34 (A/42/34 and Corr. I).

inspection function, particularly in encouraging constructive dialogue between the Unit and the various organizations of the United Nations system,
Bearing in mind the recommendations regarding the
Joint Inspection Unit in the report of the Group of Highlevel Intergovernmental Experts to Review the Efficiency
of the Administrative and Financial Functioning of the
United Nations, 22
1. Invites the Joint Inspection Unit to introduce immediately the improvements recommended in section VI
of its report 49 in order to increase the quality and effectiveness of its reports;
2. Calls upon the Joint Inspection Unit to adopt a
more collective approach in the preparation of its programme of work, in the conduct of its work and in the
writing of individual reports;
3. Requests the Joint Inspection Unit to include in its
annual report a section on its findings regarding the implementation of its recommendations;
4. Invites the Joint Inspection Unit, with due regard
for its other responsibilities, to include in its proposed programme of work the provision of advice to participating
organizations on their methods for internal evaluation and
the conduct of more ad hoe evaluations of programmes
and activities;
5. Requests the Joint Inspection Unit to include in its
next report the guidelines it follows for selecting, conducting and reporting on its inspections;
6. Also requests the Joint Inspection Unit to ensure
that its reports are co-ordinated, as far as possible, with
the programmes of work of the various bodies of the
United Nations and that they are submitted in a timely
manner;
7. Further requests the Joint Inspection Unit, in exercising its functions, powers and responsibilities, to take
fully into account the mandates of other relevant bodies,
especially the Committee for Programme and Coordination, the Board of Auditors and the International
Civil Service Commission;
8. Invites the Committee for Programme and Coordination and the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, within their respective
mandates, to provide the General Assembly with their
views on the future programme of work of the Joint Inspection Unit;
9. Requests the Committee for Programme and Coordination to advise the General Assembly on those cases
in which the Joint Inspection Unit might perform ad hoe
external evaluations of programmes and activities;
lO. Urges Member States to apply the highest standards in selecting candidates for appointment as inspectors, to give special emphasis to relevant experience and
qualifications in the fields of personnel management, public administration, inspection and evaluation, and to give
consideration to different disciplines;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to bring to the attention of the appropriate bodies of the United Nations
system all reports of the Joint Inspection Unit on matters
within their respective areas of competence and to include
reference to all reports of the Unit in the documentation
listed in the annotated preliminary agendas of the General
Assembly and other United Nations bodies under the
most appropriate substantive agenda item;
12. Requests all bodies of the United Nations system to
examine closely those reports of the Joint Inspection Unit
which are within their respective areas of competence and
