A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/155
7 February 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 95
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/49/605)]

49/155.

The role of cooperatives in the light of
new economic and social trends

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 47/90 of 16 December 1992, in particular
paragraph 2 thereof, in which it proclaimed the first Saturday of July 1995 to
be International Day of Cooperatives,
Welcoming the report of the Secretary-General on the status and role of
cooperatives in the light of new economic and social trends, 1/ especially
the important recommendations contained in section II of the report aimed at
ensuring the best possible means of dealing with the issue of cooperatives,
taking into account their broad significance in contributing to the solution
of major economic and social problems,
Recognizing that cooperatives in their various forms are becoming an
indispensable factor in the economic and social development of all countries,
promoting the fullest possible participation in the development process of all
population groups, including women, youth, disabled persons and the elderly,
Recognizing also the important contribution and potential of all forms
of cooperatives to the preparations for and follow-up to the World Summit for
Social Development and the Fourth World Conference on Women: Action for
Equality, Development and Peace, to be held in 1995 and the United Nations
Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) to be held in 1996,
1.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the status and role of cooperatives in the light of new economic
and social trends;

1/
95-76561

A/49/213.
/...

A/RES/49/155
Page 2
2.
Invites Governments, relevant international organizations,
specialized agencies and national and international cooperative organizations
to observe annually the International Day of Cooperatives on the first
Saturday of July starting from 1995, as proclaimed by the General Assembly in
its resolution 47/90;
3.
Encourages Governments to consider fully the potential of
cooperatives for contributing to the solution of economic, social and
environmental problems in formulating national development strategies;
4.
Also encourages Governments to consider reviewing legal and
administrative constraints on the activities of cooperatives with a view to
eliminating those constraints that are not applied to other businesses and
enterprises;
5.
Invites government agencies, in collaboration with cooperatives
and other relevant organizations, to develop programmes aimed at improving
statistics on the contribution of cooperatives to national economies and
facilitating dissemination of information on cooperatives;
6.
Invites the World Summit for Social Development, the Fourth World
Conference on Women: Action for Equality, Development and Peace and the
United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), in formulating
respective strategies and actions, to give due consideration to the role and
contribution of cooperatives;
7.
Requests the Secretary-General, within existing resources, to
continue to provide support to the programmes and objectives of the
international cooperative movement and to submit to the General Assembly at
its fifty-first session a report on the implementation of the present
resolution.
94th plenary meeting
23 December 1994
