,2

General Assembly -

882 (IX). Personnel policy of the United Nations: amendment to the staff regulations
of the United Nations

Ninth Session

884 (IX).

Admini8trative and budgetary coordination between the United Nations and
the specialized agencies

The General Assembly

The General Assembly

Adopts as an amendment to the staff regulations
of the United Nations the text annexed to the present
resolution. This amendment shall become effective on
1 January 1955.
ANNEX
Staff regulation 1.6 (amended text)
No staff member shall accept any honour, decoration, favour,
gift or remuneration from any Government excepting for war
service; nor shall a staff member accept any honour, decoration,
favour, gift or remuneration from any source external to the
Organization, without first obtaining the approval of the Secretary-General. Approval shall be granted only in exceptional
cases and where such acceptance is not incompatible with the
terms of regulation 1.2 of the staff regulations and with the
individual's status as an international civil servant.

512th plenary meetinq,
14 December 1954.

883 (IX). Personnel policy of the United Nations: question of educational facilities for
the children of staff members

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report 11 of the SecretaryGeneral on personnel policy, paragraphs 22 to 26 of
which deal with problems relating to the education
grant established under the staff regulations, and the
fifteenth report 18 of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions to the ninth
session of the General Assembly,
Considering that the education grant was established
with the purpose of enabling the children of staff
members, despite the fact that their parents were
expatriated, to benefit from the influence of their
national characteristics in their education,
l. N ates with satisfaction the Secretary-General's
statement that the question of educational facilities is
being studied by the International Civil Service Advisory Board;
2. Requests the International Civil Service Advisory Board to consider appropriate measures for providing children of staff members with special facilities
for the study of their mother tongue in cases where
they are obliged to attend local schools in which the
instruction is given in a language other than the mother
tongue;
3. Recommends the Secretary-General, in preparing
his report on the staff regulations for submission to
the General Assembly at its tenth session, to give
special consideration to the question whether measures
should be taken to make a larger number of staff members than at present eligible for the benefit of the
education grant.
512th plenary meetinq,
14 December 1954.
11 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Ninth Session, Annexes, agenda item 54, document A/2777.
1a Ibid., document A/2788.

1. Takes note of the report19 of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
dealing with the administrative budgets of the specialized agencies for 1955;
2. Invites the attention of the specialized agencies
to the recommendations and suggestions made in the
Advisory Committee's report and to the views expressed in the Fifth Committee at the ninth session
of the General Assembly.
512th plenary meetinq,
14 December 1954.

885 (IX). Audit reports relating to expenditure
by specialized agencies of technical assistance funds allocated from the Special
Account

The General Assembly
Takes note of the audit reports 20 relating to expenditure by specialized agencies of technical assistance
funds allocated from the Special Account, for the
financial year ended 31 December 1953 and of the
observations 21 thereon of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions.
512th plenary meetinq,
14 December 1954.

886 (IX). Organization of the Secretariat
The General Assembly,
Considering its resolution 784 (VIII) of 9 December 1953 in which it recommended that the SecretaryGeneral should proceed along the lines of his report
to the eighth session on the organization of the
Secretariat contained in document A/2554, 22
Having examined the report 23 of the SecretaryGeneral to the ninth session on the organization of the
Secretariat and the comments contained in the report"
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions,
Taking note of the Secretary-General's intention to
bring under detailed review in 1955 those United
Nat ions offices and activities external to Head,1uarters,
as well as the secretariats of the subsidiary bodies of
the United Nations,
Considering the Secretary-General's statements during the discussion of the item in the Fifth Committee
of the General Assembly,
1. N ates with appreciation the Secretary-General's
report on the reorganization of the Secretariat and
further notes his statements in the Fifth Committee
Ibid., agenda item 43, document A/2835.
See document A/2721.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Ninth Session, Annexes, agenda item 45, document A/2852.
22 Ibid., Eighth Session, Annexes, agenda item 48.
23 Ibid., Ninth Session, Annexes, agenda item 53, document
A/2731.
24 Ibid., document A/2745.
19
2o

21

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

and the general approval2 by the Economic and Social
Council of the proposals made by the Secretary-General in document E/2598 ;26
2. Approves generally the measures adopted by the
Secretary-General and invites him, in proceeding with
the implementation of his proposals, to take into
account the comments contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions and the observations and suggestions made
in the Fifth Committee of the General Assemblv with
reference to the various aspects of reorganization;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to report progress
to the General Assembly at its tenth session.
515th plenary meeting,
17 December 1954.
5

887 (IX), Amendments to the staff regulations
of the United Nations (regulations 1.10 and
4.5 (a), and annex I, paragraphs I and 2)
The General Assembly
Adopts, as amendments to the staff regulations of
the United Nations, the texts annexed to the present
resolution. These amendments shall become effective
from 1 January 1955.
515th plenary meeting,
17 December 1954.

888 (IX). Awards of compensation made by the
United Nations Administrative Tribunal:
advisory opinion of the International Court
of Justice
The General Assembly,
Having considered the advisory opinion 27 of the International Court of Justice of 13 July 1954 regarding
the effect of awards of compensation made by the
United Nations Administrative Tribunal, the report 28
by the Secretary-General on budgetary arrangements
for payment of indemnities and the report 20 of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,
Considering that under article 11 of the Statute of
the Administrative Tribunal, the General Assembly can
amend that Statute,
Believing that the establishment of procedure for
review of the judgments of the Administrative Tribunal requires careful examination,
A
1. Decides to take note of the advisory opinion of
the Court;

B

ANNEX
Staff regulation 1.10 (amended text)

The oath or declaration shall be made orally by the Secretary-General and by Under-Secretaries and officials of equivalent rank at a public meeting of the General Assembly and
by all other members of the Secretariat before the SecretaryGeneral or his authorized deputy.
Staff regulation 4.5 (a) (amended text)

Appointments of Under-Secretaries and officials of equivalent
rank shall normally be for a period of five years, subject to
prolongation or renewal. Other staff members shall be granted
either permanent or temporary appointments under such terms
and conditions consistent with these regulations as the Secretary-General may prescribe.
Annex I to the staff regulations, paragraph 1 (amended text)

An Under-Secretary or an official of equivalent rank shall
receive as basic remuneration a salary of $US18,000 (subject
to the Staff Assessment Plan at the rates laid down in General
Assembly resolution 239 (Ill) of 18 November 1948 and to
such changes as may be directed from time to time by the
General Assembly, and to salary differentials wherever applied),
together with an allowance of $US3,500.
Under-Secretaries or officials of equivalent rank shall not be
entitled to education and children's allowances but shall, if
otherwise eligible, receive other allowances and benefits which
are available to staff members generally.
Annex I to the staff regulations, paragraph 2 (amended text)

The Secretary-General is authorized, on the basis of appropriate justification and/or reporting, to make additional payments to Under-Secretaries and officials of equivalent rank at
Headquarters to compensate for such special costs as may be
reasonably incurred, in the interest of the Organization, in the
performance of duties assigned to them by the Secretary25 See Economic and Social Council resolution 557A
26 See Official Records of the Economic and Social

(XVIII).

Eighteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 29.

General. The maximum total amount of such payments is to
be determined in the annual budget by the General Assembly.

Council,

2. Accepts in principle judicial review of judgments of the United Nations Administrative Tribunal;
3. Requests Member States to communicate to the
Secretary-General, before 1 July 1955, their views
on the establishment of procedure to provide for
review of the judgments of the Administrative Tricunal and to submit any suggestions which they
may consider useful;
4. Invites the Secretary-General to consult on this
matter with the specialized agencies concerned;
5. Establishes a Special Committee composed of
Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, China,
Cuba, El Salvador, France, India, Iraq, Israel, Norway, Pakistan, Syria, the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America,
to meet at a time to be fixed in consultation with the
Secretary-General to study the question of the establishment of such a procedure in all its aspects and to
report to the General Assembly at its tenth session;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to notify all Member States of the date on which the Special Committee
shall meet;
C

7. Decides that:
(a) As from 1 January 1955 there shall be established a Special Indemnity Fund;
( b) Notwithstanding the provisions of article 7
of General Assembly resolution 359 (IV) of 10 Decem27
See Effect of awards of compensation made by the United
Nations Administrative Tribunal, Advisory Opinion of July
13th, 1954: I.C.J. Reports 1954, x:,. 47.
28
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Ninth Session, Annexes, agenda item 48, document A/C..5/607.
29 Ibid., document A/2837.
