United Nations

A/RES/63/261

General Assembly

Distr.: General
5 March 2009

Sixty-third session
Agenda item 118

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 24 December 2008
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/63/648/Add.2)]

63/261. Strengthening of the Department of Political Affairs
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 62/236 of 22 December 2007,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the revised estimates
under section 1, Overall policymaking, direction and coordination, section 3,
Political affairs, section 28D, Office of Central Support Services, and section 35,
Staff assessment, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2008–2009,
relating to the strengthening of the Department of Political Affairs, 1 the report of the
Office of Internal Oversight Services on the audit of the management of special
political missions by the Department of Political Affairs, 2 the letter dated 7 March
2008 from the Permanent Representatives of Antigua and Barbuda and Cuba to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General, 3 the letter dated 12 March 2008
from the Secretary-General to the Permanent Representatives of Antigua and
Barbuda and Cuba to the United Nations 4 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 5
0F

1F

2F

3F

4F

Reaffirming its rules of procedure,
Recalling the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the
Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the
Methods of Evaluation 6 and the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United
Nations, 7
5F

6F

Stressing the intergovernmental, multilateral and international character of the
United Nations,

_______________
1

A/62/521 and Corr.1.
A/61/357.
3
A/C.5/62/24.
4
A/C.5/62/25.
5
A/62/7/Add.32. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session,
Supplement No. 7A.
6
ST/SGB/2000/8.
7
ST/SGB/2003/7.
2

08-48645

A/RES/63/261

Reaffirming the role of the General Assembly and its relevant
intergovernmental and expert bodies, within their respective mandates, in planning,
programming, budgeting, monitoring and evaluation,
Recognizing that the prevention of armed conflict and the peaceful settlement
of disputes are central to the mandate of the United Nations,
Recognizing also that preventive diplomacy is a core function of the United
Nations and is central to the role of the Secretary-General and that the Department
of Political Affairs has primary responsibility for carrying out preventive diplomacy
and supporting the good offices function of the Secretary-General,
Recognizing further the important role of the good offices of the SecretaryGeneral, including in the mediation of disputes,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;1
0H

2.
Stresses that any activity by the Department of Political Affairs related to
preventive diplomacy and conflict resolution must be carried out in accordance with
the principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of
States;
Also stresses that improvement in the capacity of the United Nations to
3.
prevent and resolve conflicts is a better investment than dealing with the cost of
armed conflict and its aftermath;
Recognizes the important role women play in the area of preventive
4.
diplomacy;
5.
Also recognizes that the root causes of armed conflict are
multidimensional in nature, thus requiring a comprehensive and integrated approach
to the prevention of armed conflict;
Notes that the objective of strengthening and rationalizing the
6.
Department of Political Affairs, including its supportive role regarding preventive
diplomacy and resolution of conflict, is to improve the Department’s effectiveness
and efficiency in fulfilling its mandate;
Reaffirms that the Fifth Committee is the appropriate Main Committee of
7.
the General Assembly entrusted with responsibilities for administrative and
budgetary matters;
Also reaffirms its role in carrying out a thorough analysis and approval of
8.
human and financial resources and policies, with a view to ensuring full, effective
and efficient implementation of all mandated programmes and activities and the
implementation of policies in this regard;
Further reaffirms its role with regard to the structure of the Secretariat,
9.
and stresses that proposals to amend the overall departmental structure, as well as
the format of the programme budget and the biennial programme plan, are subject to
its review and prior approval;
10. Reaffirms its resolution 55/231 of 23 December 2000, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure that in presenting the programme budget, expected
accomplishments and indicators of achievement are included to measure
achievements in the implementation of the programmes of the Organization and not
those of individual Member States;

2

A/RES/63/261

11. Requests the Secretary-General to explore potential synergies and
complementarities among special political missions, where possible, in order to
avoid duplication and overlap, bearing in mind the autonomous nature of each
legislative mandate;
12. Underlines the continued importance of the role of the Secretary-General
in ensuring, when appointing his special representatives and envoys, the highest
standards of integrity, competency, impartiality and professionalism;
13. Emphasizes the sensitivity of the mandates of special political missions,
and in this regard recalls Article 2, paragraph 7, of the Charter of the United
Nations;
14. Recalls that the Secretary-General may nominate special representatives
and envoys, and in this respect notes the intention of the Secretary-General to
continuously consult with Member States concerned on these matters;
15. Also recalls the role of the Secretary-General as the Chief Administrative
Officer of the Organization, in accordance with the provisions of Article 97 of the
Charter;
16. Reiterates that the delegation of authority on the part of the SecretaryGeneral should be in order to facilitate the better management of the Organization,
but stresses that the overall responsibility for management of the Organization rests
with the Secretary-General as the Chief Administrative Officer;
17. Also reiterates the importance of strengthened accountability in the
Organization and of ensuring greater accountability of the Secretary-General to
Member States, inter alia, for the effective and efficient implementation of
legislative mandates and the use of human and financial resources;
18. Recalls the letter dated 7 March 2008 from the Permanent
Representatives of Antigua and Barbuda and Cuba to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General3 and the letter dated 12 March 2008 from the SecretaryGeneral to the Permanent Representatives of Antigua and Barbuda and Cuba to the
United Nations,4 stresses the strong concerns of some Member States contained
therein,3 and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that there is sufficient
knowledge within the Department of Political Affairs of the political situation in all
regions and to abide strictly by the principles enshrined in the Charter;
1H

2H

19. Requests the Secretary-General, in this regard, to ensure that, in the
submission of future budget documents, the narrative parts are based solely on
factual information;
20. Stresses the importance of the role of the Department of Political Affairs
in providing appropriate political guidance in the context of its involvement in
United Nations trust funds to which it provides such guidance, in accordance with
the principles enshrined in the Charter and the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly;
21. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,5 subject to
the provisions of the present resolution;
3H

22. Recalls section V, paragraph 8, of its resolution 62/238 of 22 December
2007, takes note of the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services2 and
stresses the importance of its full implementation;
4H

3

A/RES/63/261

23. Emphasizes the importance of the integration of effort, policy coherence
and efficiency in the use of resources;
24. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to address systemic issues
that hamper good management of the Organization, including the work processes
and procedures, and in that context stresses that structural change is no substitute
for managerial improvement;
25. Requests the Secretary-General to identify, where possible, means to
achieve greater complementarities and synergies between the Department of
Political Affairs and other departments and offices of the United Nations Secretariat
as well as other relevant actors of the United Nations system;
26. Stresses the importance of clear reporting lines and accountability
between the special political missions and Headquarters;
27. Decides to establish the Middle East and West Asia Division and, in this
regard, not to divide it into sections and units, and stresses the need to continue the
current arrangement;
28. Recalls all United Nations resolutions related to the situation in the
Middle East and the question of Palestine, and notes the responsibilities of the
Middle East and West Asia Division in this regard;
29. Decides that the Asia and Pacific Division shall be composed of two
sections, as follows:
(a)

Asia-Pacific I Section (Central, South and North-east Asian countries);

(b)

Asia-Pacific II Section (South-east Asia and the Pacific countries);

30.
follows:

Also decides that the Americas Division shall comprise four sections, as

(a)

North America;

(b)

Central America;

(c)

The Caribbean;

(d)

South America;

31. Stresses the importance of the Department of Political Affairs continuing
to pay adequate attention to the situation in Haiti in support of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, together with the Department of Economic and Social
Affairs, the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean and other
relevant United Nations entities;
32.

Decides that the Caribbean Section shall be headed at the P-5 level;

33. Stresses the importance of the Department of Political Affairs continuing
to pay adequate attention to regional and subregional organizations;
34. Decides not to establish a Policy, Partnerships and Mediation Support
Division and not to approve the reclassification of a post for a director of that
division from the D-1 to the D-2 level, and requests the Secretary-General to
resubmit his proposals, taking fully into account the mandate of the Department of
Political Affairs as stipulated in the strategic framework;
35. Also decides not to establish a Special Political Missions Support Unit
until a report on the management and administration of special political missions by
the Department of Political Affairs is considered by the General Assembly;
4

A/RES/63/261

36. Stresses the need for the Secretary-General to consider the status of the
existing field presence of the United Nations entities engaged in promoting peace
and security, taking into account their respective mandates, before proposing the
establishment of regional offices;
37. Recalls paragraph 23 of the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,5 and stresses that the establishment of any
future regional political affairs office requires the concurrence of all concerned
Member States covered by the relevant mandate approved by the appropriate
legislative bodies;
5H

38. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to regularly brief Member
States on issues related to the work of the Department of Political Affairs and to
keep ensuring appropriate interaction between the Department and the principal
bodies of the Organization;
39. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Office of Internal Oversight
Services with conducting an audit of the management of special political missions
by the Department of Political Affairs, as a follow-up to the report of the Office, and
to submit a report on the audit to the General Assembly for consideration at the
main part of its sixty-fourth session;
40. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report to
the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session on the efficiency and effectiveness of
the new structure in the implementation of mandates as well as programmatic
delivery and improvements in the administrative and management processes and
efficiency gains;
41. Decides to establish the posts as contained in the annex to the present
resolution.
74th plenary meeting
24 December 2008

5

A/RES/63/261

Annex
Department of Political Affairs: posts to be established under
the programme budget for the biennium 2008–2009
Number
of posts

Organizational unit

United Nations Liaison Office

New

Office of the Under-Secretary-General

3

Post level

1 P-5, 1 P-3, 1 LL

Reclassification

1 D-1 to D-2

Reclassification

1 P-3 to P-4

Redeployment

D-2 from Americas Division

Office of the Assistant Secretary-General (Africa)

New

1

1 P-4

Africa I Division

New

8

3 P-4, 2 P-3, 1 P-2, 2 GS (OL)

Africa II Division

New

6

1 P-3, 4 P-2, 1 GS (OL)

Middle East and West Asia Division

New

5

1 P-5, 1 P-4 (Iraq) , 2 P-3, 1 P-2

Asia and Pacific Division

New

4

3 P-3, 1 P-2

Americas Division

New

3

1 P-5, 2 P-2

Redeployment
Europe Division

New

D-2 to the Office of the
Under-Secretary-General
1

Reclassification

1 P-4 (Cyprus)
1 D-1 to D-2

Mediation Support Unit

New

7

1 P-4, 3 P-3, 2 P-2, 1 GS (OL)

Electoral Assistance Division

New

8

1 P-5, 3 P-4, 4 GS (OL)

Reclassification

1 P-2 to P-3

Security Council Affairs Division

New

2

2 P-2

Executive Office

New

1

1 P-4

Reclassification
Total

1 P-5 to D-1
49

2 D-2, -1 D-1, 3 P-5, 12 P-4, 12 P-3,
12 P-2, 8 GS (OL), 1 LL

Abbreviations: GS (OL), General Service (Other Level); LL, Local level.

6
