S/PV.8388

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8388th meeting

Friday, 2 November 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ma Zhaoxu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Adom
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Abebe
Mrs. Gasri
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Alotaibi
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Kuzmin
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni
Mrs. Dickson
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in Libya

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-35720 (E)
*1835720*

S/PV.8388

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President (spoke in Chinese): As this is
the first public meeting of the Security Council for
the month of November, I should like to take this
opportunity to pay sincere tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Mr. Sacha Sergio Llorentty
Solíz, Permanent Representative of the Plurinational
State of Bolivia, for his service as President of the
Council for the month of October. I am sure that I speak
for all the members of the Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Llorentty Solíz and his
delegation for the excellent diplomatic skill with which
they conducted the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Libya to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Prosecutor Bensouda.
Ms. Bensouda: At the outset, I would like to
congratulate the People’s Republic of China on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of November. I wish you, Sir, every success in
steering the essential work conducted by the Council.
I welcome the opportunity to engage with the
Council once again in relation to the Libya situation
and to provide updates regarding ongoing cases and
investigations, outstanding warrants of arrest and
cooperation with States, the organs of the United
Nations and other organizations.
As members of the Council will recall, in June 2011
the Pre-Trial Chamber of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) issued the first warrants of arrest in
the situation in Libya. Over seven years later, Libya
2/17

02/11/2018

remains a high-priority situation for my Office. Three
additional ICC warrants of arrest have been issued
following applications brought by my Office during
this period, and my team continues to make significant
progress in investigations related to other alleged
crimes in Libya. Since my last report (see S/PV.8250),
we have also piloted new models of cooperation with
interested States and organizations in relation to alleged
crimes committed against migrants transiting through
Libya. My Office hopes to replicate these models for
cooperation in other situations before the Court and
thereby further contribute to the fight against impunity.
I now turn to recent developments in the case
against Mr. Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi. As members
of the Council are aware, in June 2011 the Pre-Trial
Chamber of the Court issued a warrant of arrest against
Mr. Al-Qadhafi for the crimes against humanity of
murder and persecution. This warrant of arrest was
issued in relation to Mr. Al-Qadhafi’s contribution, as
de facto Prime Minister of Libya, to a common plan
to deter and quell, by any means, the demonstrations
against the rule of Muammar Al-Qadhafi in 2011.
On 5 June earlier this year, Mr Gaddafi filed an
admissibility challenge, submitting that his case is
inadmissible before the ICC. Significantly, in his
challenge, Mr. Al-Qadhafi states that on or around
12 April 2016, he was released from the custody of the
Abu-Bakr Al-Siddiq Battalion in Zintan, pursuant to
an amnesty law. Mr. Al-Qadhafi also argues that as a
consequence of the domestic proceedings conducted
against him in Libya, he cannot be tried at the ICC.
For the reasons set out in my written response
to this admissibility challenge, which was filed on
28 September, I argued that Mr. Al-Qadhafi’s case
remains admissible before the Court. My sixteenth
report, transmitted to the Council two weeks ago,
briefly outlines my submissions. My Office maintains
that Mr. Al-Qadhafi must be arrested and surrendered
to the Court. This admissibility challenge is currently
sub judice and the Pre-Trial Chamber will render a
decision in due course. I will therefore not delve any
deeper into the factual and legal arguments in relation
to this specific matter.
Turning to our ongoing investigations, my Office
continues to make considerable progress on the Libya
situation. We continue to monitor criminal conduct
carried out by members of armed groups in Libya whose
alleged criminal acts could fall within the jurisdiction
18-35720

02/11/2018

The situation in Libya

of the Court. Armed groups use violence to exert
control over State institutions, commit serious human
rights violations, and abuse and exploit detainees in
unregulated prisons and places of detention throughout
the country. These armed groups represent a major
threat to long-term peace and stability in Libya. We
do not confine our investigations to any one group;
we look at alleged Rome Statute crimes committed by
actors across the territory of Libya. More information
regarding the nature of these investigations cannot be
divulged at the present due to the confidential nature
of investigations. Based on the progress made, my
Office hopes to be in a position to apply for new arrest
warrants in connection with the Libya situation.
I also remain focused on the alleged Rome Statute
crimes committed against migrants transiting through
Libya. The journeys these people embark upon can
quickly turn into true nightmare scenarios in which
they become victims of the darkest side of human
nature and they are preyed upon mercilessly and their
vulnerabilities exploited with no regard for decency or
the rule of law. My Office continues to receive evidence
of serious crimes committed against migrants in Libya.
These alleged crimes include killings, sexual violence,
torture and enslavement. In line with my June 2014
policy paper on sexual and gender-based crimes, my
Office integrates a gender perspective and analysis into
these and all other investigations.
My Office recognizes that to effectively respond to
these serious crimes, not only must they be addressed
in Libya, but the criminal networks that facilitate
such activities operating outside of Libya must also
face justice. A multi-layered and multi-party strategy
is therefore required to tackle the web of crimes that
thrive in the context of migration through Libya. To that
end, my Office continues to work collaboratively with
various States, including Libya, as well as international
law-enforcement organizations. Information on crimes
committed against migrants in Libya and on the
business model used to perpetuate these horrific crimes
is gathered, shared and analysed. We engage in this
coordinated effort in the spirit of complementarity and
in line with goal 9 of my Office’s strategic plan.
Pursuant to that cooperation model, efforts are
being made to identify which entities are best placed to
investigate or prosecute alleged crimes and determine
what further support other partners can provide. The aim
is to close the impunity gap at national, transnational
and international levels and to hold accountable all

S/PV. 8388

those who commit those alleged crimes. I am pleased
to inform the Council that the cooperation strategy is
proving effective. My Office also continues to benefit
from, and is grateful for, the excellent cooperation it
receives from the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya and the Libyan Prosecutor-General’s Office.
As members are aware, within the Rome Statute
system of international criminal justice, the arrest and
surrender of ICC suspects remains one of the most
challenging issues for my Office and the ICC as a
whole. There can be no justice for the victims, and the
aims of prevention and deterrence are hindered, unless
ICC suspects are arrested and transferred to the Court
to stand trial. Contrary to the urging of members of
the Council, and despite concerted efforts by my Office
and the Registry of the Court, not one suspect in the
Libya situation has been surrendered to the ICC.
Mr. Al-Qadhafi is at large and, despite his selfclaimed release from custody over two years ago, he
has shown no intention of surrendering himself to the
Court or to the competent authorities in Libya.
In relation to Mr. Al-Tuhamy Mohamed Khaled,
former head of the Libyan Internal Security Agency,
the Council will recall that, in April 2017, upon my
request, the Pre-Trial Chamber made public a warrant
originally issued under seal in April 2013. While under
seal, the warrant remained unexecuted for more than
four years, despite diligent efforts by the Registry and
my Office. I hoped that unsealing the warrant of arrest
could facilitate Mr. Al-Tuhamy’s arrest and surrender to
the Court. It is deeply regrettable that Mr. Al-Tuhamy
remains at large.
Concerning the case of Mr. Mahmoud Mustafa
Busayf Al-Werfalli, a commander in the Al-Saiqa
Brigade operating in and around Benghazi, the Council
will recall that, on 15 August 2017, the Pre-Trial
Chamber of the Court issued an arrest warrant against
him, having found reasonable grounds to believe
that he is criminally responsible for seven execution
incidents resulting in the murder of 33 individuals.
Mr. Al-Werfalli is yet another ICC suspect not yet
arrested and surrendered to the Court.
Furthermore, despite repeated claims by the Libyan
National Army that Mr. Al-Werfalli had been arrested
and is being investigated, he is alleged to have murdered
an additional 10 people earlier this year, on 24 January,
in Benghazi. I reacted by filing a second application
under seal for a warrant of arrest for Mr. Al-Werfalli

18-357203/17

S/PV.8388

The situation in Libya

in connection with that alleged execution. On 4 July,
the Pre-Trial Chamber issued a second public warrant
of arrest for Mr. Al-Werfalli for the alleged war crime
of murder.
Mr. Al-Werfalli is alleged to have committed war
crimes. He must be apprehended and surrendered to
the Court to answer those serious charges. The Court’s
legal proceedings will afford him, as for every ICC
suspect, all due process rights guaranteed under the
Rome Statute.
Information obtained through our ongoing
investigations indicates that Mr. Al-Qadhafi and
Mr. Al-Werfalli are in Libya, while Mr. Al-Tuhamy
is outside Libya. If ICC fugitives are permitted to
remain at large, the mandate of the Court to hold those
responsible for the most serious crimes of concern
to the international community will continue to be
frustrated and the Council’s referral of the situation in
Libya to the ICC will be rendered ineffective. My Office
will continue to do its part pursuant to its obligations
under the Rome Statute. The Council also bears a
responsibility to support such work following its referral
of the situation to the ICC. Moreover, States parties and
non-States parties should take all the necessary steps
to effect the arrest and surrender of those fugitives
to the ICC. In the absence of effective accountability
for atrocity crimes, impunity will continue to reign in
Libya, causing greater suffering and instability.
Allow me to observe that I very much welcomed
the convening of the first Arria Formula meeting on
relations between the Council and the ICC, which was
held in July on the eve of the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of the Rome Statute. Co-sponsored
by the Kingdom of the Netherlands and other ICC
State parties on the Council, the meeting provided
a unique opportunity to reflect on the important
relationship between my Office — and, more broadly,
the Court — and the Council and to make proposals on
ways to strengthen that relationship. I wish to reiterate
my gratitude to all co-sponsoring States, the Council
and all who contributed to those productive discussions.
The ICC seeks independent and impartial justice
through individual criminal accountability for grave
crimes that threaten the peace, security and well-being
of the world, in an effort to end impunity and contribute
to the prevention of such crimes. The primary
responsibility of the Council is the maintenance of
international peace and security. Our two institutions
4/17

02/11/2018

must therefore work together if we are to achieve our
different, yet mutually reinforcing, mandates.
I conclude by expressing my appreciation for the
continued support members of the Council offer in
relation to the difficult but essential work my Office
carries out in connection with the Libya situation.
During my previous briefing, in May, many here
today recognized the ICC’s important work in tackling
impunity for serious crimes of international concern
and contributing to the maintenance of peace and
security. A number of Council members offered their
support and cooperation in relation to the arrest and
surrender of individuals subject to ICC warrants of
arrest. Those genuine expressions of support are very
welcome. However, I respectfully submit that those
words must be complemented by real action in support
of the ICC.
Approximately twenty years have passed since
the Rome Statute was adopted. I continue to believe
that the creation of the ICC must surely be one of
humankind’s proudest moments. Yet we have much
work to do, and tangible support by that Council is vital
to the realization of the ICC’s full potential to address
impunity for the world’s most serious crimes. I look
forward to effective support and concrete action from
the Council to ensure that our separate, yet interlinked,
mandates can positively contribute to the cause of
peace, stability and justice in Libya.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Prosecutor Bensouda for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Dickson (United Kingdom): I would like to
start by congratulating you, Mr. President, on China’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for November. The United Kingdom wishes you very
good luck for the month.
I would like to thank the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) for briefing the
Council on her sixteenth report on the situation in
Libya. The United Kingdom remains fully supportive of
the ICC’s work in Libya to tackle impunity and ensure
that those responsible for the most serious crimes of
international concern there are held accountable.
The Prosecutor’s latest report highlights once
again the troubling situation in Libya. The United
Kingdom has been clear that the status quo is not a
18-35720

02/11/2018

The situation in Libya

sustainable option. The continued political divisions
in Libya benefit no one except certain armed groups
bent on criminality that have created an environment
of lawlessness, intimidation and fear in which ordinary
Libyans continue to suffer.
The increasing violence in and around Tripoli
since August, and the ongoing sporadic violence that
has continued since the ceasefire on 4 September,
highlight this fact. Those innocent civilians, including
many children, deserve better. There is an urgent need
to break the political deadlock and bring peace to
Libya. To that end, it is vital for all parties to engage
in good faith with the United Nations-led political
process and Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Ghassan Salamé. We must ensure that all those
committing human rights violations and abuses in
Libya, including unlawful killings, do not evade justice.
The United Kingdom has strongly supported
resolutions in the Human Rights Council on increasing
accountability and calling for those committing acts
in Libya amounting to war crimes or other breaches of
international humanitarian law to be investigated and
held accountable. We call on all parties to cooperate
with the International Criminal Court (ICC), including
through the execution of arrest warrants.
The United Kingdom is grateful for the Prosecutor’s
update in the cases of Al-Qadhafi, Al-Werfalli and
Khaled, and notes that the Prosecutor’s Office believes
that Al-Werfalli is no longer under detention by the
Libyan National Army and is currently at large in
Libya. The United Kingdom will continue to work
closely with other Member States, the Office of the
Prosecutor and the Libyan Prosecutor-General’s office
in the investigation of the appalling reports of crimes
against migrants, including those perpetrated by
militia and armed groups in Libya and those involving
international migrants transiting through Libya.
Those crimes allegedly include torture, killing,
sexual violence and even the enslavement of migrants.
We are deeply concerned that the number of migrants in
detention centres has continued to rise, and the United
Kingdom will continue to provide assistance to those
who find themselves in such centres. In response to the
heightened risk of trafficking and sexual and genderbased violence in Libya, we have also provided specific
support to assist in the protection of women and girls.
We acknowledge the importance of the Office of the
Prosecutor integrating a gender perspective into its

S/PV. 8388

work, based on the policy paper on sexual and genderbased crimes.
The United Kingdom is a strong, principled
supporter of the ICC. We will continue to provide
our full support to the prosecutor and her team. It is
crucial that Member States and relevant international
organizations work to assist the Libyan authorities in
their efforts to build the rule of law in Libya. We, along
with our international partners, will continue to work
with Libya to provide it with the support it needs to
meet the challenges it faces.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): As this is the first public
meeting of the Security Council under new leadership,
let me congratulate China on assuming the presidency
of the Council for this month. We look forward to closely
working with you, Mr. President, in the upcoming
weeks and days.
Let me also take the opportunity to express our
deepest appreciation for Ms. Bensouda and her team
for their tireless efforts aimed at fighting impunity
and ensuring accountability. As Ms. Bensouda has just
said, there is a link betwen the work of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and the mission of the Security
Council, which is the maintenance of international
peace and security, as there is no peace without justice.
So I once again thank Ms. Bensouda and assure her of
Poland’s continued support for her work.
I would like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, for
presenting the sixteenth report of the Prosecutor of the
ICC, pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011). The conclusion
of the report reads in part as follows:
“Accountability for crimes under the Rome
Statute and full respect for the rule of law are
integral to sustainable peace, stability and
development in Libya ... The appalling cycle of
violence, criminality and impunity cannot be
allowed to continue for the sake of the Libyan
people and the security and stability of the country
and the region.”
We very much agree with those statements and
are grateful for the commitment of the Office of the
Prosecutor to investigating allegations of serious
criminal activity in Libya and to bringing justice to
the victims of atrocity crimes committed there. Poland
supports the call on all States, including those on the
Council, non-State actors, international organizations

18-357205/17

S/PV.8388

The situation in Libya

and other stakeholders to work together towards
those goals. Such cooperation is vital in the light of
the reported and ongoing violence and violations of
international law, including international humanitarian
law and human rights law, on the ground.
We are deeply disturbed and gravely concerned
by the ongoing serious human rights violations and
abuses. Those include the killing of civilians, including
women and children, the repeated forced eviction and
displacement of hundreds of families, and restriction of
humanitarian access. Furthermore, the abduction and
prolonged detention of persons without trial or other
legal process, as well as crimes, including killings,
sexual violence and the torture of migrants transiting
through Libya, allegedly continue. We reiterate our
call for an end to all atrocities in Libya and for full
respect for international law, including international
humanitarian law and human rights law.
Poland recognizes that a crucial step in combatting
impunity for serious crimes in Libya is the arrest
and surrender to the ICC of the individuals named
in arrest warrants issued by the Court. We note that
Libya remains under an obligation and has the primary
responsibility in that respect. However, Poland also
supports the call of the Office of the Prosecutor on all
States to take all possible steps to execute the warrants
and surrender those named therein to the ICC, where
they will receive a fair, impartial and public hearing
of the allegations against them. We also emphasize the
need for cooperation with the Office on a wide range
of other activities, which include, inter alia, the seizure
of evidence, the interviewing of witnesses and the
freezing of assets.
Poland appreciates such cooperation, including of
the Office of the Prosecutor, with the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya,
the Libyan Prosecutor-General’s office and several
States, organizations and civil society groups. And we
were very pleased to hear from Ms. Bensouda about
her good cooperation with the Libyan ProsecutorGeneral’s office, which it is very commendable and
encouraging. It could, among other things, advance the
investigative efforts, potentially deter further crimes
and contribute to improving the situation in Libya and
beyond. We encourage its further development and call
on all parties to support the political process and work
towards strengthening the rule of law and achieving
peace in Libya.
6/17

02/11/2018

Poland remains committed to cooperating fully with
the Court and the Prosecutor, as requested in paragraph
5 of resolution 1970 (2011), referring the situation in
Libya to the International Criminal Court. We reiterate
the Security Council’s call on all States and concerned
regional and other international organizations to do
the same in order to reinforce the pursuit of justice and
contribute to the maintenance of the international peace
and security because — let me reiterate — there is no
peace without justice. That is why Poland is so pleased
to continue supporting Ms. Bensouda’s Office and was
happy to co-sponsor the Arria Formula meeting on
the link between the work of the ICC and the Security
Council in July.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): Allow me
to congratulate China on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council and to ensure you, Sir, of our
support through the course of this month.
I also want to thank Prosecutor Bensouda for her
briefing on her efforts, pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011), to bring to justice those responsible for atrocity
crimes committed in Libya.
Seven years ago, in the face of the horrific atrocities
being committed by the Muammar Al-Qadhafi
regime, the Security Council unanimously referred the
situation in Libya to the International Criminal Court.
Today, much has changed in Libya, but it is still the
case that Libyans are not free from violence, conflict
or instability. Just last month, one of Libya’s most vital
economic institutions, the National Oil Corporation,
was attacked by terrorists. In the past two months,
over 100 people have been killed in clashes in and
around Tripoli. Hundreds more have been wounded
and thousands displaced — all due to the unacceptable
actions of spoilers to Libya’s political process.
The United States has strongly condemned the recent
violence in Tripoli. The political process cannot proceed
under the threat of violence and the Tripoli ceasefire
must be respected. As we have said many times before
in briefings on the situation in Libya, the human rights
situation in that country is grave and the perpetrators
of violence must face justice. Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi
and Al-Tuhamy Mohamed Khaled, the former head
of the notorious Libyan Internal Security Agency,
must be held to account for their crimes, including the
murder and persecution of hundreds of civilians and the
alleged torture of individuals perceived to have been
enemies of the Al-Qadhafi regime. We also reiterate
18-35720

02/11/2018

The situation in Libya

our calls for the relevant Libyan authorities to ensure
that Major Al-Werfalli is held accountable for alleged
unlawful killings.
We repeat our warning that those who tamper
with security in Tripoli or elsewhere in Libya will be
held accountable for their actions. As I said before the
Council in September (see S/PV.8341), a handful of
political spoilers should not be permitted to thwart the
process of achieving a more secure and stable Libya.
The continuation of that type of fighting puts people
across the country at risk of violence at the hands of
criminals and of terrorists.
The United States remains deeply concerned about
the vulnerability of migrants, refugees and asylum
seekers in Libya, who are preyed upon by human
smugglers and traffickers. Those responsible must
be brought to justice. We encourage the Government
of National Accord to continue efforts to hold such
individuals accountable, including any complicit
Government officials. We also welcome the Council’s
action in June to designate for sanctions six individuals
involved in human trafficking and the smuggling of
migrants in Libya. The United States is pleased to
have implemented concurrent sanctions against those
individuals who threaten the peace, security and
stability of Libya. We further welcome the Council’s
unanimous adoption in October of resolution 2437
(2018), which authorizes Member States to continue
to inspect and seize vessels involved in migrant
trafficking and smuggling off the coast of Libya. The
United States looks forward to continued collaboration
with the Libyan authorities, fellow Security Council
members and other allies to fight the scourge of human
trafficking and smuggling and Libya and around
the world. Let me repeat the words of Ambassador
Haley — there is no place in our world for such abuses
of human rights and human dignity.
In looking over the broad landscape of where
Libya is today, much work remains to be done to create
lasting and stable peace. It is appropriate in today’s
setting to emphasize the crucial role that accountability
plays in achieving that goal. Terrorists, armed groups
and criminal gangs must not be allowed to act with
impunity. Those responsible for egregious abuses and
atrocities must be held accountable, not only to bring
victims a measure of justice, but also to signal to all
future abusers that such crimes will not be tolerated.

S/PV. 8388

The United States is committed to pursuing
justice in Libya. We remain a steadfast partner of the
Government of National Accord, the Security Council
and our international partners in working toward that
goal and towards a more peaceful and prosperous Libya.
In closing, I reiterate the concerns of the United
States with regard to the activity of the Court with
respect to the situations in Afghanistan and the
West Bank and Gaza, including our objection to any
investigations or other activity of the Court concerning
United States or Israeli personnel.
Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): Mr. President,
you can count on France’s support for your presidency
this month.
I thank Prosecutor Bensouda and her teams for
their report and today’s briefing. As this year marks
the twentieth anniversary of the Rome Statute, France
wishes to reaffirm its complete and full support for the
International Criminal Court, as President Emmanuel
Macron strongly reiterated during the general debate
of the General Assembly (see A/73/PV.6). The Court
must be able to act and exercise its prerogatives without
hindrance, in an independent and impartial manner,
within the framework the Rome Statute. In that regard,
France reaffirms its support for the Prosecutor in the
implementation of resolution 1970 (2011), which refers
the situation in Libya to the International Criminal
Court. That was our conviction then and it remains so
today. Any lasting peace in Libya requires justice to be
rendered to all the victims. The Court plays a crucial
role in that regard.
Today, Libya is in a fragile and volatile situation,
as demonstrated by the clashes between militias in
Tripoli in late August and the attack on the oil crescent
in June. Economic predation is jeopardizing the
political process and the country’s emergence from the
crisis. The humanitarian situation is also worrying, in
particular the situation of internally displaced persons,
migrants and refugees.
In political terms, Libyans need prospects. The
Libyan people want elections. The enthusiasm for
voter registration and the initial successes of municipal
elections have been unmistakable in that regard. In
that context, our action must continue along two lines.
The first, which must remain our priority, is the fight
against all those who endanger the fragile political
balances and exploit the situation to divert Libya’s
economic resources; and the second is full support for

18-357207/17

S/PV.8388

The situation in Libya

the efforts of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL) and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Libya, Mr. Ghassan Salamé, to
advance the democratic transition in Libya. We commend
the personal efforts of the Secretary-General and the
valuable contribution of his Special Representative.
An agreement on the way forward was reached on
29 May in Paris by the key Libyan players. Compliance
with the commitments made therein is essential to moving
beyond the status quo, which only prolongs instability.
The Palermo conference organized in Italy should
make it possible to follow up on those commitments
in the presence of Libyan stakeholders. It is essential
that we support all such efforts and demonstrate real
unity to encourage Libyans to maintain the course set
by Special Representative Ghassan Salamé. We must
impose sanctions against those who carry out attacks
against Tripoli, as the Special Representative has asked
us to do. Beyond those general observations, we would
like to make three more specific remarks.
First, the ongoing investigations of the Office of the
Prosecutor require the complete and full cooperation
of all stakeholders. Cooperation with the Court by
the Libyan authorities is essential in that regard. It is
crucial to consolidate the collaboration of all the States
concerned, whether or not they are parties to the Rome
Statute, in order to provide the long-term support that
the Prosecutor needs. As the Prosecutor mentions in her
report, that cooperation can take place through various
means, such as the seizure of evidence, the freezing of
certain assets and, of course, the arrest and surrender of
fugitives. I would also like to express my delegation’s
appreciation for the support and cooperation provided
by UNSMIL and the Libyan Prosecutor General to the
Office of the Prosecutor.
Secondly, with regard to the elements of the report
relating to ongoing investigations, France deplores the
failure to date to execute the arrest warrants issued by
the Court. It is important that those arrest warrants be
executed. Let me reiterate the importance of ensuring
that all the most serious crimes committed in Libya
since 2011 and those that continue to be committed
today, including crimes committed by Da’esh, can be
investigated and prosecuted.
Thirdly, and this will be my final point, we welcome
the attention paid by the Prosecutor with regard to the
trafficking of human beings and the smuggling of
migrants, which constitute a direct threat to peace and
8/17

02/11/2018

stability in Libya. We welcome the rigorous approach
adopted by the Office of the Prosecutor. We hope that
it will make it possible to effectively combat impunity
for crimes committed against migrants. The Security
Council has repeatedly reiterated the importance of
prosecuting and trying the perpetrators of such acts.
The Council must also assume its responsibility by
imposing, under the existing United Nations regime,
individual sanctions against those responsible for the
trafficking of human beings and the smuggling of
migrants. France will continue to actively engage with
its partners in that direction.
To conclude, the situation in Libya once again
highlights a vicious circle of impunity and instability.
That reality requires us to provide answers to the
challenges facing the Libyan people and authorities.
Those challenges must be addressed through efficient
cooperation with the Court and with the support of the
Security Council.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): First of
all, my delegation would like to congratulate China on
its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of November and assure it of our full
support in carrying out its duties. We also congratulate
Bolivia on the high quality of its presidency last month.
My country thanks the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her
very informative briefing on the Court’s work on cases
related to the situation in Libya. As a State party to the
Rome Statute, Côte d’Ivoire reaffirms its full support
for the efforts of the International Criminal Court to
promote international justice and combat impunity in
Libya, as well as around the world.
Мy delegation is concerned about the deteriorating
security situation in Libya, after more than seven years
of crisis. Since 26 August, those living in Tripoli have
been the innocent victims of fighting that has resumed
between militias and armed groups. The ceasefire
reached on 4 September is a glimmer of hope that
must be preserved. To that end, Côte d’Ivoire urges
the international community to work to consolidate
the current truce and create the conditions to avoid a
resumption of clashes among armed factions.
Despite an unstable security situation, Côte d’Ivoire
welcomes the actions of the Libyan Government of
National Accord, which is resolute in its commitment
to the process leading to the organization of free,
transparent and credible elections. Those elections
18-35720

02/11/2018

The situation in Libya

will undoubtedly be an important step in building
the rule of law, as well as restoring peace and lasting
stability in Libya. I would like to commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya,
Mr. Ghassan Salamé, for his efforts and reassure him
of our full support.
Côte d’Ivoire remains firmly committed to respect
for human rights and the principle of accountability. We
firmly believes that the fight against impunity is a basic
requirement of the national reconciliation process. In
that regard, my delegation reiterates its appreciation
for the efforts of the Office of the Prosecutor to
meet the demand for justice, without which there can
be no lasting peace and stability in Libya. We also
strongly encourage the Prosecutor and her Office and
commend the high-quality work of the International
Criminal Court over the past 20 years in the area of
combating impunity.
My country also welcomes the Prosecutor’s decision
to consider the possibility of extending the ICC’s
jurisdiction to crimes committed against migrants.
That decision is justified in the light of known cases of
torture, rape and the sale of migrants, which challenge
our collective conscience. To that end, Côte d’Ivoire
urges the Libyan authorities to engage in constructive
cooperation with the Office of the Prosecutor in order
to shed light on allegations of serious human rights
violations in Libya. We urge them to allow those
accused of serious crimes to be tried by the ICC.
Notwithstanding the efforts of the Government
of National Accord to restore its authority throughout
Libya, its unstable security situation and weak
institutional capacity have a negative impact on the
establishment of institutions that guarantee the rule of
law and compliance with obligations under the Rome
Statute. The difficulties encountered by the Prosecutor
in executing various arrest warrants are symptomatic of
the complexity of the political and security environment
in Libya.
My country therefore calls on the international
community to continue its multifaceted support
for the Government of Libya to enable it to fulfil its
commitments to promote and protect human rights
and establish accountability mechanisms against
individuals or armed groups convicted of serious
human rights violations.
In conclusion, my country reiterates its support for
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court and

S/PV. 8388

calls on the international community to support the
efforts of the Government of National Accord to restore
peace and stability in Libya.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on China’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and reiterate our delegation’s support and cooperation
in ensuring success in your important functions. I also
take this opportunity to thank the delegation of Bolivia
and Ambassador Llorentty Solíz and his team for the
considerable results obtained last month. We welcome
today’s meeting and the important briefing made by
Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda. We would also like to
assure her of our full support for the challenging work
her team conducts in Libya.
Peru is deeply concerned about the grave situation,
violence and human rights violations in Libya, despite
the United Nations-sponsored ceasefire. We lament the
precarious situation of tens of thousands of internally
displaced persons and demand that the numerous
allegations of atrocity crimes be investigated. We
believe that it is of paramount importance that
the Council, which is responsible for maintaining
international peace and security, continue to refer to the
International Criminal Court situations in which access
to justice and accountability must be guaranteed. It is
clear that the Court’s work is complex and requires the
full cooperation of all States, including local authorities.
Therefore, in addition to recognizing the efforts of the
Libyan Prosecutor-General’s Office, we must remind
Libyan authorities of their legal obligation to execute
arrest warrants issued by the Court.
We also believe that, while the work of the
International Criminal Court is crucial to preventing
the most serious crimes from going unpunished, its
jurisdiction complements each State’s responsibility
to protect its population. That includes the obligation
to investigate, prosecute and punish those responsible
for atrocities. In that sense, in addition to it being an
obligation, authorities cooperating with the Court must
be understood as an opportunity to strengthen justice
and the rule of law in domestic and international spheres.
That means promoting greater trust in jurisdictional
institutions and effective deterrence.
That is particularly relevant for a country such as
Libya affected by conflict and terrorism perpetrated
by entities such as Da’esh and its affiliates, including
Boko Haram, which control areas of Libyan territory

18-357209/17

S/PV.8388

The situation in Libya

and might be involved in the trafficking of migrants.
We therefore encourage the Office of the Prosecutor
to assess such situations and their possible links with
ongoing proceedings. In that connection, we also
believe that it is necessary to make further progress in
the implementation of the action plan for the resumption
of an inclusive Libyan-owned political process under
the facilitation and leadership of the United Nations.
We would therefore like to highlight the work of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and that of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL). Right now, that means ending the
violence, which has recently escalated in Tripoli and
must be denounced and countered, and working on
concrete measures to effectively protect the population,
in particular civilians, and address terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations. We believe that that should
be the focus of dialogue among the main leaders and
political factions, as has been the case with the good
offices of UNSMIL throughout the process. Good
faith and the spirit of understanding and respect for
international law and international humanitarian law
must prevail among the parties.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): As this is the first open
meeting of the Security Council under your leadership,
Sir, I wholeheartedly wish the Chinese presidency
every success in its endeavours this month, as it holds
this important international position, and assure you of
our full support.
We would like to thank the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for
her important briefing. We take note of the Prosecutor’s
sixteenth report and update on the activities regarding
the situation in Libya, which, unfortunately, are not
very encouraging.
Ongoing political instability, a fragile security
situation and a breakdown in the rule of law continue
to create a breeding ground for growing impunity
on the part of armed militias and terrorist groups. In
that regard, we would like to appeal to all States to
recognize that terrorism poses a threat to the peace
and security of that country and other countries and
also has a negative impact on sustainable development
and the humanitarian sphere. Nonetheless, widespread
violations of human rights continue to be committed
against civilians and vulnerable populations. Thousands
of migrants and refugees in Libya are suffering abuses
and detention under inhuman conditions.
10/17

02/11/2018

Kazakhstan reiterates its position that an effective
and credible Government is crucial to reinforcing
Libya’s commitment to restoring and promoting
the rule of law, as well as its capacity in that regard,
addressing impunity, protecting basic human rights and
providing justice for past violations. To that end, the
international community’s support to Libya remains
vital to restoring stability and security throughout
the country. Such stability and security require the
unification and rebuilding of all national institutions,
including political authorities and the security and
defence forces. The United Nations has a key role to play
in that process, and we reiterate our support to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Salamé.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We
congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month and
we wish you every success in carrying out the Council’s
work. We also thank our colleague the Permanent
Representative of Bolivia and the Bolivian delegation
for wisely conducting the work of the Council last
month. I want as well to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for her valuable briefing on the sixteenth report of the
ICC submitted to the Security Council in accordance
with resolution 1970 (2011).
Once again, the State of Kuwait welcomes the efforts
of the ICC to administer justice and combat impunity in
line with international law. We commend the progress
achieved by the Prosecutor’s Office, in spite of the
tremendous challenges it is facing in shouldering its
responsibility, namely, pursuing and bringing to justice
the perpetrators of crimes and violations, especially in
the light of the current sensitive and difficult security
situation in Libya, including the proliferation of arms
and armed militias and the increasing presence of
terrorist groups.
We share Ms. Bensouda’s concern about the recent
escalation of armed clashes in the Libyan capital Tripoli,
which have claimed the lives of many victims. In that
regard, we cannot but to commend the significant
role of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) represented by Mr. Ghassan Salamé, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
UNSMIL, in reaching a ceasefire agreement. That had
a tangible impact on preventing a further deterioration
of the security situation.
18-35720

02/11/2018

The situation in Libya

We also express our concern about the reported
serious violations against migrants and detention
centres, including killing and torture. That is a blatant
violation of international humanitarian law. Once again,
we condemn those practices in the strongest terms.
There is no doubt that Libyan authorities have
the primary responsibility for administering justice
throughout Libyan territories by exercising their
jurisdiction and sovereignty. According to article
1 of the Rome Statute, the ICC is complementary to
national criminal jurisdictions in cases being addressed
in Libyan courts. The ICC will complement the Libyan
national criminal jurisdiction.
The State of Kuwait is aware that Libya is facing
tremendous security challenges that affect the ability of
court experts to conduct the necessary investigations.
However, we commend the significant cooperation by
Libyan authorities with the ICC and the Prosecutor in
line with resolution 2174 (2014).
We welcome the cooperation by a great number
of States and international, regional and civil society
organizations, as well as the support provided by
UNSMIL to the Prosecutor’s Office. That will
improve the effectiveness of the Office in carrying out
investigations, and thereby help it fulfil its mandate.
We call upon the international community to
continue supporting the Libyan Government in its
efforts to establish a comprehensive strategy to
combat crimes and flagrant violations of international
humanitarian law. The international community must
provide it with the necessary help so that the Libyan
Government can administer justice and promote the rule
of law, and thereby contribute to the implementation of
the relevant Security Council resolutions.
In conclusion, we reiterate our appreciation for the
important work of Prosecutor Bensouda and her team
in implementing her mandate, namely, investigating
serious crimes committed in Libya.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): I would like to join the rest of my
colleagues in congratulating you, Mr. President, and
your delegation on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council. I wish you every success
and reiterate the full support of my entire delegation
to ensure to that end. I would also like to thank all
members of the Security Council for their cooperation
last month. We thank the Prosecutor of the International

S/PV. 8388

Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her report,
and we express to her and to her entire team our firm
support in their important work.
At the end of its first 15 years of existence and
20 years after the signing of the Rome Statute, the
International Criminal Court has demonstrated its
capacity to resolve complex cases in sensitive scenarios.
Therefore, without prejudice to our observations
on the progress in the cases that we are considering
today, we express our appreciation for the work that
the International Criminal Court has been carrying
out since 2011 in compliance with the referral made
through resolution 1970 (2011).
In that regard, so that the Court is able to fulfil
its mandate and avoid impunity, it is crucial that the
competent authorities in Libya, the countries of the
region, regional organizations and the international
community in general make every effort to cooperate.
We reiterate that all States, regardless of whether or
not they are party to the Rome Statute, are primarily
responsible for taking action and helping to facilitate
the work of the Court.
We take due note of the report presented and
of the activities conducted by the Office of the
Prosecutor during the reporting period. We express our
grave concern about the incidents and irregularities
surrounding the case of Mr. Al-Werfalli, who is
now the subject of two arrest warrants issued by the
International Criminal Court, on 15 August 2017 and
4 July 2018, respectively, on charges related to the
summary execution of at least 43 people in the city
of Benghazi. We note that, according to reports of the
Libyan National Army, Mr. Al-Werfalli is said to have
been arrested and subjected to an investigation by a
military prosecutor. However, the Prosecutor’s report
states that Mr. Al-Werfalli is alleged to be at large and
serving as a member of the Libyan National Army.
Furthermore, we note with great concern that,
although arrest warrants remain in force, they have not
been fulfilled. In that regard, we reiterate the urgent
need for all pending arrest warrants to be executed so
that the Court is able to comply with its mandate and
carry out its work effectively. It is precisely in these
scenarios that the idea of universal criminal justice
becomes relevant and the need to ensure the universality
of the Rome Statute becomes apparent.
Moreover, the intensification of violence, extrajudicial
executions, killings, kidnappings, arbitrary detentions

18-3572011/17

S/PV.8388

The situation in Libya

and armed clashes described in the Prosecutor’s report
bear witness to the sensitive situation that the Libyan
people continue to experience. That is even more so
given that, since the beginning of the year, there have
been more than 400 deaths from crossfire, bombing and
the detonation of improvised explosive devices, which
have also led to the displacement of approximately 3,600
people from the areas in which clashes have intensified.
We are also deeply concerned about repeated reports
of violations of the rights of migrants who are subject
to rape, torture, degrading and humiliating treatment,
denial of medical assistance and arbitrary detention.
As has been rightly noted, that is a complex situation
that requires a multidimensional strategic approach to
cooperating with the Libyan State.
We are certain that the investigations regarding those
violations carried out by the Office of the Prosecutor
in the context of the principle of complementarity
will not only help to identify the perpetrators but, if
they constitute crimes against humanity, activate the
Court’s jurisdiction for their trial. In order to achieve
that goal, my delegation highlights and praises the
collaboration and constant assistance that the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya provides to the
Office of the Prosecutor. We take this opportunity to
encourage them to continue cooperating so effectively.
In addition to receiving periodic reports on the
cases I mentioned, financial contingencies must also be
guaranteed to ensure their continuity and effectiveness.
The Organization and the membership in general should
appreciate the costs incurred by the International
Criminal Court to sustain the investigations and
trials within its jurisdiction, especially when we
notice that several States — including members of
the Council — are still not party to the Statute and do
not contribute to the investigations. To that end, we
recommend that the Office of the Prosecutor include in
its next semi-annual report a list of the costs borne by
the International Criminal Court — and its Office in
particular — to conduct its activities in Libya.
The International Criminal Court is a global
undertaking of interest to all States. Its mission is
intrinsic to the strengthening of international criminal
justice, peace and security, respect for human rights
and guarantees of due process. In that understanding,
as we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the Rome
Statute this year, we take the opportunity to reflect on
the effectiveness of the Court and whether the model
conceived covers our expectations with regard to
12/17

02/11/2018

cooperation and universality. That aim is to reinforce
and improve the capacities and organization of the Court
in order to strengthen accountability and international
justice at a time when the responsibility of all States to
comply with their obligations under international law
specifically, as well as international humanitarian law,
are being called into question.
Finally, my delegation reiterates its concern about
the public complaints regarding the actions of former
authorities of the Office of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court that are specifically related
to the investigations under way in Libya. With that in
mind, and in view of the integrity and transparency that
are paramount for international tribunals, we consider
it appropriate for the Office of the Prosecutor to give
a public accounting of the scope and veracity of those
statements in its next report, given that the integrity of
the Court is essential to guarantee its credibility and
effectiveness before the international community.
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): Let me join
others in congratulating you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency and, of course, assure
you of Sweden’s full support during this month. I also
take this opportunity to thank Bolivia for a successful
presidency last month. We thank the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) for being with us
again and for her informative briefing to the Security
Council today.
The International Criminal Court plays an
indispensable role in the pursuit of international justice
and accountability. At a time when the Court, as well
as the rules-based international order itself, are under
increased pressure, renewed support for the ICC is
crucial. We must all respect the integrity of the ICC;
not doing so undermines our commitment to ending
impunity for atrocity crimes. It is also worth recalling
that the ICC is a Court of last resort under the principle of
complementarity: it acts only when national judiciaries
are unable or unwilling to investigate and prosecute
serious international crimes. Therefore, the Council
must take timely and effective measures to enable the
Court to carry out its mandate. That is particularly true
for the situation in Libya, where suspects remain at
large despite arrest warrants issued against them.
We are gravely concerned about the recent reports
of escalating violence and civilian casualties around
Tripoli and Derna. The forced eviction of the Tawergha
population and the abductions of military, civil society,
18-35720

02/11/2018

The situation in Libya

political and foreign targets are deeply worrisome
as well. In addition, the treatment of international
migrants in transit, including reports of killings, sexual
violence and torture committed in detention centres,
is particularly concerning. Violations of international
humanitarian law and violations and abuses of human
rights must be investigated and those responsible
brought to justice.
We reiterate yet again our strong support for the
Office of the Prosecutor and commend its steadfast
commitment to bringing justice to victims of serious
international crimes in Libya. Despite the continued
volatility of the security situation on the ground,
the Office of the Prosecutor has continued to pursue
its important task with great determination. We are
pleased to see the inclusion of the gender perspective
in the report, in line with the Office’s June 2014 policy
paper on sexual and gender-based crimes.
We also greatly appreciate the support that the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ghassan
Salamé and the Libyan Prosecutor-General’s Office
have provided. The efforts of international and regional
organizations, including civil society, are also very
important. We are grateful for their unwavering
commitment to serve and support the justice sector in
Libya, despite the harsh circumstances.
We regret that seven years have passed since the
arrest warrant against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi was
issued, and yet he remains at large. We also regret that
the arrest warrants against Al-Werfalli and Al-Tuhamy
likewise remain outstanding since our previous
briefing on this matter in May (see S/PV.8250). The
reports of executions carried out by Al-Werfalli on
multiple occasions, possibly amounting to war crimes,
are deeply disturbing.
We support the Prosecutor’s call on Libya to
cooperate with the Office of the Prosecutor and
immediately arrest and surrender all the suspects to
the Court. We stress that cooperation with the Libyan
Prosecutor-General’s Office, Libyan authorities, State
parties, other United Nations States Members and other
relevant entities is crucial to assist the Office of the
Prosecutor in fulfilling its mandate.
The ICC referral is an essential part of the Council’s
broader measures in relation to Libya, including
sanctions. The Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya,

S/PV. 8388

and its Chair are currently on a mission to Libya and
we will receive this mission’s input to the Council
next week. It is important that the Council address
the situation comprehensively. Accountability and
strengthening the rule of law, in which the ICC plays
an important role, is an essential component of the
Council’s broader efforts towards peace and stability in
Libya. Cooperation with the ICC therefore deserves the
Council’s full support.
Finally, I would also like to take this opportunity
to reiterate Sweden’s sincere appreciation to the Court
and its officials in all organs. Their work continues to
make a significant contribution to accountability for
perpetrators and justice for victims of serious crimes of
international concern. We also extend our gratitude to
the Kingdom of the Netherlands in its capacity as host
nation of the Court.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): Allow
me to start by thanking Bolivia for its stewardship of
the Security Council during the month of October. I
wish you, Mr. President, and your team all the best for
the month of November; you can count on the support
of the entire Dutch delegation.
On behalf of the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
I would like to express my sincere thanks to the
Prosecutor, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her sixteenth
report and comprehensive briefing on the situation in
Libya. The Kingdom of the Netherlands remains a firm
supporter of the International Criminal Court (ICC).
Please allow me to focus on three important aspects:
the Rome Statute system, international cooperation
and accountability.
As noted by others, this year marks the twentieth
anniversary of the Rome Statute. Not only did we
establish the first permanent International Criminal
Court 20 years ago, we introduced the Rome Statute
system. States parties have taken on the responsibility
to end impunity and prosecute international crimes at
the national level. Only when States were unable, or
unwilling, would the ICC come into play.
The Council acted unanimously in 2011 in
referring the situation in Libya to the ICC so as to
ensure accountability for the most serious crimes. We
commend Prosecutor Bensouda for her unwavering
commitment to bringing justice to the victims of
atrocities in Libya since 2011.

18-3572013/17

S/PV.8388

The situation in Libya

Even today, the volatile security and human rights
situation in Libya is extremely worrisome. Civilians
continue to bear the brunt of the fighting and the ongoing
conflict. The situation of internally displaced persons
and migrants is a particular cause for concern. The
Prosecutor is often the only hope that the victims have
for ensuring accountability for the crimes committed.
But she cannot do it alone.
That brings me to my second point, which is on
international cooperation. The full cooperation and
assistance of the Council’s member States is essential
for the Office of the Prosecutor to fulfil its mandate.
We welcome the successful cooperation between the
Libyan Prosecutor-General’s Office and the Office of
the Prosecutor, and we urge all States, including the
Libyan authorities, to cooperate with the Court and
to arrest and surrender all those against whom an
arrest warrant has been issued. We also encourage the
Libyan authorities to ensure that the domestic case
against Abdullah Al-Senussi continues without undue
delay. In that regard, we applaud the statement of the
representative of Libya on Monday in the General
Assembly (see A/73/PV.27) in which he said that Libya
is committed to the fight against impunity.

02/11/2018

remains at large constitutes complete disregard of the
Council and the international community as a whole.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands stands firmly by
Prosecutor Bensouda in her fight, and ours, against
impunity. But only if we are all fully committed to that
goal can we make accountability a reality in Libya and
around the world.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): Let me join others in congratulating you,
Mr. President, on the assumption of the presidency
of the Council by the People’s Republic of China.
We wish you every success and pledge you our full
support. My delegation would like to once again thank
and commend Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), for her courageous
work and for her sixteenth report, which she has just
done an excellent job of presenting to us today.

However, because of the security situation, justice
at the national level is often delayed. Until the Libyan
authorities can prosecute all international crimes at
the national level, the ICC must ensure accountability
for the international crimes committed in Libya. That
was the mandate that the Council entrusted to the ICC
many years ago, and that the Council must help the ICC
to achieve. I hear criticisms that the investigation is
not advancing quickly enough. But when the Council
makes referrals, we should continue to work together to
follow up on their implementation and should help the
ICC to achieve its goals.

Focusing on the issue before us, we must recognize
that it is not easy to tackle issues as complex as those
we are dealing with today, especially given the current
situation in Libya, a country that is going through
terrible times on the political, economic and social
fronts and where, as everyone knows, the security
situation continues to be highly volatile, owing to the
prominence and influence of the dozens of militias and
armed groups that in practice are in control of much
of the country. We consider that to be one of the main
obstacles to carrying out an investigation aimed at
clarifying specific facts in any field, as is currently
the case with the Office of the Prosecutor. That
demonstrates the gravity of the current situation and the
existing limitations, both those that I have mentioned
and for the Libyan Government, which we encourage
to continue collaborating to the extent possible with the
Office of the Prosecutor, despite those limitations.

With regard to my third point, which is about
accountability, we welcome the ICC’s efforts to
investigate whether crimes against migrants fall within
its jurisdiction, and we are keen to see progress in that
area. We deeply regret that Mr. Al-Werfalli and other
suspects have not been arrested and brought to The
Hague, especially considering the recent murders that
Mr. Al-Werfalli has allegedly committed, showing that
a lack of accountability encourages the repetition of
crimes. Without fear of punishment, perpetrators will
feel free to commit further offences. We find it even
more alarming that Mr. Al-Werfalli was reportedly
released after just one day in custody. The fact that he

While taking all of this into consideration,
we believe that the problem is bigger than that.
The prevailing impunity and the large number of
grave violations of international law and of serious
multidimensional crimes, as Prosecutor Bensouda
just informed us — such as murder, sexual violence,
human trafficking, torture of immigrants and extortion
of every kind — continue to be a source of concern.
That is why it may be necessary to try a new strategy
and focus efforts on determining how to reduce the
presence and influence of armed groups and militias
in this process within an appropriate legal framework,
including measures to support and cooperate with the

14/17

18-35720

02/11/2018

The situation in Libya

S/PV. 8388

Libyan Government in the prosecution of the most
serious crimes and to ensure the most effective and
robust accountability possible, without forgetting that
those measures must be impartial and applied equally,
regardless of who commits the crime.

that it is improving. The country is divided into spheres
of influence. The international community should
focus its efforts on uniting it. Unfortunately, various
external actors continue to place their own interests in
Libya above the goal of a political settlement.

To that end, it is essential to maintain strict,
objective and transparent cooperation between States
and international organizations, the International
Criminal Court and the Council, with a view to seeking
real solutions that will help put an end to this type of
situation, while putting aside any unilateral interests or
actions. All of that must be done within a framework
of respect for Libya’s sovereignty and integrity, as
well as for its laws, internal rules and customs, which
in turn must ensure justice within a framework of
respect for human rights and international law. In
that context, based on our assessment and Prosecutor
Bensouda’s report, it is clear that the country’s judicial
institutions feel unable to detain and prosecute Mr. Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, Mr. Abdullah Al-Senussi and
Mr. Mahmoud Mustafa Busayf Al-Werfalli, among
others. The International Criminal Court must
therefore work closely with the Libyan Government in
order to facilitate the Prosecutor’s work. It must also
continue to make efforts to establish mechanisms that
will restore peace and stability in Libya. In that regard,
we welcome the recent extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya.

We take note of the sixteenth report of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
on the investigation of the Libya dossier, although
unfortunately we have seen no information in it about
the investigation itself — that is, about the progress of
the investigation. We have repeatedly brought up the
ICC’s selective approach to this issue, and the report is
yet another confirmation of that. For example, the report
mentions the recent escalation of violence in Tripoli,
in which civilians died, yet it simply records the fact
that it happened. Not a single armed group is named as
responsible for this dangerous outbreak of hostilities.
For some reason the Prosecutor was not interested
in investigating the incident in which terrorists blew
up two cars near a crowded mosque either. And each
successive report dwells on the reports of the activity
of the Libyan National Army in Derna.

In conclusion, Equatorial Guinea believes that in
the light of the difficulties the Prosecutor’s Office faces
in carrying out its investigations, all that we can do is
fully support its efforts, its wide range of activities
and its requests for effective cooperation. That is why
we ask the Council to take its recommendations into
account and to take action accordingly.
Once again, I wish Prosecutor Bensouda every
success in the mission entrusted to her and courage in
her complex and dedicated work in the context of the
tangled conflict in which Libya is mired.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your presidency for this month and assure you that
you will always have the Russian Federation’s full
support and assistance. I would also like to congratulate
Bolivia on its successful conclusion of the presidency
of the Council for the month of October.
I would first like to say a few words about the
situation in Libya in general. Sadly, there are no signs

Of course, the interest in aspects of the migration
issue in the context of the situation in Libya is
understandable. But there is something one-sided about
the ICC’s view of these problems. We would like to
point out that it is criminal organizations, firmly based
in migrants’ countries of destination and chiefly in
Europe, that are getting rich off the illegal business of
transporting those migrants, while that key aspect is
missing from the Prosecutor’s report for some reason.
In paragraph 25 of the report, which we read
carefully, we did note one sensible assessment,
which is that the Council’s referral of the situation
in Libya to the ICC may not prove successful. In that
connection — and we spoke about this at the previous
meeting (see S/PV.8250) — our delegation is fully
resolved to provide members with every assistance
in ensuring that the Council does not repeat this
unfortunate experiment. In principle, therefore, given
the Court’s noticeably shaky reputation in the eyes of
many States Members of the United Nations, attested to
by the debate in the General Assembly on 29 October
(see A/73/PV.27) — and as my colleague from the
Netherlands correctly remarked when she said that the
investigations “are not quick enough”, we believe that
we can and should consider changing the frequency of
the ICC’s briefings to the Council.

18-3572015/17

S/PV.8388

The situation in Libya

Mr. Abebe (Ethiopia): Let me join other
delegations in congratulating you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this month, and assuring you of our full support. We
also express our profound appreciation to the delegation
of Bolivia for its able leadership of the work of the
Council in October. We thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, for her
report and briefing to the Security Council pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011).
We remain extremely concerned about the grave
violations of human rights committed by all parties to the
conflict in Libya. The continued violence perpetrated
by armed groups and terrorists is seriously threatening
the country’s stability and security. Abductions, torture,
displacement, the killing and injuring of civilians,
arbitrary detention and human trafficking continue
unabated. Criminality is increasing and the level of
lawlessness engulfing the country is deeply troubling.
As pointed out in the statement issued yesterday by
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, the use
of force and intimidation against private and public
institutions is also alarming.
Unfortunately, it is the Libyan people, particularly
their most vulnerable groups, such as women, children,
migrants and refugees, who are suffering enormously
in the ongoing crisis. The current dangerous and
uncertain situation must be addressed as a matter of
urgency. That is why we fully concur with the view of
Mr. Ghassan Salamé, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Libya, who has underscored on
a number of occasions, including in his most recent
briefing of the Council (see S/PV.8341), that the status
quo in Libya is untenable.
We condemn all attacks on civilians and civilian
infrastructure, including the recent attacks in southern
and central Libya. All who continue to commit such
violations must be held accountable. It is vital to fight
the widespread sense of impunity in Libya through
the appropriate legal mechanisms, while respecting
the country’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
We strongly believe that ensuring the protection of
civilians and civilian infrastructure should be the
primary responsibility of all the parties in Libya. In that
regard, the international community should continue
to support building and enhancing the capacity of
Libyan State institutions, particularly its judiciary and
law-enforcement bodies, in order to ensure the rule of
law. The international community should also provide
16/17

02/11/2018

support anchored in a long-term and coordinated
strategy for building State institutions, in order to
foster an environment of security and stability.
The continued and widespread violations of human
rights cannot be sustainably halted until all Libyan
political actors find a lasting political solution to the
protracted crisis. Unifying State institutions also
remains extremely critical. In that regard, all Libyan
actors must be urged to work constructively towards
concrete progress in addressing the impediments to the
full implementation of the United Nations action plan.
In conclusion, I want to reiterate our position that
only a Libyan-led and -owned comprehensive political
dialogue, facilitated by the United Nations, can bring
about a credible and successful transition in Libya.
We continue to support the diplomatic endeavours of
Special Representative Salamé to implement the United
Nations action plan. In that regard, all Libyan actors
should engage constructively with him. The Council
should also continue to support his efforts.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
First of all, I thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda for her
briefing today.
China is very concerned about the evolving situation
in Libya. We support all efforts that are conducive
to stabilizing the situation in Libya, promoting a
political settlement of the Libyan issue and combating
terrorism. We support the United Nations in continuing
to implement the related action plan by intensifying its
mediation efforts. China firmly supports the Libyan
people in safeguarding their national unity and State
integrity. We hope that all the parties in Libya will
adhere to a process for a political settlement that is
led and owned by the Libyans themselves, and work
to settle their differences through inclusive dialogue
and negotiations, building mutual trust, finding a
solution that accommodates the interests of all parties,
pushing for national reconciliation and restoring State
governance, with a view to achieving peace, stability
and development in Libya as soon as possible. The
international community should respect Libya’s
independence, unity, sovereignty and territorial
integrity, and should continue its support and assistance
to Libya.
18-35720

02/11/2018

The situation in Libya

China’s position on the International Criminal
Court remains unchanged.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Fares (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): First
and foremost, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of November. I am
also pleased to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court, for her briefing.
We are here today to focus on a single objective,
which is combating impunity. The Rome Statute
established a regime between our national and
international legal systems designed to prosecute
the perpetrators of the most serious crimes — war
crimes and crimes against humanity. In that spirit, the
principle of complementarity was established between
the International Criminal Court and national legal
systems, meaning that at this stage, although Libya is
not party to the Rome Statute, the Court complements
our national criminal judiciary in order to ensure
justice. At the same time, we also underscore the
principle of Libya’s State sovereignty with regard to
the application of its local laws for crimes committed
within its territory.
We are fully aware that there is some delay in the
pursuit and prosecution of suspects. However, we want
to emphasize that the delay is not the result of any
unwillingness on the part of the national judiciary to
prosecute and punish the perpetrators of the crimes in

S/PV. 8388

question, but is rather due to the security conditions that
Libya is dealing with and that all countries that have
experienced conflict are familiar with. Our national
judiciary has actually prosecuted many of the accused,
and the various verdicts have led to the conviction and
punishment of some and the acquittal of others.
In that regard, we want to stress that in order for
our national judiciary to meet its obligations with
regard to achieving justice and promoting the rule of
law, we need the international community’s serious
support in helping the Libyan authorities to end our
country’s current security crisis, in conjunction with
the efforts being made to unify our institutions and
ultimately enable the political process to succeed. That
can be done, first, by providing the national institutions
responsible for applying the law with the support they
need so that they can play their full role in strengthening
security and stability; secondly, by eradicating the
various factors and conditions that result in crimes
and violations; thirdly, by confiscating the tools that
are used to commit those crimes, especially weapons;
and fourthly, by eliminating terrorist and all other
outlaw groups.
In conclusion, we reaffirm that the Libyan
authorities are committed and eager to punish the
perpetrators of crimes and combat impunity, while
applying legal rules that reflect the rule of law. The
Libyan judiciary is independent, impartial and capable
of carrying out criminal and social justice in order to
ensure the rights of victims and end impunity.
The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.

18-3572017/17
