United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

A/72/768*–S/2018/165*
Distr.: General
27 February 2018
Original: English

General Assembly
Seventy-second session
Agenda item 39
The situation in Afghanistan

Security Council
Seventy-third year

The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 68/11
and Security Council resolution 2344 (2017), in which the Secretary-General was
requested to report every three months on developments in Afghanistan.
2.
The report provides an update on the activities of the United Nations in
Afghanistan, including political, humanitarian, development and human rights
efforts, since the issuance of the previous report, on 15 December 2017 (A/72/651S/2017/1056). The annex to the present report contains an assessment of progress
made towards the achievement of benchmarks and indicators since the issuance of the
report of 3 March 2017 (A/71/826-S/2017/189), in accordance with Security Council
resolution 1868 (2009).

II. Relevant developments
3.
The National Unity Government came under pressure owing to an extended
impasse between the Presidential Palace and the Jamiat-e-Islami political party over
the removal of a governor. The prolonged dispute dominated the political stage and
threatened to undermine national unity. Negotiations between the two parties revived
debate about the electoral system, as Jamiat-e Islami, joined by other political parties,
sought to introduce changes prior to the next elections. Nevertheless, preparations for
holding the 2018 parliamentary and district council elections under the current system
continued, bolstered by the selection by the Independent Election Commission of a
new administrative board. The executive and legislative branches developed a more
constructive working relationship, as the National Assembly, the parliament of
Afghanistan, passed the national budget for 2018 and approved 11 of 12 nominees for
* Reissued for technical reasons on 6 March 2018.

18-02724* (E)

060318

*1802724*

A/72/768
S/2018/165

ministerial positions. The Government also took further steps to implement its
anti-corruption strategy, and public revenue collection continued to increase thanks
to improved administration services and enforcement. Private sector growth,
however, was constrained by continuing security volatility, regulatory uncertainty and
corruption. The security situation remained highly unstable, as anti -government
elements conducted a series of high-profile attacks in urban centres, dampening
public morale and threatening to undermine confidence in the Go vernment. Those
incidents also heightened tensions between Afghanistan and Pakistan, as Afghan
officials accused Pakistan of allowing “terrorist safe-havens” on its territory. Civilian
casualties remained very high throughout 2017, with children accounting for almost
a third of the casualties, and with protracted fighting leading to thousands of new
displacements. Lastly, there was little progress towards peace negotiations between
the Government and the Taliban.

A.

Political developments
4.
Since the issuance of the previous report, national politics in Afghanistan have
been dominated by an extended impasse between the Presidential Palace and the
Jamiat-e Islami political party, which has occupied the attention of key figures in both
the Government and the political opposition, undermined national unity and
distracted attention from the national reform agenda. While the proximate cause of
the crisis was the decision by President Ashraf Ghani to remove Mohammad Atta
Noor from his position as Governor of Balkh Province, the impasse soon revealed
competing conceptions of the origins of the Government’s legitimacy. As the
stalemate grew more protracted, negotiations between the two parties also became a
staging ground for expressing broader opposition concer ns, as political parties used
the crisis to intensify their long-standing demands for reforms to the electoral system
and the Constitution.
5.
The dispute between the Presidential Palace and Jamiat-e Islami marked the
culmination of long-standing tensions between the central Government and Mr. Noor,
a prominent figure in the country’s north who had served as Governor of Balkh since
2004. Although he had been a key supporter of Chief Executive Abdullah during the
2014 election campaign, relations between Mr. Noor and the two National Unity
Government leaders, President Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah, deteriorated
over the course of 2017. By mid-year, Mr. Noor had emerged as a leading critic of the
Government and was a key member of a multiparty and multi -ethnic opposition
coalition (the Coalition for the Salvation of Afghanistan), which was apparently
intending to contest the parliamentary elections planned in 2018. On 18 December
2017, the Government announced its acceptance of a resignation letter that Mr. Noor
had submitted several months earlier. Mr. Noor rejected the validity of the letter,
insisting that his exit from public office could only be negotiated by Jamiat -e Islami,
the party in which he serves as Chief Executive. The following day, Jamiat -e Islami
issued a statement rejecting Mr. Noor’s removal as a breach of the political agreement
of September 2014, which forms the basis of the National Unity Government, in
particular its provisions on the appointment of senior officials.
6.
Those events resulted in several weeks of negotiations between the Presidential
Palace and the Jamiat-e Islami party over the terms of Mr. Noor’s departure, as the
Government attempted to install a replacement as Governor of Balkh Province. On
3 January 2018, the Independent Directorate for Local Governance appointed former
Jamiat-e Islami commander Mohammad Dawood as the new Governor. Mr. Dawood
established an office in Kabul, while Mr. Noor, remaining in the Governor ’s office in

2/32

18-02724

A/72/768
S/2018/165

Balkh, threatened to arrest Mr. Dawood if he attempted to move to the Province. The
two sides accused each other of arming supporters in Balkh. Tensions reached a peak on
16 January, when Mr. Noor issued a public statement warning Mr. Dawood against
travelling to Balkh to attend the funeral of his father. The two sides eventually reached
a compromise, allowing Mr. Dawood to visit Balkh without incident and return to Kabul.
7.
Meanwhile, in Kabul, negotiations over Mr. Noor’s departure rapidly assumed
a broader dimension. The President and his supporters maintained that the
Constitution was the ultimate basis of the Government ’s authority in Afghanistan,
pointing out that it clearly gave the President alone the power to appoint and remove
governors. By contrast, Jamiat-e Islami leaders argued that the executive provisions
of the Constitution were superseded by the National Unity Government agreement of
2014, by which the President and the Chief Executive were required to agree on senior
appointments, including governors. Jamiat-e Islami insisted on the implementation of
the outstanding provisions of the agreement, including plans for the introduction of
electronic national identity cards, district council elections and the inclusion of party based proportional representation in the electoral s ystem as conditions for Mr. Noor’s
departure. After numerous rounds of talks, the negotiations had still failed to reach an
agreement, and the impasse continued into February. Adding to the intractability of
the standoff was the perception within Jamiat-e Islami and other significant political
groups that they had been marginalized by the President and that this marginalization
had an ethnic dimension.
8.
During the dispute, both sides sought to rally the support of other political
actors. The Government sent a delegation to Turkey on 13 January and again on
4 February, in an apparent overture to Mr. Noor’s coalition partner, First VicePresident Abdul Rashid Dostum. Mr. Dostum, who has been residing in Ankara since
May 2017, reportedly for medical treatment, and who remains under indictment for
the alleged sexual assault and illegal detention of a political rival, did not overtly
respond to those advances. Meanwhile, other political figures aligned themselves with
the position of Jamiat-e Islami. On 3 January, Kandahar Chief of Police Abdul Raziq
issued a statement in support of Mr. Noor, claiming that the Governor could not be
dismissed without broad consensus in the National Unity Government. On 14 January,
a group of opposition figures, including the First Vice-President’s son, Batur Dostum,
and prominent parliamentarians Humayun Humayun and Zahir Qadir, convened at the
residence of former Vice-President and Jamiat-e Islami member Ahmad Zia Massoud
in an apparent show of unity against the Government. Concurrently, opposition parties
sought to reinvigorate public debate over the electoral system. On 1 February, eight
political parties and coalitions, including Hizb-i Islami (Arghandiwal), Jamiat-e
Islami, Junbesh-e Milli, and Mehwar-e Mardom-e Afghanistan, issued a joint
statement calling upon the Government to modify the Election Law of 2016 to include
a role for political parties in elections.
9.
The political volatility was exacerbated by rising public frustration over
insecurity, in particular in urban centres. A spate of suicide and complex attacks
throughout January 2018, in particular three major attacks in Kabul that inflicted
hundreds of casualties, led to widespread calls through social media for the
resignation of security officials. On 29 January, Kandahar Chief of Police Raziq
issued a plea for calm, calling upon people to abstain from demonstrations despite
their frustrations with the Government. Demonstrations occurred in Kabul on
1 February, as some protesters blamed the Government for failing to ensure security
and others rallied outside the embassy of Pakistan, accusing that country of
supporting the attackers. However, in contrast with the aftermath of the attack of
31 May 2017, those demonstrations did not attract significant crowds, probabl y

18-02724

3/32

A/72/768
S/2018/165

because of fears of further attacks. In response to the violence, President Ghani
escalated his rhetoric against anti-government element groups, telling a gathering at
the High Peace Council on 3 February that he would no longer seek reconciliation
with the perpetrators of the attacks and blaming Pakistan for harbouring the Taliban.
10. That series of attacks and the public reactions to them further hindered
the already minimal progress towards initiating peace negotiations between the
Government and the Taliban. There was, however, incremental progress on the
implementation of the Government’s peace agreement of 2016 with Hizb-i Islami
(Gulbuddin). In January, over several days, 78 prisoners affiliated with the group were
released in accordance with the agreement, following months of delay caused by
vetting procedures. This was the third and largest release of prisoners since the
signing of the agreement.
11. Against this background of political uncertainty, relations improved between the
executive and legislative branches, allowing the Government to pursue some elements
of its agenda. On 4 December, the lower house of the National Assembly passed
confirmation votes for 11 of 12 candidates nominated by the Government for
ministerial positions. Nargis Nehan, the Government’s nominee for the position of
minister of mines and petroleum and the only woman proposed for a ministerial post,
did not receive the required number of votes, but remained in her role in an acting
capacity. On 17 January, the National Assembly approved the national budget. The
budget had previously been rejected by the lower house on 13 December but was
approved on the second attempt by a large majority of parliamentarians, following
extensive consultations between the National Assembly and the Minister of Finance.
12. The Independent Election Commission emerged from several months of
indecision and made progress with preparations for parliamentary and district council
elections. On 10 December, the Commission presented its voter registrati on concept
and budget to the Government and donors, following consultations with political
stakeholders and civil society. For the first time, according to the Election Law, a
voter list linking voters to specific polling stations is to be created — a long-standing
recommendation by numerous observer groups and the Special Electoral Reform
Commission of 2016. The Commission also decided to use existing national identity
cards as a basis for voter registration, rather than produce cards itself. An operationa l
plan and regulation were approved by the Commission on 9 January and the
Commission initiated the procurement of materials, with the first materials arriving
in Kabul on 14 February. The Commission signed numerous memorandums of
understanding with the Government, civil society organizations and other public
institutions, including the Electoral Complaints Commission, to establish a mutual
cooperation framework that defined the respective mandates and responsibilities. On
7 January, the Independent Election Commission also held consultations in seven
provinces, bringing together representatives of political parties, coalitions, civil
society organizations and other electoral stakeholders. The fourth national election
forum was held in Kabul on 14 February.
13. Steps were also taken to address leadership gaps in the Commission, after the
removal of its Chair in November and the dismissal of the Chief Electoral Officer in
October. The previous Selection Committee for electoral bodies conducted a
nomination process for the vacant commissioner position, leading to the appointment
of Mr. Sayyid Hafizullah Hashimi as the seventh commissioner on 13 January. The
appointment enabled the Commission to conduct an internal election to designate its
board, and the Commission elected former Spokesperson Gula Jan Abdulbadi Sayyad
as its new Chair on 31 January. Independently, on 15 January, President Ghani

4/32

18-02724

A/72/768
S/2018/165

appointed Ms. Shahla Haque as acting Head of the Secretariat and Chief Electoral
Officer. One of the first acts of the new Chair of the Independent Election
Commission was to indicate that elections might need to be delayed from the current
date in July 2018, but that they could still be held in 2018.

B.

Security
14. By the end of 2017, the United Nations had recorded 23,744 security-related
incidents. This was the highest number ever recorded, although it was only negligibly
higher than the figure for 2016. Armed clashes continued to represent the highest
proportion of incidents, at 63 per cent. There were 14,998 armed clashes in 2017,
slightly more than in 2016, during which 14,977 clashes had been recorded. Incidents
relating to the use of improvised explosive devices remained the second highest
category of incidents, while air strikes continued at high level s. The 950 air strikes
recorded in 2017 represented a 67.6 per cent increase compared with the same period
the previous year. Targeted killings and abductions increased by 6 per cent compared
with 2016, while suicide attacks increased by 50 per cent. The e astern region
experienced the highest number of incidents, followed by the southern region, with
the two regions accounting for 55 per cent of all security incidents.
15. The United Nations recorded 3,521 security-related incidents from 15 December
2017 to 15 February 2018, representing a 6 per cent decrease compared with the same
period the year before. The reporting period witnessed a spike in large -scale incidents
of violence, with two high-profile complex attacks and a large vehicle bombing in
Kabul and an attack against an international non-governmental organization in the
city of Jalalabad that took place between 20 and 27 January.
16. Despite this spate of violence in urban areas, the winter season saw a drop in
the overall number of direct Taliban attacks around the country. The Taliban were not
able to seize any provincial capitals or district administration centres during the
reporting period, which Afghan and international security officials attributed to an
intensification of air strikes by international military and the Afghan Air Force, as
well as an increase in night raids by Afghan special forces. However, anti -government
elements continued to place pressure on Afghan security forces, with coordinated
attacks during the reporting period against Afghan National Defence and Security
Forces checkpoints in Helmand, Kandahar and Nimroz Provinces in the south,
Kunduz Province in the north-east, Ghazni Province in the south-east and Farah
Province in the west. Those attacks inflicted significant casualties on Afghan security
forces and allowed insurgents to capture weaponry and logistical supplies, but they
did not result in significant territorial gains. The Taliban, however, consolidated their
hold over mostly rural territory throughout 2017.
17. Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province remained resilient,
despite concerted operations by Afghan and international military forces. The group
conducted several attacks against the civilian population and military targets,
especially in Kabul and in the eastern Province of Nangarhar, and continued to engage
in armed clashes against the Taliban as the two groups competed for control over
territory. Meanwhile, in the northern region, self-proclaimed Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant-Khorasan Province affiliates continued to engage in violent clashes
against both Afghan Government and Taliban forces, suggesting that the group has
expanded its geographical reach and begun to consolidate its presence outside the
eastern part of the country.

18-02724

5/32

A/72/768
S/2018/165

18. There were 42 incidents involving United Nations personnel in 2017, including
nine incidents of intimidation, 17 criminal incidents, one armed clash and three
incidents of abduction.

C.

Regional cooperation
19. Relations between Afghanistan and other countries during the reporting period
were marked by growing tensions with Pakistan, following the spate of violence in
January, despite high-level contacts between the Governments of both countries. On
17 December, military officials from Afghanistan, Pakistan and the United States of
America met in Kabul to discuss military and counter-terrorism cooperation. On
16 January, 1,800 Pakistani clerics adopted a fatwa, or religious ruling, declaring
suicide attacks to be “un-Islamic”. A fatwa against violence and terrorism directed
against targets in Afghanistan had been proposed as part of the Quadrilateral
Coordination Group road map for peace agreed between Afghanistan, China, Pakistan
and the United States in 2016. The January announcement, however, was received
with scepticism in Kabul, reportedly because it did not specifically condemn terrorism
and violence in Afghanistan. On 3 February, a high-level delegation led by the Foreign
Secretary of Pakistan, Tehmina Janjua, visited Kabul to discuss the AfghanistanPakistan Action Plan for Peace and Solidarity, covering the areas of military
cooperation, counter-terrorism and intelligence sharing, economy, trade and transit,
and refugee repatriation. This was followed by a second round of talks in Islamabad
on 8 and 9 February, attended by the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan, Hekmat Karzai. Following the second meeting, the Government of
Afghanistan issued a press release stating that, while some progress had been made
on the cooperation mechanism, there had been no concrete outcomes.
20. During the reporting period, the Government of Afghanistan continued to take
steps towards closer regional cooperation with other neighbouring countries. Trade
through the ports of Bandar Abbas and Chabahar in the Islamic Republic of Iran
increased as of early 2017, marking a significant shift in the commercial relations of
Afghanistan with the Islamic Republic of Iran. The Government of Afghanistan also
continued to expand its relations with Central Asian States. Bilateral relations with
Uzbekistan received a boost following the official visit of President Ghani on 4 and
5 December, when the two countries signed more than 20 bilateral agreements
covering areas such as security and intelligence cooperation, transit and customs
procedures and infrastructure.
21. International cooperation in support of a peace process in Afghanistan made
limited progress. On 26 December, the Government of China hosted the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan and Pakistan in B eijing for a first trilateral dialogue
meeting, a format suggested by the Government of China in June 2017. The three
sides reaffirmed their commitment to improving relations, deepening mutual
beneficial cooperation, advancing connectivity under the Belt a nd Road Initiative and
fighting terrorism in all its forms. They also expressed support for an inclusive
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process in Afghanistan. The Government of
Indonesia also increased its engagement in efforts to establish peace in Af ghanistan.
In December, the Government of Indonesia hosted a delegation of Afghan High Peace
Council officials and affiliated ulama and offered to assist Afghan reconciliation
efforts. On 29 January, during a visit to Kabul, the President of Indonesia, Jok o
Widodo, suggested the establishment of a tri-national committee with participation of
ulama from Afghanistan, Indonesia and Pakistan, to promote peace and reconciliation
efforts in Afghanistan.

6/32

18-02724

A/72/768
S/2018/165

III. Human rights
22. On 15 February, the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) released the 2017 annual report on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. 1 The Mission documented 10,453 civilian casualties (3,438 people killed and
7,015 injured) in 2017, a decrease of 9 per cent compar ed with 2016. Civilian deaths
decreased by 2 per cent, while the number of civilians injured decreased by 11 per
cent. UNAMA attributed 65 per cent of all civilian casualties to anti -government
elements, 20 per cent to pro-government forces, 11 per cent to unattributed crossfire
during ground engagements between anti-government elements and pro-government
forces, 3 per cent to explosive remnants of war and approximately 1 per cent to cross border shelling. The decrease in civilian casualties is mainly attributed to fewer
civilians coming to harm from ground fighting, while civilian casualties from the
indiscriminate use of improvised explosive devices (in suicide and non -suicide
attacks) increased. Conflict-related violence also destroyed livelihoods, homes and
property, displaced families and limited access to education, health and other services.
23. The use of improvised explosive device tactics (in suicide and non -suicide
attacks) caused 4,151 civilian casualties (1,229 people killed and 2,922 injured),
comprising 40 per cent of all civilian casualties. This includes suicide and complex
attacks, which resulted in 605 people being killed and 1,690 being injured, amounting
to 22 per cent of all civilian casualties. Non-suicide improvised explosive device
tactics, including the use of pressure-plate devices, accounted for 18 per cent of all
civilian casualties. Ground engagements accounted for 3,484 civilian casualties (823
people killed and 2,661 injured), amounting to 33 per cent of all civilian casualties.
Worryingly, UNAMA documented the highest number of civilian casualties by aerial
strikes in a single year since 2009. The Mission documented 631 civilian casualties
from aerial attacks (295 people killed and 336 injured), marking an increase of 7 per
cent compared with 2016, with women and children comprising 62 per cent of those
casualties. UNAMA documented 309 civilian casualties by the Afghan Air Force, 237
by international military forces and 76 by undetermined pro -government forces.
Overall, the Mission documented 3,179 child casualties (861 children killed and 2,318
injured). While this represents a 10 per cent decrease compared with 2016, children
still accounted for 30 per cent of all civilian casualties. Women casualties increased
about 1 per cent, but female mortality increased by 5 per cent.
24. The start of 2018 witnessed a continuation of extreme harm to civilians from
attacks by anti-government elements, occurring steadily throughout the month of
January, including several egregious assaults deliberately targeting civilians in Kabul
and Jalalabad. Between 20 and 27 January, three attacks killed at least 143 civilians
and injured 265. On 20 January, five armed attackers opened indiscriminate fire inside
the Intercontinental Hotel in Kabul and proceeded to search for hotel occupants room
by room, killing 24 civilians (including 16 foreign nationals) and injuring 15. On
24 January, four suicide attackers stormed the Save the Children compound in the city
of Jalalabad after detonating an explosive-laden vehicle, killing 5 civilians and
injuring 21. The premises of the non-governmental organization were damaged in the
attack and the nearby office of the Swedish Committee for Afghanistan was burned
down. On 27 January, a suicide attacker detonated another explosive-laden vehicle
painted as an ambulance outside the former Ministry of Interior compound in Kabul,
killing at least 114 civilians and injuring at least 229. Two hospitals, the Afghan High
__________________
1

18-02724

UNAMA and Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, “Afghanistan:
protection of civilians in armed conflict — annual report 2017” (Kabul, 2018).

7/32

A/72/768
S/2018/165

Peace Council, several foreign diplomatic missions and civilian shops, many of which
were severely damaged, are located in that area.
25. From 1 October to 31 December 2017, the country task force on monitoring
and reporting verified seven conflict-related incidents targeting health facilities and
health-care personnel (three by the Taliban, two by undetermined armed groups and
two by the National Directorate for Security), compared with 18 incidents in the
previous quarter. Three of the incidents included targeted attacks on health -care
personnel (two were killed and one was abducted), two incidents of threat against
health-care personnel or patients, one incident of threat on a health -care facility and
one indiscriminate attack causing physical damage to a clinic. The task force ve rified
13 incidents affecting education facilities and education-related personnel, including
four incidents of direct targeting against schools and threats against education -related
personnel, three indiscriminate attacks resulting in physical damage to s chools and
one incident resulting in the killing and abduction of education personnel. The task
force attributed nine incidents to armed groups (eight to the Taliban and one to Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province), two to pro-government militia, one
to both Afghan National Defence and Security Forces and the Taliban in a crossfire
incident and one to an unknown perpetrator. In addition, the military use of seven
schools was verified, five by the Taliban and two by the Afghan National Defe nce
and Security Forces.
26. During the same period, the recruitment and use of 36 boys by parties to the
conflict were documented, of which five were verified (two by Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant-Khorasan Province, two by the Afghan National Police and one by the
Taliban), compared with 19 verified cases in the previous reporting period. As at
31 December 2017, the Ministry of Justice had reported 171 children held on national
security-related charges in juvenile rehabilitation centres across the country,
compared with 300 at the end of December 2016, a decrease largely due to transfers
and releases. UNAMA verified the sexual abuse of one child by the Afghan National
Police and five cases of abduction involving 13 boys by the Taliban. UNAMA also
verified six incidents of denial of humanitarian access (four by the Taliban, one by
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province and one by an undetermined
armed group), compared with eight such incidents in the previous reporting period.
27. Justice and redress for women remained low amid the continued prevalence of
violence against women. As part of the implementation of the Elimination of Violence
Against Women Law of 2009, the Anti-Harassment of Women and Children Law was
published on 31 December 2017, clarifying the definition of harassment in public
places and strengthening complaint procedures. With United Nations support, the
Ministry of Justice completed countrywide consultations on the draft family law to
be submitted to the Council of Ministers and the National Assembly.
28. The Government took steps to improve gender equality in the civil service. On
10 January, the Independent Administrative Reform and Civil Service Commission
issued a new policy to increase the representation of women in the civil service to 24
per cent in 2018. Finalization of the revised budget for the implementation of the plan
remains to be approved.
29. On 14 January, the upper house of the National Assembly approved the
consolidated text of a new anti-torture law. The draft law is currently under review
by the Joint Commission of the National Assembly before its signing by the President
and publication in the official gazette in March. The draft law contains a revised
definition of the crime of torture in domestic law that is consistent with the definition
contained in the Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading

8/32

18-02724

A/72/768
S/2018/165

Treatment or Punishment. It also sets out provisions allowing victims of torture to
claim redress in civil and criminal courts. On 28 January, the Government carried out
the death sentence on three men convicted of the kidnapping and murder of a 13 -yearold boy. This is the second group of prisoners to have been executed in recent months.
30. On 31 January, the window closed for victims to make representations to the
International Criminal Court regarding a request by the Court ’s Prosecutor to initiate
an investigation into alleged war crimes and crimes against humanity committed in
Afghanistan. Following preliminary deliberations, the Pre-Trial Chamber is expected
to decide whether to authorize an investigation into the situation in Afghanistan.
31. During the reporting period, civil society activists and media personnel
continued to face threats and attacks by anti-government elements and
pro-government forces. UNAMA documented four incidents across the country. The
Afghan Independent Bar Association held a series of workshops on accountability
issues for lawyers, giving presentations on the new Penal Code and the draft
anti-torture law. The workshops were attended by approximately 130 participants,
20 per cent of whom were women.

IV. Implementation of the Kabul Process and coordination of
development assistance
32. Economic growth remained limited owing to the ongoing conflict, regulatory
uncertainty and widespread corruption. Overall, estimated growth increased slightly,
from 2.2 per cent in 2016 to 2.6 per cent in 2017. The forecast for 2018 is 3.2 per cent
growth, provided that the security and political situation does not de teriorate
significantly. There was a notable decline in growth in the agricultural sector, which
accounts for the largest share of the economy. Growth in the sector was forecast to
increase by only 1.5 per cent in 2017, compared with 6 per cent the previou s year,
while the industry and service sectors were projected to grow by 2 and 3.3 per cent,
respectively. Inflation, while volatile, remained within the single digits. The trade
deficit widened in the first half of 2017, as exports decreased by 3 per cent and
imports increased by 8 per cent. The annual deficit, which is financed by foreign aid,
is projected to reach 33 per cent of gross domestic product in 2017.
33. According to the Ministry of Finance, the Government increased revenue
collection by 18 per cent to $2.44 billion in 2017, mainly through improvements in
administration services and enforcement. Despite those gains, according to the World
Bank in its Afghanistan Development Update, released in November 2017, the
Government is expected to cover only around 40 per cent of budgeted expenditure
with domestic revenue, leaving a fiscal gap of 15 per cent of gross domestic product
at the end of 2017. This gap is projected to continue to widen, leaving the Government
dependent on on-budget foreign civilian development assistance to maintain basic
services and implement development programmes. The Government ’s development
budget expenditure increased from 55 per cent in 2016 to 67 per cent in 2017, owing
mainly to a reduced development budget. Additional reforms to the budgeting process
were introduced in the national budget for 2018 and are expected to further increase
expenditure levels.
34. The Government continued to invest efforts in strengthening accountability in
the implementation of its development priorities through the high development
councils. On 9 December, the Government presented an update to its Self -Reliance
through Mutual Accountability Framework, reporting that 10 of 24 deliverables had

18-02724

9/32

A/72/768
S/2018/165

been completed. As part of its implementation of the Afghanistan National Peace and
Development Framework, the Government also continued to develop 10 national
priority programmes under the guidance of the high development councils. Two
national priority programmes, the Citizens’ Charter National Priority Programme and
the Women’s Economic Empowerment National Priority Programme, which were
launched earlier, made further progress in implementation, while the remaining eight
are in different stages of preparation.
35. The fight against corruption remained a principal component of the
Government’s reform agenda. On 9 December, the President issued a decree for the
implementation of the Afghanistan National Strategy for Combating Corruption ,
which the High Council for Rule of Law and Anti-Corruption had adopted on
28 September 2017. The head of the High Council secretariat was also appointed. In
January 2018, of the nine priority ministries required under the Strategy to prepare
and submit detailed implementation plans, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of
Transport and Civil Aviation and the Ministry of Labour, Social Affairs, Martyrs and
Disabled had submitted their completed implementation plans to the High Council ’s
secretariat. Three ministries were in the process of finalizing their plans, while the
remaining three reported delays in the process.
36. The Government continued to prioritize reforms within the security sector, with
a focus on leadership within the Ministry of Defence. On 4 February, President Ghani
signed retirement orders for 164 Afghan National Army generals in accordance with
inherent law personnel reforms within the Ministry of Defence. Under the reforms,
the Government aims to retire 400 generals within 18 months in an effort to improve
professionalism and foster generational change within the Afghan National Army
leadership. The transfer of the Afghan National Civil Order Police from the Ministry
of the Interior to the Ministry of Defence, a key component of the Government ’s fouryear plan on security sector reform, also continued.
37. Efforts were made to strengthen the legal anti-corruption framework. On
27 November, the lower house of the National Assembly approved the Law on
Declaration and Registration of Assets of State Officials and Employees , which had
been adopted through a presidential legislative decree on 28 October. For the first
time, the law required members of the National Assembly and provincial and district
councils to declare assets on an annual basis. The new Penal Code, which came into
force on 15 February, further consolidated the anti-corruption legal framework, with
such measures as the criminalization of land usurpation and the codification of all
mandatory provisions under the United Nations Convention Against Corruption.
However, civil society organizations criticized the transfer of responsibility for asset
registration and verification from the High Office of Oversight and Anti -Corruption
to the Administrative Office of the President under the new law. In addition, the
grouping of all anti-corruption investigative institutions and functions in the Office
of the Attorney General has raised concerns about the lack of an independent
implementation and monitoring mechanism under the Strategy.

V. Humanitarian assistance and refugees
38. During 2017, 475,433 people were newly displaced by conflict. Between
15 December 2017 and 1 February 2018, 11,668 people were displaced. The highest
concentration of recently displaced people is in the eastern region, which shelters
more than 141,000 or 28 per cent of all people displaced in Afghanistan since the
beginning of 2017. Many displaced families have been forced to move multiple times

10/32

18-02724

A/72/768
S/2018/165

and have no immediate prospect of returning to their areas of origin in safety and
dignity.
39. With regard to Afghan citizens living in Pakistan, on 3 January, the Federal
Cabinet of Pakistan decided to grant a 30 day-extension to proof-of-registration cards,
which provide temporary legal stay to Afghan refugees living in Pakistan. On
31 January, another 60-day extension was issued. In total, 1.4 million Afghans
residing in Pakistan hold such a card, while another one million are estimated to live
in that country without registration. The registration of those undocumented Afghans
in Pakistan commenced in August 2017, and over 804,000 app lications had been
received as at 15 February 2018.
40. During 2017, a total of 57,411 refugees returned to Afghanistan from Pakistan,
1,202 from the Islamic Republic of Iran and 204 from other countries. These figures
represent a decrease of 85 per cent compared with 2016, when a total of 372,577
refugees returned. The reduction in returns was mainly due to an improved protection
environment in Pakistan, as well as increased reluctance among refugees to return to
a highly volatile security environment. Suspended on 1 December 2017 for a threemonth winter pause, the voluntary repatriation programme from Pakistan of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) is scheduled to
resume on 1 March 2018.
41. The deportation and spontaneous return of undocumented Afghans from
Pakistan continued, with 3,796 arrivals (3,200 spontaneous arrivals and 596
deportees) from 17 December 2017 to 15 February 2018. Since the beginning of 2018,
the total number of undocumented returnees arriving from Pakistan has reached
2,896, down from 9,084 over the same period in 2017. During the reporting period,
92,723 Afghans arrived from the Islamic Republic of Iran (44,685 spontaneous
arrivals and 48,038 deportees), 65,839 arriving after 1 January 2018. Of th e
undocumented returnees, the International Organization for Migration (IOM) assisted
3,226 people (85 per cent) from Pakistan and 4,185 people (5 per cent) from the
Islamic Republic of Iran. In total, in 2017, 462,316 undocumented Afghans returned
from the Islamic Republic of Iran and 98,191 from Pakistan. Between 15 December
2017 and 15 February 2018, IOM also assisted 683 voluntary Afghan returnees from
Europe.
42. To help vulnerable families to get through the winter, UNHCR and partners
provided winterization assistance to more than 53,000 families from mid -December
to 4 February. In addition, humanitarian partners provided more than 185,000
blankets, and more than 13,000 families received winter clothing.
43. More than 5.5 million children were reached through polio vaccination
campaigns conducted in December 2017 and January 2018. At the time of writing,
there had been 14 cases of polio reported in Afghanistan in 2017, of which 5 were
from Shah Wali Kot in Kandahar Province, which had been inaccessible for
vaccination for more than six months in 2017. With support of the United Nations,
vaccination teams managed to gain access to the district in November and have
completed four vaccination campaigns since. In January 2018, three cases of wild
poliovirus were reported, one each from Kama district of Nangarhar Province and
Shah Wali Kot and Spinboldak districts of Kandahar Province. From 12 to
16 February, a subnational campaign supported by the United Nations was conducted
by the Ministry of Public Health to vaccinate 5.5 million children in high-risk districts
of 21 provinces of the country.

18-02724

11/32

A/72/768
S/2018/165

44. Constraints on humanitarian access continued, with a total of 39 incidents
affecting United Nations and aid workers from 15 December to 31 January. In 2017,
a total of 388 incidents were reported, compared with 200 in 2016. The higher number
can be attributed partly to the protracted nature of the conflict in certain areas of the
country as well as to improved reporting. In 2017, 21 aid workers were killed, 33
injured and 149 abducted. In December, 19 incidents against health workers or health
facilities were recorded, bringing the total to 143 such incidents for the entire year.
Incidents against health workers and facilities represented 38 per cent of all recorded
incidents against humanitarian workers in 2017.
45. A warmer winter with less than average precipitation is having a strong impact
on the planting season and will affect the quality and yield of the harvest of winter
cereals as well as the forthcoming spring harvest. Accumulated precipitation in more
than a dozen provinces was less than one third of the average in the last quarter of
2017. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations recommended in
December to provide vulnerable communities in drought-prone areas with
agricultural assistance.
46. The Mine Action Service of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
continued to support the Government in fulfilling its mine action obligations,
including its presidency of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling,
Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction in 2018.
This presidency is an opportunity to highlight the progress and continued
commitments of Afghanistan on this issue at the international level. The average
monthly rate of casualties from mines, explosive remnants of war and victim activated explosive devices, referred to as “pressure-plate improvised explosive
devices” in previous reporting, stands at 170 per month for 2017, an increase
compared with 2016. The vast majority of casualties — 96.4 per cent — are due to
explosive remnants of war and victim-activated explosive devices. The Service has
been focusing on securing means to provide immediate, short -term support to those
victims and is supporting the Afghan Directorate of Mine Action Coordination to
develop a national strategy to assist victims as a priority in 2018.
47. The Mine Action Service and partners continued to provide risk education in
communities affected by explosive hazards, as well as at encashment and transit
centres to alert populations to the danger posed by landmines, explosive remnants of
war and victim-activated explosive devices. In total, 602,511 people, including 3,767
returnees at encashment or transit centres, received risk education from 1 November
to 31 January. During the same time period, the Directorate of Mine Action
Coordination, with support from the Mine Action Service, declared seven
communities free of mines, which enabled approximately 8,618 individua ls across
290,500 m2 to move freely within their communities and facilitated improved
agricultural activities and market access. It is estimated, however, that 3,227
minefields, 315 battlefields and 38 contaminated firing ranges remain, affecting 1,423
communities.
48. On 15 January, the Government of Afghanistan and the United Nations jointly
launched the Humanitarian Response Plan (2018–2021), in which they asked for
$437 million for 2018 to assist 2.8 million people across all sectors of intervention.
On 22 December 2017, the United Nations announced the first standard allocation of
2018 of more than $20 million from the Afghanistan Common Humanitarian Fund in
order to start implementing the Humanitarian Response Plan. The Plan for 2017 was
funded up to $317.5 million, or 78 per cent of the requested funding of $409 million.

12/32

18-02724

A/72/768
S/2018/165

VI. Counter-narcotics
49. The Government of Afghanistan, supported by its international partners,
continued its counter-narcotics operations during the reporting period. From
1 November to 31 December 2017, Afghan law enforcement authorities conducted a
total of 445 counter-narcotics operations, which resulted in seizures of 391 kg of
heroin, 31 kg of morphine, 8,141 kg of opium, 2 kg of methamphetamine, 38,547 kg
of hashish, 1,256 kg of solid precursor chemicals, 1,437 litres of liquid precursor
chemicals and 1,590 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA) K-tablets
(synthetic drugs). These seizures resulted in 531 arrests. The opiate seizures (opium,
morphine and heroin combined and calculated as morphine equivalent) recorded
during 2017 were the highest since 2012. Opium prices dropped significantly (down
41 per cent from December 2016 to December 2017), owing to the record harvests
reported in 2017, but a similar drop was not observed with heroin prices (a decline of
7 per cent when comparing December 2016 with December 2017). The relatively
stable price of heroin is likely attributable to the high rate of opiate interdictions
throughout 2017, in combination with high prices for the precursor acetic anhydride
following the interdiction of shipments into Afghanistan in early 2017.

VII. Mission support
50. As at 31 January, the Mission’s vacancy rates were 9.5 per cent for international
staff and 6.4 per cent for national staff, compared with the approved rates of 14 per
cent and 7.5 per cent, respectively. Representation of female staff, despite special
measures granted for the Mission to recruit and retain more national female staff,
remained very low. As at 31 January, the female representation for each category of
staff stood at: 30 per cent for international staff, 35 per cent for United Nations
Volunteers, 9 per cent for National Professional Officers and 7 per cent for Local level
staff. Between 1 December 2017 and 31 January 2018, UNAMA conducted 122 road
and 12 air missions, as well as 374 reverse outreach missions during which district
representatives visited UNAMA field offices.

VIII. Observations
51. Since the previous report, another spate of horrific violence, including suicide
attacks in Kabul and Jalalabad, killed and wounded hundreds of people, most of them
civilians. These attacks naturally provoked public outrage, leading prominent figures
to call for a renewed emphasis on military action against armed oppo sition groups
rather than reconciliation. In the wake of such violence, the task of bringing the
parties together in a credible peace process has become both more difficult and more
urgent. I strongly believe that only through a negotiated peace settlement can the
tremendous human suffering caused by this conflict be brought to an end.
52. Constructive engagement by international partners as well as regional consensus
on peace in Afghanistan are essential to creating a conducive environment for peace
talks. Given the number of platforms and processes that have emerged, it is my hope
that the sum thereof will contribute to a peaceful outcome in Afghanistan. In this
regard, I hope that the renewed high-level direct contact between officials of
Afghanistan and Pakistan will reverse the recent increase in tensions between the two
countries. I urge the two Governments to continue to engage in dialogue at all levels
to promote peace, stability and the mutual interests of both countries. I welcome the

18-02724

13/32

A/72/768
S/2018/165

trilateral dialogue of Ministers for Foreign Affairs facilitated by the Government of
China in December 2017.
53. The impasse between the President’s supporters and Jamiat-e Islami has
exacerbated divisions within the National Unity Government, placing additional
pressure on already fragile political arrangements. The restraint shown by all parties
so far has helped to ensure that these tensions have been confined to the political
realm and have not escalated into violent confrontation. The crisis has, however,
already diverted attention from urgent policy issues, and I am concerned that its
prolongation may provoke instability and further delay elections. Restraint from the
use of violence must be paired with political flexibility in negotiating a solution. I
stress the need to resolve the dispute peacefully and expeditiously to enable the
Government to focus on the myriad security, humanitarian, development and
governance challenges facing Afghanistan.
54. The Independent Election Commission has appointed its new Chair and
administrative board and is taking steps towards commencing voter registration.
Electoral preparations must be accelerated if credible parliamentary and district
council elections are to be held in 2018. This will depend on not only the work of the
Independent Election Commission and the Electoral Complaints Commission but also
the coordinated efforts of other government entities, as well as the availability of
sufficient funding and the provision of adequate security measures. I encourage the
electoral management bodies to work closely with relevant institutions and civil
society to ensure timely and transparent electoral preparations. Noting the ongoing
public concern about the feasibility of timely elections, I also encourage all
stakeholders, including political actors, civil society representatives and religious
leaders, to work constructively with the electoral management bodies to strengthen
public confidence in the electoral process.
55. The persistently high numbers of armed clashes and their co rresponding impact
on civilians remain a deep concern. The year 2017 marked the highest number of
recorded civilian casualties from the indiscriminate use by anti -government elements
of suicide improvised explosive devices. The first months of 2018 saw a p articularly
brutal series of attacks by anti-government elements deliberately targeting civilians,
including the targeting of aid organizations and foreigners and the misuse of the
protected emblem of the Red Crescent Society on a vehicle painted as an amb ulance
to transport a suicide improvised explosive device into a restricted access area. The
perpetrators of these atrocious acts must be held accountable.
56. The toll in lives lost to mines, explosive remnants of war and pressure -plate
improvised devices remains high. Noting the Government’s obligation to track, mark
and remove explosive remnants of war pursuant to the Protocol on Explosive
Remnants of War to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of
Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious
or to Have Indiscriminate Effects (Protocol V) and the obligations of international
military forces to assist the Government in ensuring that leftover devices are
destroyed, the United Nations stands ready to provide necessary support as designated
in article 3 of Protocol V.
57. The Government has made commendable efforts in implementing the Law on
the Elimination of Violence against Women as well as upholding Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and security. By reinserting the chapter
on the elimination of violence against women into the Penal Code and finalizing its
third periodic report to the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women, the Government can send a reassuring signal to all Afghans of its

14/32

18-02724

A/72/768
S/2018/165

commitment to protecting the lives and rights of women. Furthermore, by providing
human and financial resources, the Government can ensure the effective
implementation of its national action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), which would strengthen the meaningful participation of women in political,
peace and security processes.
58. The continued judicial executions in the country are a source of concern. Those
who are investigated, prosecuted and sentenced for capital offences are not being
afforded the necessary fair trial guarantees provided for under domestic law and the
international human rights conventions to which Afghanistan is a party. I call upon
the Government of Afghanistan to place a moratorium on the death penalty with a
view to its abolition.
59. The Government has taken further steps towards implementing its
anti-corruption strategy, in particular by strengthening the legal framework on
anti-corruption. By approving the Law on Declaration and Registration of Assets of
State Officials and Employees, the National Assembly took an important step towards
improving the transparency and accountability of the political institutions of
Afghanistan. Noting the concerns raised by civil society groups about the transfer of
responsibility for asset registration from the independent High Office of Oversight
and Anti-Corruption to the Administrative Office of the President and the
consolidation of anti-corruption investigative functions in the Office of the Attorney
General, I encourage the Government to develop an independent monitoring
mechanism under the strategy.
60. In the year since it was established, the Anti-Corruption Justice Centre has
performed commendable work in prosecuting high-level officials, with a particular
focus on ending impunity in the security sector. Recently, however, the number of
accused persons being tried in absentia has increased, owing to the lack of
enforcement of arrest warrants. I encourage the Ministry of the Interior and other
relevant entities to cooperate with the Centre to ensure that accused persons are
brought to face trial.
61. In the face of significant security and governance challenges, Afghanistan has
made considerable progress on its fiscal reform agenda. The Government continued
to improve its public revenue collection and introduced reforms to the budgetary
process, which have brought the national budget into closer alignment with
international standards. Despite these gains, projected economic growth figures for
Afghanistan, while improving, are not yet sufficient to absorb the hundreds of
thousands of expected new entrants into the labour market in the coming years.
Acknowledging the real progress made in the fiscal arena, I encourage the
Government to introduce further policy reforms that can help generate private sector
growth and provide job opportunities to the next generation of Afghans.
62. I thank all United Nations personnel in Afghanistan and my Special
Representative for Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan, Tadamichi Yamamoto, for their continued dedication under such
challenging conditions to fulfil our commitments in support of the people of
Afghanistan.

18-02724

15/32

A/72/768
S/2018/165

Annex
Progress achieved against benchmarks
I. Security
Benchmark: sustainable Afghan security institutions and processes capable of ensuring peace and
stability and protecting the people of Afghanistan
Indicators of progress

Metrics

Increase in the number of national
police and national army personnel
mentored, trained and operational
according to an agreed structure

• In January 2017, President Ashraf Ghani announced the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces road map with four key objectives to be
achieved by 2020: to increase fighting capabilities; to develop leaders;
to ensure the unity of command and military efforts; and to counter
corruption.
• In 2017, the authorized force level of the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces was 352,000 Afghan National Army and Afghan
National Police personnel and 30,000 Afghan local police personnel.
The overall authorized strength of the Ministry of Defence was 195,000
military personnel and 5,502 civilians, while the authorized strength of
the Afghan National Police was 157,000 personnel.
• In 2017, the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces increased
their offensive capabilities by initiating the expansion of t he Afghan
Special Security Forces and the modernization of the Afghan Air Force,
including major portions of the Afghan Border Police and the Afghan
National Civil Order Police. The expansion of the Afghan Special
Security Forces will result in an increase in the force level, from 19,022
personnel authorized for 2017 to 33,896 by 2020. The number of
Afghan Air Force personnel authorized for 2017 was 8,407, while the
number authorized for 2018 is 8,626. The Afghan Air Force received its
first two UH-60 Black Hawks in late September 2017 and is due to
more than double the size of its fleet by 2020.
• In 2017, the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces began to
target corrupt and criminal influences in their ranks, referring cases to
the Anti-Corruption Justice Centre and other prosecutorial bodies.
Further work is needed in the Forces to improve vetting and tackle
networks and nepotism.

16/32

18-02724

A/72/768
S/2018/165

II. Peace, reintegration and reconciliation
Benchmark: national dialogue and regional engagement towards pursuing constructive and inclusive
processes to foster a political environment conducive to peace
Indicators of progress

Metrics

Development and implementation of
inclusive national and regional
processes to enhance peace,
reintegration and reconciliation
efforts

• On 6 June 2017, the Government convened the first meeting of the
Kabul Process for Peace and Security Cooperation, bringing together
representatives of 26 countries and organizations, including the United
Nations. At the meeting, which was organized with technical assistance
from the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
participants expressed support for an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
peace process and for regional security cooperation.
• In June 2017, the High Peace Council was restructured, and a new
Chair, Karim Khalili, was appointed. Under the new structure, the
Council has a total of 52 members, of whom 12 are women.
• In September, the High Peace Council adopted a new operational strategy
with a streamlined mandate, focused on public outreach and national
consensus-building. In the same month, donors agreed to continue to fund
the Council’s operational costs for three-month terms on a rolling basis
and to fund outreach activities on a project basis.
• On 20 November, the National Security Adviser, Hanif Atmar, presented
the Government’s initial strategy on peace and reconciliation to a
meeting of representatives of the international community.
• In November and December, UNAMA coordinated and provided inputs
to the international community on a set of common messages to assist
the Government in finalizing its peace strategy. Many of the points
raised by the international community were taken into account in the
Government’s subsequent draft vision paper in early January 2018.
• Following the peace agreement of September 2016 between the
Government and Hizb-i Islami (Gulbuddin), the leader of Hizb-i Islami
(Gulbuddin), Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, returned to Kabul in May 2017. By
17 January 2018, 160 prisoners affiliated with the group had been
released from Pul-e Charkhi, Bagram and Kandahar prisons in
furtherance of the peace agreement.

Increased ability by the Afghan
authorities to gather and provide
substantiated, updated and accurate
information to the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011)

18-02724

• In 2017, the Government continued to provide substantiated, updated
and accurate information to the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011)
• On 5 May 2017, the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
submitted its eighth report, pursuant to resolution 2255 (2015),
concerning the Taliban and other associated individuals and entities
constituting a threat to the peace, stability and security of Afghanistan
(see S/2017/409). The report was based in large part on information
provided by the Afghan authorities.

17/32

A/72/768
S/2018/165
Indicators of progress

Metrics

• When the Security Council Committee visited Afghanistan on 29 and
30 October 2017, the Chief Executive, Abdullah, reiterated the
Government’s commitment to pursuing individuals and entities using
the sanctions mechanisms. Further action remains pending.
Increased public support for the
peace process through engagement
at the community level and with
civil society

• In 2017, UNAMA facilitated a total of 14 local peace initiatives and
provided mediation support to foster Afghan-led mediation and
reconciliation efforts at the provincial and district levels. The initiatives,
involving stakeholders from 16 provinces, included conflict resolution
initiatives, community dialogues, jirgas and outreach gatherings with
ulama (religious clerics), tribal representatives, provincial council
members, provincial peace council members, government officials and
youth and women activists.
• On 25 December 2017, the High Peace Council organized a gathering of
more than 700 religious scholars in Kabul. At the gathering, religious
leaders agreed upon a declaration expressing support for Afghan -led
peace efforts, including direct talks between the Government and the
Taliban, and called upon the Taliban to renounce violence.
• To mark the Global Open Day on Women, Peace and Security in 2017,
UNAMA and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women organized dialogues from 17 October to
22 November, which attracted 364 participants, including 303 women
from 21 provinces. The theme of the dialogues was “Women’s
participation in the electoral process”.

III. Governance and institution-building
Benchmark: extension of government authority throughout the country through the establishment of
democratic, legitimate, accountable institutions, down to the local level, with the capacity to implement
policies and to become increasingly capable of sustaining themselves
Indicators of progress

Metrics

Increased ability of the Afghan
authorities and independent electoral
institutions to manage and conduct
genuine and periodic elections, with
due regard to women’s participation
and constitutionally guaranteed
quotas

• In 2017, the Independent Election Commission demonstrated its ability to
commission technical studies, consider options for introducing technology
into electoral processes, conduct public outreach and conclude
cooperation agreements with key partners, both national and international.
• On 21 February 2017, the Commission submitted a technical study on
electoral constituencies to the Government, in which it proposed the
division of 12 large provinces with more than five seats into smaller
constituencies, leaving the remaining 22 provinces unaffected.
• On 22 June, the Commission announced that parliamentary and district
council elections would be held on 7 July 2018.
• On 25 October 2017, the Commission announced its decision to revert
to a paper-based voter registration option.

18/32

18-02724

A/72/768
S/2018/165
Indicators of progress

Metrics

• On 20 November, the Commission and the Independent Administrative
Reform and Civil Service Commission signed a memorandum of
understanding regarding the recruitment of Commission staff, aiming to
accelerate the process and set up a mechanism to ensure transparency.
• In November 2017, the Commission signed a memorandum of
understanding with the Afghanistan Central Civil Registration
Authority, which provided clarification on the roles of the two
institutions in relation to voter registration.
• On 10 December, the Commission submitted the voter registration
concept and budget to the Government and donors following
consultations with political stakeholders and civil society. The voter
registration operational plan and regulations were subsequently
approved on 9 January 2018. For the first time, as envisaged in the
Election Law of 2016, a voter list linking voters to specific polling
stations will be created using national identity cards.
• On 11 December 2017, the Independent Election Commission announced
that it had approved the locations of 7,355 polling centres following a
review of locations that had commenced in August 2017. The Electoral
Complaints Commission has also begun to review nearly 400 complaints
in relation to the assessment of polling centres.
• By the end of January 2018, leadership gaps in the Independent Election
Commission had been partially addressed through the appointment of
Shahla Haque as acting Head of the Secretariat and Chief Electoral
Officer. Her appointment followed the dismissal of the previous Chief
Electoral Officer, Imam Mohammad Warimach, by President Ghani in
October 2017. Ms. Haque is the first woman to be appointed Chief
Electoral Officer of the Commission. Following the dismissal of the
Chair of the Commission, Najibullah Ahmadzai, in November 2017, a
new Commissioner, Sayyid Hafizullah Hashimi, was appointed by
President Ghani on 13 January 2018 in a process criticized by some
civil society activists. On 31 January, the Commission elected Gula Jan
Abdulbadi Sayyad as its new Chair. Wasima Badghisi, a woman who
was re-elected Deputy Chair for Operations in January, had served as
Chair before Mr. Sayyad was elected.
• On 4 October 2017, UNAMA, the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), the Independent Election Commission and the
Electoral Complaints Commission signed the project document for
electoral support, enabling continued United Nations assistance to
electoral processes in Afghanistan. On 30 December, key donors
pledged to fund up to 90 per cent of the voter registration budget ,
estimated at $28 million, while the Government would cover the
remaining costs.

18-02724

19/32

A/72/768
S/2018/165
Indicators of progress

Metrics

• The Independent Election Commission and the Electoral Complaints
Commission held three national election forums in Kabul, on
19 September, 20 October and 6 December, with representatives from
civil society groups, political parties and coalitions, tribal elders and other
Afghan political stakeholders. On 7 January 2018, the Independent
Election Commission held its first set of provincial-level elections forums
in Balkh, Bamyan, Herat, Kandahar, Kunduz, Nangarhar and Paktya, and
there are plans to hold such forums on a regular basis in all provinces.
Establishment of the Independent
Joint Anti-Corruption Monitoring
and Evaluation Committee and
development of anti-corruption
benchmarks

• On 19 January 2017, the Independent Joint Anti-Corruption Monitoring
and Evaluation Committee released its eleventh six-month report,
covering the period from July to December 2016. The report included a
discussion of the Committee’s collaboration with the Ministry of Public
Health in implementing recommendations of the Committee.
• On 7 July, the Committee released its special report on vulnerabilities to
corruption in the Office of the Afghan Attorney General, in which it
noted that the Office of the Attorney General had introduced a number
of positive internal organizational changes, including performance
monitoring and evaluation and compliance with merit-based
recruitment.
• With regard to progress in its monitoring and evaluation programme, the
Committee issued 261 recommendations in 2017, 55 of which have been
implemented, bringing the total number of recommendations issued and
implemented since 2010 to 862 and 215, respectively.

Empowerment of anti-corruption
institutions to enable them to
oversee a whole-of-government
approach to anti-corruption

• A new Land Management Law was issued by presidential decree on
4 March 2017. The law makes the administration of public land more
efficient and transparent and reduces institutional vulnerabilities to
corruption. In April, a revised land allocation law was drafted with
substantial input from UNAMA and the United Nations Human
Settlements Programme. The aims of the law are to streamline processes,
increase transparency and reduce institutional vulnerabilities to corruption
in the allocation of public land. The law is awaiting presidential
endorsement.
• On 28 September, the High Council for Rule of Law and
Anti-Corruption adopted the Afghanistan National Strategy for
Combating Corruption. On 9 December, a presidential order was issued
for the implementation of the strategy by nine priority ministries. As at
31 January 2018, three of the nine priority ministries had submitted
anti-corruption action plans and three were in the process of finalizing
their plans.
• On 3 October 2017, the President inaugurated the multi -stakeholder
forum of the Open Government Partnership in Afghanistan, comprising
representatives of the Government, civil society and the private sector.
The Partnership is a global compact under which member States commit
to engaging non-State actors to make governance more accountable and
transparent.

20/32

18-02724

A/72/768
S/2018/165
Indicators of progress

Metrics

• On 28 December, the President approved the national action plan for the
Open Government Partnership, consisting of 11 commitments, including
the development of a protection policy for women in conflict and
emergency situations and the establishment of special courts to address
violence against women in 12 provinces. Afghanistan joined the
Partnership in 2016.
Annual publication of the asset
declarations of public officials

• In 2017, the High Office of Oversight and Anti-Corruption issued asset
declaration forms to 5,661 senior government officials, received 2,673
completed forms and verified 47 submissions, bringing the total number
of forms issued, received and verified since the establishment of the
asset declaration programme in 2008 to 16,508, 10,061 and 280,
respectively. The 280 verified forms include those of the President, the
Chief Executive, the Second Vice-President, all the Cabinet Ministers
and 33 of 34 provincial governors. The low level of verification of
assets is due to limited cooperation by the targeted officials.
• On 28 October 2017, the President issued Legislative Decree No. 1270,
transferring the assets registration and verification function from the
High Office of Oversight and Anti-Corruption to the Administrative
Office of the President to improve compliance.

Increased capacity of civil servants
at the central, provincial and district
levels to discharge functions and
deliver services

• In 2017, the Civil Service Training Institute trained 2,540 civil servants,
including 533 women (21 per cent), which represented 65 per cent of
the target of 3,850. The Training Institute could not achieve its target
owing to significant delays in the recruitment of trainers. The civil
servants were trained in computer applications, the English language
and human resource management, as well as administration and
financial management.

Increased transparency and
effectiveness of civil service
appointments

• In 2017, the Independent Directorate of Local Governance facilitated
the appointment of 275 of 386 district governor position s and 33 of 41
deputy provincial governors positions through a merit-based recruitment
system. Of the persons appointed, only one deputy provincial governor
and two district governors were women.

Strengthened civil service reform
supported by a comprehensive
approach to capacity-building and
donor-funded technical assistance

• On 11 March 2017, a new Chair began work at the Independent
Administrative Reform and Civil Service Commission as part of an
initiative to strengthen the implementation of civil service reforms. In
2017, the Chair facilitated the appointment of new commissioners and
began to develop a five-year strategic plan with the objectives of
institutionalizing merit-based recruitment in Government, maintaining a
competitive compensation package in the civil service and prioritizing
reforms in key areas, such as pensions and the reintegration of returning
Afghan refugees.

18-02724

21/32

A/72/768
S/2018/165
Indicators of progress

Metrics

• The Government took steps to improve gender equality in the civil
service. On 10 January 2018, a new policy was issued to increase the
representation of women in the civil service from 15 per cent in 2017 to
17 per cent in 2018. The policy introduces a quota system, special
administrative privileges, workplace protection and better career
development opportunities for women in the civil service.
Implementation of the subnational
governance policy and development
of subnational regulatory, financing
and budgetary frameworks

• In 2017, the Independent Directorate of Local Governance, with support
from UNAMA and UNDP and in consultation with national and
subnational institutions, civil society and the international community,
facilitated the formulation of a draft subnational governance policy. On
10 January 2018, the Directorate presented the draft policy to the
President for endorsement, after which it will be submitted to the
Cabinet for approval.
• In February 2017, the Ministry of Economy, with the support of
UNAMA, facilitated the formulation of the provincial development
plans for 2017 in all 34 provinces, using the provincial planning
guidelines that it had developed in 2016. In November 2017, the
guidelines were reviewed and revised, and, in January 2018, the
Ministry of Economy launched an orientation programme for line
departments in all 34 provinces on the revised guidelines in preparation
for the provincial planning process of 2018.

Development and publication of
criteria for administrative
boundaries

• In 2017, after the criteria for administrative boundaries in urban areas
had been developed, four municipal boundaries were completed and
mapped, bringing the total number of boundaries mapped to 26 of 34
provincial municipalities. Boundaries for 820 urban neighbourhoods
were also mapped during the year.

Establishment of adequate
infrastructure for functioning
government institutions, especially
at the subnational level

• In 2017, three citizen service centres of offices of provincial governors
were constructed to increase the access of citizens to the issuance of
national identity cards and other government services. In addition, 13
offices of provincial governors and 11 municipalities were equipped
with Internet infrastructure to improve information technology
management systems and enable improved communication with
constituents. Eight small-scale infrastructure projects enabled
municipalities to improve the delivery of services, benefiting 157,168
citizens, including 45,728 women.

Establishment of credible and
accessible judicial and penal
systems that respect and uphold the
human rights of all citizens

• On 4 March 2017, the President endorsed the revised Penal Code, which
consolidates crimes and punishments into a single code and incorporates
provisions of international law, including international human rights
conventions and treaties. Improvements to the Code include the
adoption of modern, gender-neutral definitions of crimes, such as rape,
the prohibition of the use of torture, the prohibition of land -grabbing,
the criminalization of and the imposition of strict punishments for the
practice of bacha bazi and a significant reduction in the number of
crimes that are punishable by death.

22/32

18-02724

A/72/768
S/2018/165
Indicators of progress

Metrics

• In 2017, the Anti-Corruption Justice Centre, which was established in
2016, embarked on the processing of more complex cases involving
senior government officials, in particular individuals from the security
sector. As at 31 January 2018, the Centre had processed 27 cases
involving 114 accused persons at the primary court level, including 14
generals from the Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of the Interior
and 3 deputy ministers, who were convicted of offences and subjected
to prison terms ranging from 1.5 to 14 years.

IV. Human rights
Benchmark: improved respect for human rights of Afghans, in line with the Afghan Constitution and
international law, with particular emphasis on the protection of civilians, the situation of women and
girls, freedom of expression and accountability based on the rule of law
Indicators of progress

Metrics

Reduction in the number of incidents
of unlawful use of force and
intimidation of civilians, through
compliance of relevant actors with
international law

• In 2017, UNAMA documented 10,453 civilian casualties (3,438 people
killed and 7,015 injured), a decrease of 9 per cent compared with 2016.
UNAMA attributed 65 per cent of the civilian casualties to
anti-government elements, 20 per cent to pro-government forces,
11 per cent to unattributed crossfire during ground engagements
between anti-government elements and pro-government forces, 3 per
cent to explosive remnants of war and approximately 1 per cent to
cross-border shelling from Pakistan into Afghanistan. The combined
use of improvised explosive device tactics caused 4,151 civilian
casualties (1,229 people killed and 2,922 injured), comprising 40 per
cent of all civilian casualties in 2017, followed by ground engagements
accounting for 3,484 civilian casualties (823 people killed and 2,661
injured). Conflict-related violence continued to kill and injure women
and children in 2017. UNAMA recorded 3,179 child casualties (861
children killed and 2,318 injured), a 10 per cent decrease compared
with 2016. The Mission documented 1,224 women casualties (359
women killed and 865 injured) in 2017, an increase of less than 1 per
cent, although female mortality increased by 5 per cent. Women
comprised 12 per cent of conflict-related civilian casualties.
• In 2017, the Tawheed Centre in the Office of the National Security
Council, with support from the Resolute Support Mission of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization, created a database to strengthen the
Government’s capacity to track conflict-related civilian casualties. In
addition, the Resolute Support Mission trained 305 officers of the
Afghan National Defence and Security Forces in measures to mitigate
civilian casualties.

18-02724

23/32

A/72/768
S/2018/165
Indicators of progress

Metrics

• The Civilian Casualties Avoidance and Mitigation Board held three
meetings in 2017, on 15 February, 23 August and 5 December, during
which it addressed practical efforts undertaken by the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces and international military forces to
improve the protection of civilians.
• In 2017, the Afghan National Police established 12 additional child
protection units, bringing the total number of units to 33, covering 33 of
34 provinces in the country.
• UNAMA and the United Nations Children’s Fund trained 22
communication officers of the National Directorate of Security, 17 chiefs
of police in Kabul district and 11 teachers on the protection of children in
armed conflict in 2017.
• In May 2017, the revised Penal Code was published in the Official
Gazette. It includes provisions prohibiting and criminalizing the
recruitment and use of children by armed forces and a new chapter
criminalizing the practice of bacha bazi. It also introduces definitions of
international crimes in line with the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court.
• In August, the Government ratified the Convention on Prohibitions or
Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May
Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate
Effects of 1980, including all amendments and Protocols thereto.
• In October, the Government formally endorsed the national policy on
the prevention and mitigation of civilian casualties, the aim of which is
to protect civilians from conflict-related harm.
• On 17 October, UNAMA held its second annual civil-military dialogue on
the protection of civilians in Kabul, during which high-level government
and military representatives and the international protection community
discussed plans to meet obligations under the Protocol on Explosive
Remnants of War to the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons and
the implementation of the national policy on the prevention and mitigation
of civilian casualties.
• On 5 December, the Ministry of Defence launched its child protection
policy, which focuses on the prevention of six grave child rights
violations in armed conflict and the use by the military of education and
health facilities.
Improved awareness by Afghans of
their rights and by the Government
of its obligations

24/32

• In 2017, UNAMA published six reports on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, including two special reports. UNAMA utilized the
reports for awareness-raising and advocacy to promote respect for
international humanitarian and human rights laws by all parties to the
conflict.

18-02724

A/72/768
S/2018/165
Indicators of progress

Metrics

• In March 2017, the Anti-Torture Law and the new Penal Code were
issued by presidential decree, both of which contain a definition of
torture in line with the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
• On 24 April, UNAMA released its fourth public report on the treatment
of conflict-related detainees, which covered the period from January
2015 to December 2016. The release of the report coincided with the
second periodic review of Afghanistan by the Committee Against
Torture.
• In April, the Government indicated its intention to withdraw its
reservation to the Convention against Torture, and the Cabinet
approved, in principle, the decision to ratify the Optional Protocol to the
Convention. In its voluntary pledges and commitments submitted on
6 September 2017 as part of its candidacy for membership of the
Human Rights Council, the Government confirmed its continued
commitment to ratifying the Optional Protocol to the Convention
against Torture (see A/72/377), although implementation of those
commitments remains pending.
• In June, credible reports indicated that the President had issued an order
for the execution of 11 death row prisoners in retaliation for the suicide
attack in Kabul on 31 May, which killed 92 people and injured 491. As
a result of the advocacy of UNAMA, the Special Rapporteur on
extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions issued an urgent appeal
calling for the executions to be stopped until the right to a fair tria l
could be upheld. As a result, the planned executions did not take place.
• In September, the President endorsed an annex to the Anti -Torture Law,
which includes a provision for victims of torture to bring legal claims
for redress before criminal and civil courts. The Law and the annex
thereto were consolidated into one unified text, which was approved by
the upper house of the National Assembly on 14 January 2018. The text
is awaiting the President’s signature and is expected to be published in
the Official Gazette in March 2018.
• In November 2017, the Office of the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court made a request to the Pre-Trial Chamber for
authorization to initiate an investigation into alleged international
crimes committed in Afghanistan since May 2003, including the war
crime of torture committed by the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces. UNAMA continues to promote accountability and to
support efforts to address impunity for human rights abuses.
Improved impact of, and support for,
legal and policy measures to combat
violence against women and girls

18-02724

• In 2017, the proportion of women in the Afghan National Police
increased by 8 per cent, to 3,379. To address the sexual harassment of
women in the police force, the Ministry of the Interior continued work
to finalize its internal complaints procedure.

25/32

A/72/768
S/2018/165
Indicators of progress

Metrics

• In 2017, prosecution offices for the elimination of violence against
women were established in all 34 provinces. Female prosecutors are
present in 25 of the 34 provincial offices.
• In 2017, the Government continued its efforts to increase the role of
women in peace processes. On 2 July, 5 new female members were
nominated to the High Peace Council, thereby increasing the
representation of women to 12 members of a total of 63, with 4 women in
the Executive Board and 8 women in the General Assembly.
• In 2017, the Government continued to implement the national action plan
for the implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on
women and peace and security to increase the participation of women and
incorporate gender perspectives in the promotion of peace and security,
and to take measures to protect women and girls from gender-based
violence in armed conflict. Discussions continue between the Government
and donors about the funding mechanism and budget for the national
action plan.
• In 2017, UNAMA continued efforts to increase the participation of
women in the Afghan civil service, in political and social spheres of life
and in peace negotiations. Such efforts included the dialogues to mark
the Global Open Day on Women, Peace and Security from 17 October
to 22 November. The dialogues focused on strengthening the
participation of women in all aspects of the electoral process across
Afghanistan.
• The new Penal Code reduces the severity of the punishment under the
law for women who commit certain crimes, including adultery. In
August, however, the chapter on violence against women was removed
from the Code, which was viewed by some as a setback in upholding
the Government’s commitment to protecting the lives and rights of
women.
• The Government, on 8 March 2017, launched the Women’s Economic
Empowerment National Priority Programme and, on 8 August,
established the Executive Committee on Women’s Empowerment to
facilitate high-level coordination among national and international
stakeholders.
• On 18 April, the First Lady of Afghanistan launched the national plan of
action to eliminate early and child marriage (2017–2021).
Improved awareness of, and support
for, legal and policy measures
related to combating impunity and
furthering transitional justice

26/32

• In 2017, UNAMA continued to engage with civil society, the
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission and the
Government to end impunity for human rights violations and seek
justice and redress for victims.

18-02724

A/72/768
S/2018/165
Indicators of progress

Metrics

• UNAMA raised awareness about provisions in the peace agreement of
2016 between the Government and Hizb-i Islami (Gulbuddin) that grant
leaders of the group immunity and foresee the release of most prisoners
affiliated with the group, which could preclude the prosecution of
individuals who may be legally responsible for war crimes, genocide,
crimes against humanity and other gross violations o f human rights.
• In 2017, UNAMA engaged with the Transitional Justice Coordination
Group, comprising 20 civil society organizations, to promote efforts for
sustainable peace and reconciliation processes. On 26 November, the
Group expressed its support for the decision of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court to request the Pre-Trial Chamber to initiate
a formal investigation into human rights abuses in Afghanistan.
• In 2017, UNAMA finalized 34 provincial road maps for peace resulting
from local consultations conducted in previous years. Provincial road
maps will serve as tools for civil society organizations to engage with
the Government to promote respect for the rule of law and human rights
and to address impunity.
Government fulfilment of reporting
requirements on international human
rights covenants and conventions
and implementation of the
recommendations emanating from
the universal periodic review of
Afghanistan under the auspices of
the Human Rights Council

• In March 2017, the Government began to draft the third periodic report
of Afghanistan to the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination
against Women, which was due to be submitted in July 2017 but is now
expected to be submitted in March 2018.
• In April, UNAMA gave a briefing to the Committee against Torture in
closed session in Geneva ahead of the review of the second periodic
report of Afghanistan.
• On 15 August, the Government issued a standing invitation to all special
procedures of the Human Rights Council, indicating its willingness for
continued engagement with the United Nations human rights
mechanisms to promote respect for human rights in the country and to
benefit from the expert assessment and recommendations of mandate
holders.
• On 16 October, Afghanistan was elected by the General Assembly to be
a member of the Human Rights Council for three years from 1 January
2018. Work is under way to implement the voluntary pledges and
commitments of the Government, which contain elements on
strengthening the rule of law, the rights of women and children,
internally displaced persons and refugees and accountability.

Increased capacity and commitment
of the Government of Afghanistan
and the Afghanistan Independent
Human Rights Commission, as the
Afghan national human rights
institution, to respect, protect, fulfil
and promote human rights

18-02724

• In 2017, UNAMA continued its engagement with the Afghanistan
Independent Human Rights Commission on the protection of civilians
and the provision of support to human rights defenders and female
survivors of violence, and conducted senior-level consultations to
promote collaboration with United Nations human rights mechanisms.

27/32

A/72/768
S/2018/165
Indicators of progress

Metrics

• In 2017, UNAMA and the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights
Commission organized 59 events focusing on preserving and widening
civil society space, as well as promoting freedom of expression and
inclusive peace and reconciliation processes. The events involved 1,475
participants, of which approximately one third were women, in 27
provinces.

V. Economic and social development
Benchmark: government policies, supported by the international community, that promote
sustainable economic growth and contribute to overall stability
Indicators of progress

Metrics

National priority programmes are
designed and implemented with
international support and
endorsement

• By the end of 2017, the Government had prepared, launched and begun
implementation of 2 of the 10 national priority programmes. The
remaining 8 programmes are in the preparation phase but are expected
to be finalized and launched in 2018.
• In early 2017, the Government launched the Women’s Economic
Empowerment National Priority Programme and began its
implementation in March.
• Implementation of the Citizens’ Charter National Priority Programme
commenced in May 2017.
• As at 31 December, the national priority programme for the
development of the extractives sector was in the final stages of approval
by the Government’s High Economic Council.
• In 2017, concept notes or draft texts were developed for the national
priority programmes on urban development, agriculture, infrastructure
and justice.

More equitable distribution of
development assistance and
government expenditure throughout
Afghanistan

• With ongoing conflict in most parts of the country in 2017, it became
increasingly difficult to implement programmes equitably across the
country, especially in rural areas. As at late December, implementation
of the Citizens’ Charter National Priority Programme, the goal of which
is to bring basic services and tangible development to remote areas, was
being implemented in 32 provinces, 101 districts, 4 cities and nearly
5,000 communities.
• By 31 December 2017, gender and women’s affairs committees, which
are mandated to mainstream gender equality initiatives into the work of
provincial governments, had been established in all 34 provinces.

Increased revenue collection and
sustainable growth based on Afghan
resources

28/32

• In the first 10 months of 2017, the Government increased revenue
collection by 14 per cent, to $1.89 billion, primarily as a result of
improvements in the administration and enforcement of tax collection.
Owing to the dominance of the informal sector in the economy, most tax
revenue continues to be collected from customs, large taxpayers and
non-tax revenue sources.

18-02724

A/72/768
S/2018/165
Indicators of progress

Metrics

• Despite improvements in revenue collection, the Government is
expected to have covered only 40 per cent of budgeted expenditure in
2017, leaving a fiscal gap of 15 per cent of gross domestic product
(GDP), which is projected to increase to 17.4 per cent in 2020.
On-budget foreign civilian development assistance will therefore remain
critical to maintaining basic services and implementing development
programmes.
• Although the conflict continued to create insecurity and uncertainty and
limit economic growth in 2017, the growth rate increased slightly, from
2.2 per cent in 2016 to 2.6 per cent in 2017.
• To improve the business climate and avoid stifling growth, the
Government is considering several tax measures, such as a value added
tax, which would simplify the taxation process for businesses.

VI. Regional cooperation
Benchmark: sustained and effective regional coordination in support of prosperity, peace and stability
Indicators of progress

Metrics

Improved coordination of regional
bodies and increased regional
investments

• On 1 March 2017, during the thirteenth summit of the Economic
Cooperation Organization in Islamabad, member States adopted the
Islamabad Declaration and the Vision 2025, in which a road map was set
out for greater regional cooperation and integration over the next 10
years.
• On 15 and 16 March, during high-level talks held in London between
Afghanistan and Pakistan, an agreement was reached to improve cross border trade, economic and security cooperation. The agreement led to
the reopening of official border crossing points that had been closed for
a few weeks in February and March 2017.
• On 14 April, a conference on reconciliation in Afghanistan took place in
Moscow with participants from Afghanistan, China, India, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Pakistan, the Russian
Federation, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan. Participants
reiterated that the conflict in Afghanistan had no military solution and
must be resolved through intra-Afghan dialogue on the basis of Security
Council resolutions. Participants also called upon the Taliban to engage
in direct talks with the Government of Afghanistan.
• On 7 May, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic of
Iran visited Kabul and met with senior government officials. Talk s
between the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan and the
Islamic Republic of Iran led to a bilateral cooperation agreement and the
establishment of five working committees to implement elements of the
agreement.
• On 8 and 9 June, President Ghani participated in the summit of the
Heads of States of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization in Astana.

18-02724

29/32

A/72/768
S/2018/165
Indicators of progress

Metrics

During the summit, India and Pakistan became full members of the
Organization, and it was agreed that Afghanistan would be admitted to
the Organization once it resolves its internal conflict.
• On 5 August, President Ghani attended the inauguration ceremony of the
President of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Hassan Rouhani, in Tehran.
Both parties discussed security and economic cooperation, including the
Chabahar port and other infrastructure projects.
• On 27 August, senior military leaders of Afghanistan, China, Pakistan
and Tajikistan attended the meeting of the Quadrilateral Cooperation
and Coordination Mechanism in Counter-Terrorism in Dushanbe.
• On 11 October, after a seven-year pause, the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization held a meeting of the Afghanistan Contact Group in
Moscow. The Contact Group is a consultative platform that supports
Afghanistan in its fight against terrorism, drugs and criminality and
provides support for the sustainable development of the country through
the Organization’s economic cooperation framework.
• On 16 October, senior representatives of the Ministries of Foreign
Affairs of Afghanistan, China, Pakistan and the United States of
America participated in a meeting of the Quadrilateral Coordination
Group in Muscat to revive peace talks between the Government of
Afghanistan and the Taliban. Afghanistan and Pakistan agreed to
coordinate the return of refugees, taking into account the onset of
winter.
• During the seventh Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on
Afghanistan, which took place in Ashgabat on 14 and 15 November,
participants reiterated their support to the process o f the Conference and
the economic development of Afghanistan. In the margins of the
Conference, senior officials from Afghanistan, Azerbaijan, Georgia,
Turkey and Turkmenistan signed an agreement to build the Lapis Lazuli
transport corridor, giving Afghanistan a new, relatively attractive route
to ship its products to Europe.
• On 30 November, in Istanbul, representatives from Afghanistan,
Pakistan and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees gathered for the twenty-ninth meeting of the Tripartite
Commission. During the meeting, participants reiterated their
commitment to joint resource mobilization and lasting solutions for the
protracted displacement of Afghan refugees, including their sustainable
return and reintegration into Afghanistan.
• On 1 December, the seventh Heart of Asia Ministerial Conference on the
Istanbul Process on Regional Security and Cooperation for a Secure and
Stable Afghanistan took place in Baku. Discussions focused on regional
cooperation and common efforts to fight terrorism and concluded with
the adoption of the Baku Declaration, in which participating countries
emphasized the central role of regional organizations in fostering
stability and prosperity and reaffirmed their commitment to expanded
economic cooperation and the implementation of established

30/32

18-02724

A/72/768
S/2018/165
Indicators of progress

Metrics

confidence-building measures. Meetings of senior officials of the Heart
of Asia — Istanbul Process were held in March, September and
November, and meetings of regional technical groups were held in
March, April, August and November.
• From 4 to 6 December, during President Ghani’s first official visit to
Uzbekistan, 20 bilateral agreements were signed, including agreements
on the simplification of transit and customs procedures, a bilateral
committee on security was established, an Afghan consulate was opened
in Termez, and agreement was reached to construct an additional
1,000-km long electricity transmission line from Surkhan-Darya to Pul-e
Khumri and a 400-km railroad from Mazar-e Sharif through Shiberghan
and Maymana to Herat.
• On 21 December, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uzbekistan
received the approval of President Ghani for the organization of the
ministerial conference on the theme “Afghanistan — path to a peaceful
future” in Tashkent, which is scheduled on 26 and 27 March 2018.
• On 26 December 2017, the first dialogue of the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of Afghanistan, China and Pakistan was held in Beijing.
• On 29 January 2018, the President of Indonesia, Joko Widodo, visited
Kabul and offered support for the establishment of an Islamic centre,
development projects and the establishment of a trinational committee
of ulama from Afghanistan, Indonesia and Pakistan to promote peace
and reconciliation efforts in Afghanistan.

VII. Partnership between the Government of Afghanistan and
the international community
Benchmark: coherent support by the international community for Afghan priorities within an Afghan -led
coordination framework
Indicators of progress

Metrics

Increased proportion of aid aligned
with the Afghanistan National
Development Strategy and
government priorities

• In 2017, international donors continued to align their bilateral assistance
portfolios with the Afghanistan National Peace and Development
Framework, a process that will continue in 2018 as the national priority
programmes under the Framework continue to be developed and
launched.

Improved accountability of
procurement and contracting on
behalf of the Government and the
international community

• According to the National Procurement Authority, as at 31 December
2017, all the contracts signed for 733 high-value projects had been
published on its website.

18-02724

• In 2017, the Revenue Department of the Ministry of Finance held
bilateral consultations with several donors to discuss the implementation
of recommendations from the joint taxation working group in late 2016
to improve the transparency of donor contracts for off-budget
programmes.

31/32

A/72/768
S/2018/165
Indicators of progress

Metrics

Strengthening of the Joint
Coordination Monitoring Board in
support of the Kabul process and as
a means of facilitating a regular
review of progress on Afghan
priorities and mutual commitments

• The Joint Coordination Monitoring Board and the Senior Officials
Meeting, which convened in June and October 2017, respecti vely,
succeeded in reinvigorating the regular review of progress made against
the development and reform agenda through a new, more discursive
format. At the meetings, mutual commitments were confirmed between
the Government and international partners and steps were identified for
moving forward.

VIII. Counter-narcotics
Benchmark: sustained trend in the reduction of poppy cultivation, narcotics production and
drug addiction
Indicators of progress

Metrics

Decrease in poppy cultivation,
narcotics production and addiction
rates

• Poppy cultivation did not decrease. In 2017, the area under opium poppy
cultivation in Afghanistan was estimated at 328,000 hectares, a 63 per
cent increase from the 127,000 hectares estimated in 2016. Opium
production in 2017 was estimated at 9,000 tons, an increase of 87 per
cent from the 4,800 tons produced in 2016 and a record high for poppy
cultivation in the country.
• At almost $1.4 billion, equivalent to approximately 7 per cent of the
estimated GDP of Afghanistan, the farm-gate value of opium production
increased by 55 per cent in 2017 compared with 2016.

Increase in effective interdiction and
counter-trafficking efforts

• In 2017, Afghan law enforcement authorities, supported by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), conducted a total of
2,798 counter-narcotics operations, leading to seizures of 2,366 kg of
heroin, 64,757 kg of morphine, 47,178 kg of opium, 121 kg of
methamphetamine, 62,086 kg of hashish, 2,322
3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA) K-tablets (synthetic
drugs), 53,046 kg of solid precursor chemicals and 77,272 litres of
liquid precursor chemicals. The operations also resulted in the
dismantling of 50 heroin and 3 methamphetamine manufacturing
laboratories, the arrest of 3,078 suspects and the seizure of 477 vehicles,
217 weapons, 747 mobile phones and 8 radios.

Increase in licit agriculture and
related private capital investment in
areas previously used for poppy
cultivation

• In 2017, UNODC launched seven alternative development projects,
worth $6.5 million, in 35 districts of 18 provinces of Afghanistan,
targeting 20,000 rural households.

32/32

18-02724
