1. Dtcides in its judgement that Israel is a peaceloving State and is able and willing to carry out the
obligations contained in the Charter, and accordingly,
2. Recommends to the General Assembly that it admit
Israel to membership in the United Nations.

1. Decide qu 'a son avis Israel est un Etat pacifique
capable de remplir les obligations de la Charte et dispos6
a le faire et, en consequence,
2. Recommande a l'Assemblee generale d'admettre
Israel comme Membre de I'Organisation des Nations
Unies.

Adopted at the 414th meeting

Adoptee d la 414e seance par
9 voix contre une (F',Kypte),
avec une abstention ( RoyaumeUnl de Grande-BretOGM et
d'lrlande du Nord).

by 9 votes to 1 (F,Kypt), with
1 abstention ( United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland).

Deeiaion

Decision

At its 444th meeting, on 15 September 1949, the Council
decided that a separate vote should be taken on the
application for membership in the United Nations of
each country mentioned in the draft resolution submitted
by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,• namely,
Albania, the Mongolian People's Republic, Bulgaria,
Romania, Hungary, Finland, Italy, Portugal, Ireland,
Transjordan (Jordan), Austria, Ceylon and Nepal.

A sa 4448 seance, le 15 septembre 1949, le Conseil a
d6cide que les demandes d 'admission a I'Organisation
des Nations Unies des pays enumeres dans le projet de
resolution presente par l'Union des Republiques socialistes sovi6tiques • - Albanie, Republique populaire de
Mongolic, Bulgarie, Roumanie, Hongrie, Finlande, Italic,
Portugal, Irlande, Transjordanie (Jordanie), Autriche,
Ceylan et Nepal - seraient mises aux voix separement.

Adopted by 8 votes to 3
(E°.KJpt,
Ukrainian
Soviet
Socialist Republic, Union of
Soviet Socialist RepublicsJ.

Adoptee par 8 voix contre 3
(Fgypte, Republlque soclaliste
sovietique d' Ukraine, Union des
Republlques soclalistes sovietiques).

TRUSTEESHIP OF STRATEGIC AREAS 15

TUTELLE DES ZONES STRATfGIQUES 11

'70 (1M9). Reeolation of '7 Mareh 1M9

'70 (1M9). Resolution du 7 man 19-'9

[S/1280)

[S/1280)

Whereas Article 83, paragraph 3, of the Charter of
the United Nations provides:

Attendu que le paragraphe 3 de l'Article 83 de la
Charte des Nations Unies est ainsi con~u:

"The Security Council shall, subject to the provisions
of the trusteeship agreements and without prejudice
to security considerations, avail itself of the assistance
of the Trusteeship Council to perform those functions
of the United Nations under the trusteeship system
relating to political, economic, social, and educational
matters in the strategic areas",

«Le Conseil de securite, eu egard aux dispositions
des accords de tutelle et sous reserve des exigences de
la securite, aura recours a )'assistance du Conseil de
tutelle dans l'exercice des fonctions assumees par
I'Organisation au titre du regime de tutelle, en matiere
politique, 6conomique et sociale, et en matiere
d 'instruction, dans Jes zones strategiques»,

"Ibid., Folll'th Ynr, No. 41, 444th meeting, pp. 2-3 (document
S/1340/Rev. i).
11
Resolutiotia '.be'-~ on this question were also adopted

.. Ibid., quatr"me annh, n" 42, 444• sunce, p. 2 et 3 (document
S/1340/Rev. 2).
11 Question ayant fait l'objet de r6solutions ou decisions de la
part du Conseil en 1947 et 1948.

by the Council in f947'bdl948.

12

The Security Council
Resolves:
1. That the Trusteeship Council be requested, subject

to the provisions of trusteeship agreements or parts
thereof in respect of strategic areas, and subject to the
decisions of the Security Council made having regard to
security considerations from time to time, to perform
in accordance with its own procedures, on behalf of the
Security Council, the functions specified in Articles 87,
and 88 of the Charter relating to the political, economic,
social and educational advancement of the inhabitants
of such strategic areas;
2. That the Trusteeship Council be requested to send
to the Security Council, one month before forwarding
to the Administering Authority, a copy of the questionnaire formulated in accordance with Article 88 of the
Charter and any amendments to such questionnaire
which may be made from time to time by the Trusteeship
Council;
3. That the Secretary-General be requested to advise
the Security Council of all reports and petitions received
from or relating to strategic areas under trusteeship, and
to send copies thereof, as soon as possible after receipt,
to the Trusteeship Council for examination and report
to the Security Council;
4. That the Trusteeship Council be requested to
submit to the Security Council its reports and recommendations on political, economic, social and educational
matters affecting strategic areas under trusteeship.
Adopted at the 415th meeting
by 8 votes to none, with 3
abstentions (Egypt, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic,
Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics).

Le Conseil de securite

Decide:
1. D'inviter le Conseil de tutelle, sous reserve des
dispositions des accords de tutelle ou des parties desdits
accords relatives aux zones strategiques, sous reserve
egalement des decisions qui auront pu etre prises par le
Conseil de securite en ce qui concerne les exigences de la
securite, a exercer, conformement a son propre reglement,
au nom du Conseil de securite, les fonctions enoncees
aux Articles 87 et 88 de la Charte relatives aux progres
des habitants desdites zones strategiques dans les domaines
politique, economique et social et dans celui de l'instruction;
2. D'inviter le Conseil de tutelle a envoyer au Conseil
de securite, un mois avant qu 'il ne soit adresse al' Autorite
chargee de !'administration, un exemplaire du questionnaire etabli conformement a l' Article 88 de la Charte,
ainsi que tous amendements que le Conseil de tutelle
pourrait eventuellement apporter audit questionnaire;
3. D'inviter le Secretaire general a porter a la connaissance du Conseil de securite tous rapports et petitions
emanant de zones strategiques sous tutelle ou y relatifs,
et a envoyer des exemplaires de ces documents, des que
possible apres reception, au Conseil de tutelle pour
examen et rapport au Conseil de securite;
4. D'inviter le Conseil de tutelle a soumettre au Conseil
de securite ses rapports et recommandations en matiere
politique, economique et sociale, ainsi qu'en matiere
d 'instruction, interessant les zones strategiques sous
tutelle.
Adoptee a la 415• seance par
8 voix contre zero, avec 3
abstentions ( Egypte, Republique socialiste sovietiq11e
d'Ukraine, Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques).

Decision

Decision

At its 415th meeting, on 7 March 1949, the Council
accepted the interpretation of the text of the resolution
it had just adopted [resolution 70 (1949)] given in the
statement made by the President of the Trusteeship
Council on 22 July 1948 at a joint meeting of the committees appointed by the Security Council and the Trusteeship Council respectively to confer on the question of
the respective functions of the two Councils in regard to
trusteeship of strategic areas. 18

A sa 415 8 seance, le 7 mars 1949, le Conseil a accepte
l'interpretation du texte de la resolution qu'il venait
d'adopter [resolution 70 (1949)] donnee dans la declaration faite par le President du Conseil de tutelle le 22
juillet 1948, a une reunion commune des deux comites
nommes respectivement par le Conseil de securite et
par le Conseil de tutelle et charges de se concerter au
sujet de la question des attributions respectives des deux
Conseils concernant la tutelle des zones strategiques 2 6.

11
See Official Records of the Security Council, Fourth Year,
Supplement for March 1949, document S/916.

.. Voir Proces-verbaux officie/s du Consei/ de securite quatrieme
annee, Supplement de mars 1949, document S/916.
'

13
