xv
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE
SIXTH COMMITTEE
Without prejudice to any initiative which Member States may take in this respect,
6. Requests the Secretary-General to carry out
appropriate studies and to submit, at such times
as he may consider appropriate, suitable proposals
for the improvement of the methods and procedures of the General Assembly and its committees, including proposals to extend the use of
mechanical and technical devices ;
7. Requests, in particular, the Secretary-General to make the "thorough legal analysis", suggested by the Special Committee, of the questions
raised in paragraph 34 of the report of the Special
Committee, taking into account the proposal submitted to the Sixth Committee by the Belgian
delegation4 and the discussions in the Sixth Committee and in the plenary meeting, and to submit
a report to the fifth regular session of the General
Assembly.
236th plenary meeting,
22 October 1949.

361 (IV). Approval of a supplementary
agreement with the Universal Postal
Union concerning tbe use of the
United Nations laissez-passer
The General Assembly
Approves the supplementary agreement 1 between the United Nations and the Universal
Postal Union signed on 13 and 27 July 1949
concerning the use of the United Nations laissez;asse,-.
235th plenary meeting,
22 October 1949.

362 (IV). Methods and procedures of
the General Assembly
The General Assembly,
Having regard to its resolution 271 (III) 2 of
29 April 1949 relating to the appointment of a
Special Committee on Methods and Procedures
of the General Assembly,
Having considered the report3 of the Special
Committee and the conclusions reached therein,
Mindful of the importance of adapting its organization and procedures to its increasing responsibilities,
1. Expresses its satisfaction with the work
performed by the Special Committee on Methods
and Procedures of the General Assembly;
2. Approves the amendments and additions to
its rules of procedure, as set forth in annex I to
the present resolution ;
3. Decides that these amendments and additions
shall enter into force on 1 January 1950;
4. Approves the recommendations and suggestions of the Special Committee, as set forth in
annex II to the present resolution ;
5. Considers these recommendations and suggestions to be useful and worthy of consideration
by the General Assembly and its committees, and
requests the Secretary-General to prepare a document embodying the above-mentioned recommendations and suggestions in convenient form
for use by the General Committee and the delegations of Member States in the General
Assembly;
Considering that the study of factors affecting
the duration of General Assembly sessions should
be pursued by making use of the experience gained
during future sessions of the General Assembly,

Annex I

Amendments and additions to the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly
NEW RULE 1 (a)

Duration of session
On the recommendation of the General Committee.
the General Assembly shall, at the beginning of each
session, fix a target date for the closing of the session.
REVISED RULE 14

Additional items

Additional items of an important and urgent character, proposed for inclusion in the agenda less than
thirty days before the opening of a regular session or
during a regular session, may be placed on the agenda,
if the General Assembly so decides by a majority of
the Members present and voting. No additional item
may be considered until seven days have elapsed since
it was placed on the agenda, unless the General Assembly, by a two-thirds majority of the Members
present and voting, decides otherwise, and until a
committee has reported upon the question concerned.

REGULAR AND SPECIAL SESSIONS'
NEW RULE 19

Explanatory memoranda

All items proposed for inclusion in the agenda shall
be accompanied by an explanatory memorandum and,
if pos~ible, by basic documents or by a draft resolution.
3
See Official Records of the fourth session of the General Assembly, Supplement No. 12.
• See Official Records of the fourth session of the General Assembly, Sixth Committee, 156th meeting, paragraph 65.
• Existing rule 19 will become 19 (a).

See Official Records of the fourth session of the General Assembly, Annex to the Si:rlh Committee, document
A/944.
2 See Official Records of the third session of the General Assembly, Part II, Resolutions, page 17.
1

59
