UN/TED NA T/ONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

1(-y/5

RECORDS

th
MEETING:

’ “I :,‘I:. j 1
30 NOVEMBER 1976

I ‘I’,:

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/I975)

Pllge
1
. , . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . . , , . . 8. .

Adoption of the agenda . . , . . . . . . . . . . ,. . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I . . . . . I . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (S/12235) . . . , . . , , . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . #. . . . . , . . . . . . a. ,

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of: the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Reso/utior?s
end
Decisions
of the Security Coumil.
The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1975th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 30 November
Mr. Jorge Enrique ILLUECA

PresidW:

(Panama).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland,
United
Republic of Tanzania and United States of America.
Provisional

1. Adoption

Thsee members (Benin, Chino anti the Libyan Arnb
Republic) did not pnrticipnte irr the \vtilrg.

2. The PRESIDENT
(irlterpretgtiom
fionz Spnnish):
In connexion with the adoption of the resolution on
the renewal of the mandate of UNDOF, I have been
authorized to make the following complementary
statement on behalf of the Security Council regarding
the resolution just adopted:

agenda (S/Agenda/l975)

of the agenda

“As is known, the report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force states in paragraph 32 that ‘despite the present
quiet in the Israeli-Syria sector, there can be no
question that the situation in the Middle East will
tremain unstable and potentially dangerous unless
real progress can be made towards a just and lasting
settlement of the problem in all its aspects’. This
statement of the Secretary-General’reflects
the view
of the Security Council.”

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General o.n the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (S/12235)
The weeting

was called to order at 4.40 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda

The agenda WCIScrdopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General
Nations Disengagement Observer

1976, at 3.30 p.m.

3. Further, I have been asked by the delegations of
Benin, China and the Libyan Arab Republic to say
that, as they have not participated in the vote on
this resolution, they take the same position with regard
to the statement which I have just read out on behalf
of the members of the Council.

on the United
Force (S/12235)

1. The PRESIDENT
(intelp,‘ettrtion
jhr
Sprrnish):
The Council will now consider the item on its agenda.
I should like to draw the attention of members to the
two relevant documents before the Council. The first
is the report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF)
covering the period 25 May to 22 November 1976;
the second is the draft resolution contained in document S/12246. The text of the draft resolution was
considered by the Security Council during its unofficial
consultations held yesterday and this morning. In
accordance with the procedure agreed to during the
unofficial consultations, the Council will now vote on
the draft resolution contained in document S/12246.

4. I shall now call upon the members of the Council
who have asked to speak after the vote.
5.

Mr.

LA1 Ya-Ii (China) (i/rtPrpretrrtiou
.hm
With regard to the question of the United
Nations Force, we have always held a different
position in principle. This is well known to all. Based
on our consistent position, the Chinese delegation
did not participate in the vote.

Clrhcw):

6. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) fi/rtop/‘ctcltinn~;,~~/~?
Russitru): The Security
Council has just adopted a resolution renewing for a
further six months the mandate of UNDOF. The
question of extending the mandate of the Force is
indissolubly connected with the whole range of questions relating to the Middle East settlement. Unfortunately, in spite of all the efforts made by the United
Nations-in
the Security Council and in the General
Assembly-no
real progress has yet been made
towards the solution of this major iriternational

In ,firllor/r: France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic ofTanzania, United
States of America.
Against: None.
I

problem. So far, the basic causes of the conflict in the
Middle East have not been eliminated. That region
continues to be one of the main focal points of international tension. Israel is still holding on to the Arab
lands which it seized as a result of the 1967 aggression-the
Golan Heights, the Sinai peninsula, the
West Bank, the Gaza Strip and East Jerusalem. With
the support of its protectors, Israel also continues to
trample under foot the inalienable national rights of
the Arab people of Palestine. All this inevitably leads
to an increase of tension in the Middle East, fraught
with the possibility of a new outbreak of war.

/

‘I:;.‘,’

7. Recent events in the Middle East have quite
clearly shown the correctness of the position of the
Soviet Union. From the very beginning, the USSR
warned that the so-called partial measures concluded
pn a separate basis and excluding the key questions
in a Middle East settlement would not only not ease
the situation, but, on the contrary, would complicate
it even further.
8. Now, when the frank statements of the authors
of the step-by-step policy in private talks with Israeli
ministers have become public knowledge, the essence
of this policy, its main aim, cannot be doubted by
anyone. It consists in ensuring in good time, long
before the last or the penultimate step is taken in withdrawing Israeli troops, that no such step should be
taken at all. The step-by-step policy would seem to
indicate that the interests of the so-called security of
Israel cannot be met in any other way than by the
annexation by Israel of part of the Arab territories.
It is no secret that, according to them, Israeli troops
ought to remain forever in a certain part of the Arab
lands occupied in 1967. It is also now no secret that,
as a part of this policy, Israel is continuing and will
continue to block the exercise of the inalienable right
of the Arab people of Palestine to create its own
State.
9. Thus, it is clear what the policy of partial agreements is leading to. It is to the legalization of the
annexation of a considerable part of the Arab territories. That is why the policy of partial agreements
enjoys the full support of Israel. That is why Israel’s
Prime Minister,
Mr, Rabin, has made another
statement to the effect that instead of a universal
peace it would, in his words, be more useful to strive
to achieve new interim agreements dealing separately
with each Arab country concerned.
10. In the opinion of the Soviet Union, such an
approach, first, goes against the spirit and the letter
of relevant resolutions adopted by the United Nations;
and secondly, it is alien to the interests of a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East because an unjust
peace cannot be lasting. The only way to establish
a genuinely just, and therefore genuinely lasting, peace
in this region is, as heretofore, by means of an allembracing
political settlement. This approach is
supported by the overwhelming majority of States
Members of the United Nations.

11. The Security Council and the General Assembly
have made considerable efforts to escape from the
present impasse with regard to a Middle East settlement, The Council has this. year held eight series of
meetings devoted to various aspects of the Middle
East problem. At five of these series of meetings a
direct and active part was played by representatives
of the Arab people of Palestine, in their capacity as
representatives of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO). Having invited the PLO, the only
legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, to
take part in the discussion of the Middle East problem,
the Security Council, following the General Assembly,
thus officially recognized the following: without the
participation of the Palestinian people, without a just
solution of the Palestinian problem on the basis of the
guarantee of the inalienable national rights of the
Palestinian
people, a lasting and all-embracing
settlement in the Middle East is impossible.
12. The discussion of the Middle East problem in
the Security Council and the General Assembly this
year once more quite clearly confirmed that an allembracing political settlement of this conflict can be
achieved only on the basis of the following three
organically connected principles: first, withdrawal of
Israeli troops from all Arab territories occupied as a
result of Israeli aggression in 1967; secondly, the
satisfaction of the legitimate national demands of the
Arab people of Palestine, including its inalienable right
to establish its own State; and, thirdly, international
guarantees for the security and inviolability of the
boundaries of all States in the Middle East and their
right to an independent existence and development.
These principles taken together-and
they are indissoluble-should
take due account of the legitimate
rights of all parties directly concerned.
13. This all-embracing settlement of the Middle East
conflict should be achieved at the Geneva Peace
Conference on the Middle East with the participation
of all parties directly concerned, including the PLO
as the legitimate representative of the Arab people
of Palestine.
14. The advantages of resuming the work of the
Geneva Peace Conference are obvious. In that forum
the key questions of the Middle East settlement
should be discussed, for they cannot simply be ignored
there. Representatives of the PLO should, of course,
take part in the work of the Geneva Conference from
the very beginning of its resumption and should enjoy
equal rights with other participants.
15. The Soviet Union considers that the Geneva
Conference should very soon resume its work in
order to speed up the achievement of an all-embracing
political settlement in the Middle East. It is wefl
known to the members of the Council that the Soviet
Union recently took a new initiative to aid the resumption of the work of that Conference, The Government
of the Soviet Union put forward a specific agenda

4

for the .Conference, encompassing all the problems
whose solution would indeed lead to the establishment of a lasting peace in the Middle East.

lastina peace in the Middle East and any references
to the”nked for real progress towards a just and lasting
settlement ofthe Middle East problem in all its aspects.

16. The delegation of the USSR considers that at the
present time all efforts should be directed towards the
achievement of an all-embracing Middle East settlement within the framework of the Geneva Peace Conference. The Soviet Union does not object to renewing
the mandate of UNDOF for a period of six months
on the definite understanding that that prolongation
of the mandate will be used to seek a settlement of
the Middle East conflict within the framework of the
Geneva Peace Conference.

20. This position of Israel shows the true nature of
the public statements made by Israeli leaders allegedly
in support
of a settlement in the Middle East. It
shows once more that, .in fact, Israel continues
obstinately to block such a settlement. It shows, that,
as heretofore, Israel is trying to turn the United
Nations forces stationed in Arab lands into a means of
freezing the situation for all time.

17. In this connexion, the Security Council should
take very seriously the statement of the Government
of the Syrian Arab Republic, in which it is stated
that

East problem
in all its aspects constitutes ’ an
important warning to Israel. We hope that this warning
will be the last. The establishment of a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East can no longer be postponed.

21.

The fact that the Council

repudiated

the Israeli

approach
and recognized the need to activate effort$
to achieve a just and lasting settlement of the Middle

“The Syrian Arab Republic...
has decided to
approve the extension of the mandate of UNDOF
for a further six-month period., , hoping that this
time the international community
will assume its
responsibility and prevent Israel from continuing
to undermine the chances for peace, to violate the
Charter of the United Nations and to defy the
United Nations and its resolutions on the question
of Palestine and the. Middle
East problem”
[S/12237, LIIZIZ~X].

22. The Soviet Union consistently and insistently
supports not only the deepening of international
detente but also the extension of detente to all the
regions of the world, so that its fruits can be enjoyed
by all peoples. The USSR position in favour of the
immediate establishment of a just and lasting peace
in the Middle East is an important component of ‘the
consistent foreign policy of the Soviet Union, which
was confirmed in resolutions adopted at the twentyfourth and twenty-fifth Party Congresses. Speaking
on 24 November in Bucharest, the General Secretary
of the Central Committee of the Communist Party
of the Soviet Union, Leonid Brezhnev, noted that:

In that statement of the Syrian Government there is
a serious warning that Syria, like other Arab States,
cannot reconcile itself with Israel’s endless occupation of Arab territories and its obstinate policy of
depriving the Palestinian people of their rights.

“A

lasting peace cannot be the privilege of
alone. Peace is indivisible.
Nowadays this
fact is truer than it has ever been, and as long as
the seeds of war are not crushed in the Middle East,
as long as the lands expropriated by aggression
are not returned to the Arabs, as long as the
Palestinian people are denied their right to their
homeland, as long as the racist regimes of Pretoria
and Salisbury flagrantly trample under foot the
rights of the indigenous population
of southern
Africa and spill the blood of Africans, there can be
no lasting peace anywhere.”
Europe

18. The Security Council likewise cannot ignore the
warning contained in paragraph 32 in the SecretaryGeneral’s report on UNDOF, which states:
“Despite the present quiet in the Israel-Syria
sector, there can be no question that the situation
in the Middle East will remain unstable and potentially dangerous unless real progress can be made
towards a just and lasting settlement of the problem
in all its aspects.”

23. The Soviet delegation would like to stress the
following. We have turned our,attention
to a matter
referred to in the Secretary-General’s
report, namely,
the obligation of the United Nations Secretariat and
the UNDOF
Command to keep the expenditures on
the maintenance of the forces within the limits of the
appropriations
adopted. The USSR wishes to restate
its firm position that the United Nations forces in the
Middle East should be maintained as economically
as possible and, if possible, that expenditures should
be cut. In any case, there must be no increase in
expenditures
for the United Nations Emergency
Force (UNEF) and UNDOF beyond the levels established by the Security Council and the General
Assembly.

It is not surprising that this warning has become an
organic part of the decision just approved by the
Security Council.
19. At the same time the Soviet delegation cannot but
express most serious concern regarding the situation
created by Israel during the informal consultations
among the Council. members on the resolution just
adopted. The behind-the-scenes
machinations
of
Israel in this respect should be made known publicly.
The Israeli delegation-and
this should be said quite
openly-tried
to block any references in the resolution just adopted to the urgent necessity of continuing and activating efforts to establish a just and
3

24. Mr. MURRAY (United Kingdom): My delegation was very pleased to join in voting in favour of
the resolution just adopted, renewing the mandate of
UNDOF for a further six months. The role which the
Force plays in maintaining the cease-fire and in
supervising the Agreement on Disengagement between
Israeli and Syrian Forces [S1113021Add.I of 30 A4n.v
1974, N~VT~X I] is of the greatest importance, and
there can be no doubt that its continuation remains
essential at the present time.

the co-operation of the parties. On the other hand,
however, the report intimates to us that, although
UNDOF has done a good job, the situation is still
fluid and hazardous. The Secretary-General’s report,
in paragraph 32, categorically states: “there can be no
question that the situation in the Middle East will
remain unstable and potentially
dangerous unless
real progress can be made towards a just and lasting
settlement of the problem.”
Hence my delegation
concurs that renewed efforts should be made to resume
the negotiating process.

25. We were also pleased to note from the excellent
report prepared by the Secretary-General that the
situation in the area has remained quiet during the
period under review and that there have been no
serious incidents. Nevertheless, as he goes on to point
out, in the absence of real progress towards a settlement, the.underlying situation will inevitably remain
unstable and dangerous.

31. In order to achieve this desired goal, my delegation has gone along with the renewal of the mandate
of UNDOF for another period of six months and has
voted in favour of the draft resolution. This is in
keeping with the recommendation
contained
in
paragraph 33 of the Secretary-General’s
report
before us.

26. It is now two and a half years since the establishment of the UNDOF, and we cannot but note with
regret that there has not been more progress during
this time towards defusing these dangers by means of
real moves towards a settlement.

32. However, one point of overriding importance we
should like to emphasize is that UNDOF has been
established for a purpose. That purpose exactly
expressed, is the attainment of a just and lasting
settlement of the problem in all its aspects. In other
words, UNDOF is to be viewed as a United Nations
instrument. It is a means to an end and not an end in
itself. Once its instrumentality
has been taken
advantage of by the parties concerned, it has to go,
Once the end has been achieved, it has to leave.

27. As we have many times pointed out, the principal
purpose of the Force in our view is not to serve as a
substitute for a settlement but to provide the conditions in which progress towards a settlement can take
place. There seems to be a general view, which
I personally share, that the time’ may at last be
ripe now for such a move. We very much hope, therefore, that the next six months provided by the
extension of the mandate will be used to good effect.

33. It is obvious, therefore, that the Force is not
there to stay. Consequently, it would seem very
encouraging to see the parties concerned leaving
no stone unturned in pursuing the cause of a just and
durable peace in the area. This is primarily the reason
why the mandate has been extended-so
that productive and concerted efforts may be made to foster
and promote negotiations which will result in the
long-awaited lasting peace in the area.

28. I should like once again, in conclusion, to thank
most profoundly the Secretary-General and, through
him, Major-General Philipp, the Commander of the
Force, his staff and all those associated, here in New
York and in the area, with the running of the Force
for the skill and dedication they have shown in
carrying out their tasks over the past six months.
I should also like to express our gratitude to the
Governments of Austria, Canada, Iran and Poland,
which provide the contingents making up the Force.
The way in which the Force performs its difficult and
delicate role evokes our admiration and is a source of
continuing credit to the Organization.
29. Mr. CHALE (United Republic of Tanzania):
Once again the Security Council is meeting to consider
the report of the Secretary-General on the work of
UNDOF,
which was established in May 1974 to
supervise the cease-fire called for by the Security
Council and the Agreement on Disengagement
between Israeli and Syrian Forces [ihid.].

34. Therefore, I am very hopeful that today’s extension of the period of the mandate is-to borrow the
words of Talleyrand-the
beginning of the end and-to
borrow the words of Churchill-the
end of the
beginning. We are looking forward to the day when the
inscription of the Isaiah wall, the wall facing the
United Nations Secretariat building across First
Avenue, where numerous demonstrations have been
held, will be verified in fact somehow, some day, in
the Middle East. That inscription says: “They shall
beat their swords into plowshares and their spears
into pruning hooks. Nation shall not lift up sword
against nation; neither shall they learn war any more.”
I think that inscription is there for us to see and for
us to mediate on, and it is for us to .see to it that
it is- verified in fact, difficult as that may be.

30. On the one hand, we are happy to note that the
tasks entrusted to UNDOF, namely, the maintenance
of the cease-fire and the overall supervision of the area
of separation, have been effectively performed with

35. In conclusion, my delegation wishes to express
its appreciation to the Secretary-General,
to MajorGeneral Philipp, to Lieutenant-General
Siilasvuo,
Chief Co-ordinator of the United Nations Peace4

keeping Missions in the Middle East, and to all those
valiant men in the Force for their efforts;‘sacrifices
and dedication.

sight of the essential fragility of the present Middle
East stalemate. We must not, out of passivity and
habit, appear to compromise with aggression. We must
use our influence and authority to ensure the return
of the occupied Arab lands to their rightful owners,
to secure the enjoyment by the Palestinian people
of their right to self-determination
in their homeland
and to uphold the right of all States in the area to
exist within boundaries that are universallyrecognized.

36. Mr. JACKSON (Guyana): The favourable vote
of my delegation on the resolution once more extending
the mandate of UNDOF for a further period of six
months, that is, to 31 May 1977, represents a reaffirmation of my country’s keen desire to support
measures that seek the creation of conditions conducive to progress towards the attainment of a final
peace in the Middle East region.

41. At its present session the General Assembly has
already witnessed positive efforts in this regard in the
reiteration of the indispensable bases for a Middle
East settlement. The actions of the Security Council,
which has special responsibilties under the Charter,
should advance those efforts.

37. That the performance of UNDOF has contributed
to maintaining quiet in the area is beyond question.
We are heartened by the continuing contribution
of
the Force in maintaining the cease-fire between Syria
and Israel, thus avoi,ding the outbreak of serious
incidents which could disturb the present calm in the
Israeli-Syrian sector. Therefore, we agree with the
Secretary-General’s observation that in the circumstances the continued presence of UNDOF
in the
area is essential.

42. But it is not only within the organs of the United
Nations that the essential framework for a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East has ‘been almost
universally recognized, nor is it only in United Nations
organs that there are insistent calls for some impetus
to be given to the negotiating process with a view
to bringing about an early resolution of the grave and
compIex problems of the Middle East. At Colombo,
just a few months ago, the Heads of State or Government of Non-aligned
Countries expressed deep
satisfaction with United Nations resolutions which
stressed the importance of the establishment of a
just and lasting peace in consonance with the aims and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. At
that summit meeting of non-aligned countries the
Heads of State or Government expressed their grave
concern over ,the stagnation of efforts to establish a
just peace and manifested their confidence that the
non-aligned countries would bring stronger pressure to
bear in order to create the impetus necessary for overcoming the obstacles.

38. In this connexion, my delegation would have
preferred the very pertinent and succinct observations
of the Secretary-General contained in paragraph 32
of his report to be reflected in the resolution we have
just adopted. That that was not possible is a source
of great disappointment to my delegation. However,
those observations concerning
the unstable and
potentially dangerous situation, which will continue
in the Middle East unless real progress can be made
towards a comprehensive
settlement,
have been
included in your statement, Mr. President, indicating
quite clearly that the Security Council shares those
observations.
39. In expressing our view concerning the prevailing
calm in the area,,however, we cannot but repeat our
warning against the tendency to see the routine adoption of resolutions renewing the mandate of UNDOF
as a substitute for sustained and determined efforts
to reach a final overall settlement in the Middle East.
The Council is well aware of the tensions which
simmer below the surface calm that at present prevails
in the Middle East area. These tensions, natural and
inevitable, are direct consequences of prolonged
occupation. Continued occupation accompanied by
repression only serves to aggravate those tensions.
We have witnessed the vicious circle of the struggle
for freedom and repression. That situation has occupied the Council’s attention on a number of occasions
this year. It is to be regretted that the many long hours
the Council has devoted to the consideration of those
grave problems have had little, if any, impact on the.
larger issue of a search for lasting peace in the Middle
East.

43. Running through many of those calls is the
belief that the months ahead are propitious for a
sustained and intensified effort, for a renewal of the
negotiating process. Many believe that the objective
conditions for progress on the Middle East question
are better today than they have been for some time.
It is good, therefore, that the Council should lend its
voice to stating these conditions, for it should unhesitatingly join so many in the international community
who desire an urgent end to the occupation of Arab
territories, the restoration of the legitimate rights of the
Palestinian people and the introduction of a regime
of inter-State relations based on respect for the right
of all States to live peacefully within determined
boundaries.
44. In closing, I should like to pay a particular
tribute to the Syrian Arab Republic for its decision to
agree to the renewal of the mandate of UNDOF. The
Government and people of the Syrian Arab Republic
have once again placed their confidence in the
Organization’s
capacity to facilitate the much desired
peace settlement.
Such a trust should not go

40. Therefore, while we can take some comfort from
the constructive role that UNDOF
is playing on
Syrian territory occupied by Israel, we cannot lose

unrewarded.
5

45. I should like also to express the thanks of my
delegation to the Secretary-General,
to the forces and
to the troop-contributing
countries for the laudable
efforts they continue to make in the cause of international peace and security.

51. In conclusion, the Swedish delegation would
once again like to express our Government’s warm
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his efforts
to promote a development towards peace, and to
commend warmly the officers and men and the
Commander of UNDOF, as well as the collaborators
of the Secretary-General
in charge of UNDOF
operations,’ for their excellent services and their
devoted efforts in the cause of peace.

46. Mr. RYDBECK
(Sweden): The Swedish Government shares the view of the Secretary-General,
as expressed in his report, that if all the factors
involving the presence of UNDOF in the Israel-Syria
sector are taken into account, this presence must be
considered essential. My delegation was therefore
pleased to vote today in favour of the draft resolution
contained in document S/12246.

52. Mr.

DATCU

(Romania)

(interpwtntion

from

French): As we gather from the report of the Secretary-

General, in the course of the last six months UNDOF
has continued to carry out its tasks successfully with
the co-operation of the parties concerned.

47. It is in fact obvious to all that UNDOF is playing
an important and constructive role. The Force has
so far been successful in assisting the parties to maintain the cease-fire, in supervising the area of separation
in order to ensure that there are no military forces
within it and in investigating complaints from both
parties concerned-to
mention only a few of the
important achievements of the Force during the last
six-month period. There can therefore be no doubt that
UNDOF has been an important factor in maintaining
quiet in the area.

53. The Force has unquestionably ‘contributed
to
maintaining the cease-fire in the sector, and we must
congratulate all its members.
54. It is true that the situation in this sector has
been calm and that no serious incidents have taken
place, but, on the other hand, we must admit that no
progress has been achieved during this period towards
the establishment of a true peace. As is clearly
stressed in paragraph 32 in the report of the SecretaryGeneral: “the situation in the Middle East will remain
unstable and potentially dangerous unless real progress
can be made towards a just and lasting settlement of
the problem in all its aspects”.

48. However, while expressing satisfaction with the
peaceful situation, it is necessary for the Swedish
delegation to call attention to the fact that, in its resolution 390 (1976), adopted in May this year, the Council called upon the parties concerned-as it is doing
now-immediately
to implement its resolution 338
(1973). Although commendable efforts have been made
by the Secretary-General to promote an early resumption of negotiations aimed at establishing a just and
durable peace in the Middle East, it must be recognized
that very little progress indeed has been achieved
in this context.

55. We all agree with this observation of the Secretary-General. In fact, my Government considers that
the present state of tension in the region and the as yet
unresolved problems flowing from the Middle East
conflict constitute a grave danger for peace not only
in that region but also throughout the world.
56. Therefore, it is imperative
to undertake new
efforts ensure the resumption
of the negotiating
process so as to establish a just and lasting peace in
the Middle East, based upon the relevant resolutions
of the United Nations. To that end, an important
initiative might be the resumption of the Geneva
Conference, with the participation
of the countries
concerned and of other States in a position to contribute to a speedier solution of this problem. We are
deeply convinced that, in order to achieve a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East, the problem of the
Palestinian people must be solved, by, inter dice, the.
creation of an independent Palestinian State. This
presupposes the withdrawal of Israeli forces from
the Arab territories occupied following the 1967 war,
and guarantees of the independence and territorial
integrity of all States in the Middle East.

49. Certain recent developments
have, however,
given some cause for hope that the repeated call of
the Council to the parties to implement resolution 338
(1973) may result in action. As my delegation has
stated before in the Security Council, a grave responsibility rests with the parties to do their utmost to
utilize the six months ahead in making their contribution towards the achievement of a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East. There is, indeed, an urgent
need to continue and to intensify the peace efforts.
The present quiet must not be allowed to degenerate
into stagnation and immobility.
50. In this context, the’ Swedish delegation will
emphasize what was stated in the Secretary-General’s
report and restated here today by the President on
behalf of the Council, namely, that despite the present
quiet in the Israel-Syria sector, there can be no
question that the situation in the Middle East will
remain unstable and potentially dangerous unless real
progress can be made towards a just and lasting
settlement of the problem in all its aspects.

57. The United Nations,
through the Security
Council, has, in the course of the last three years,
played an important role in the creation and maintenance of conditions propitious for the establishment
of peace in that region. The dispatching of United
Nations Forces to separate the belligerents in Sinai
6

and Golan attests to this fact. But today we have
to find a new approach, namely, an overall solution
to the problems, because any partial approach can
only complicate matters and create new threats to
peace in the Middle East.

pleasure to participate
under your leadership,
and benign.

in the work of the Council
which was both authoritative

63. Mr. KANAZAWA
(Japan): My delegation voted.
in favour of the draft resolution which the Council
has just adopted, renewing the mandate of UNDOF
for another period of six months. We did so because
we believe that the task which the Force has been
performing
in the Israel-Syria sector still remains
indispensable for that period.

58. The United Nations could play a much more
important role in the efforts to achieve an overall
political settlement in the Middle
East. In this
connexion, we emphasize the need to involve the
United Nations more directly, both in the efforts to
resume the Geneva Conference and in the work of
that Conference, and, generally speaking, in any steps
that are taken to bring about an overall solution to
the problems of the Middle East.

64. It is a source of great satisfaction to us to note
from the report of the Secretary-General that UNDOF
has been able, with the co-operation of the parties,
to carry out the tasks entrusted to it, that it has continued to perform its functions effectively, that the
situation in the area has remained quiet, and that there
have been no serious incidents.

59. Convinced that the activities of UNDOF
are
part of the constructive measures conducive to the
maintenance of an atmosphere that will favour efforts
for the resumption of the negotiating process, the
Romanian delegation voted in favour of the resolution
adopted a few moments ago by which the mandate of
UNDOF has just been extended for six months. At
the same time, we wish again to stress that the
maintenance of the Force can in no way be considered an end in itself, but only a temporary measure,
of limited duration, until the establishment
of true
peace. Otherwise, it would be tantamount
to an
indefinite prolongation of foreign military occupation,
instability and injustice.

65. We wish to pay tribute to the Governments
which provide troops and military observers from
the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization
in Palestine (UNTSO). We should like to congratulate
the officers and men and the civilian staff for having
performed their duties with exemplary devotion and
efficiency. We should like also to congratulate the
Secretary-General
and his staff for their constant
efforts to maintain the high level of effectiveness of the
Force.
66. While UNDOF is fully discharging the important
task in the area assigned to it, my delegation cannot
fail to reiterate its conviction that the presence of
UNDOF
is not an end in itself but is intended to
provide the time and to create the climate conducive
to negotiations for a peaceful settlement, The performance of UNDOF must not be allowed to have the
effect of causing the quiet now prevailing to end up
in stagnation and a state of “no war, no peace”. The
role of UNDOF
is a temporary one; its presence
cannot be perpetuated. We are in full agreement with
the Secretary-General’s
view, as stated in his report,
and as reflected in the note by the President, emphasizing the vital importance of making real progress
towards a just and lasting settlement of the problem
in all its aspects.

60. Since UNDOF is located on Syrian territory,
it is obviously very important, first of all, to secure
the agreement of that country to any decision concerning the activities of the Force. The Syrian Government has once again demonstrated
patience and
political wisdom by agreeing to a further extension
of the mandate of UNDOF. We should be grateful
to it for that decision, just as we must appreciate its
determination to have recourse to the framework and
procedures set forth in the Charter in order to assert
its inalienable rights.
61. We trust that all the interested parties will take
full advantage of this latest extension of the UNDOF
mandate by resuming and intensifying their efforts
to arrive at an overall negotiated solution to the
problems of the Middle East and to establish a just
and lasting peace in the region.

67. To be sure, efforts have been made at a number
of levels to resume negotiations, as called for in resolution 338 (1973), but, much to our regret, these have
produced no tangible results.

62. Before concluding what I think will be my last
statement in the Council this month of November,
may I be allowed, Mr. President, to offer you a warm
and well-earned tribute, for the impeccable way in
which you have carried out your important tasks.
Your intensive efforts as a persuasive negotiator have
greatly assisted us in finding generally acceptable
solutions to the extremely delicate situations the
Council has had to face in the course of this month,
and particularly yesterday and today, in connexion
with the problem we are now discussing. As far as
my delegation and I are concerned, it has been a real

68. Despite the sharp differences of opinion which
have made it impossible thus far to reconvene the
the tireless efforts of the
Geneva Conference,
Secretary-General
over the past year to achieve that
end have at least been greeted with some goodwill.
We wish once again to pay tribute to the contribution
he and his assistants have made to the cause of peace
in the Middle East. My delegation wishes to encourage
them to continue their constructive efforts towards
7

that end. The Council can take satisfaction from the
Secretary-General’s
readiness to renew his efforts,
following the line taken by the Council, which is
entrusted with the ultimate responsibility
for the
maintenance of peace and security. The SecretaryGeneral’s contacts with the parties concerned constitute one of the reasons why we continue to hope
that the resumption of negotiations can be agreed
upon.

73. May I add .that we fully share also the feelings
which led the Secretary-General
f? make the other
observations appearing in paragraphs 31, 32 and 33 of
his report. In particular, my delegation has had the
opportunity of stressing on several occasions in the
Council Italy’s concern over the uneasy and precarious
state of affairs existing in the Middle East. My delegation is firmly convinced-and
has said so more than
once-that UNDOF’s aim and that of the other peacekeeping forces in the area is not to maintain an.d
protract the present situation any longer than necessary. Its m&n task is, rather, to help to bring the
parties concerned closer together and promote the
climate and conditions,best suited to encouraging them
to proceed with determmation along the road to peace.

69. It should be noted, however, that neither today’s
decision, nor the Council’s decision of 22 October
last [wwlution
396 (1976)] to renew the mandate
of the UNEF, offers any assurance that negotiations
will be resumed. We agree with the SecretaryGeneral’s view that the primary role of those peacekeeping forces is to create an atmosphere conducive
to the active search for a peaceful solution of underlying
political
problems. In this connexion, we would
suggest that perhaps recent events in the Middle
East are fostering such an atmosphere. The situation
in Lebanon is considerably improved. Are there not
indications that responsible sectors of the parties concerned are now more inclined to an active search
for a peaceful solution?

74. In this connexion and in respect of what I said
in my introductory remarks, I wish to note that the
present situation in the area and the declarations and
statements made hitherto by many pal’ties in the course
of the thirty-first session of the General Assembly show
some encouraging signs of a better adjustment to the
reality as it is, rather than what they wish it was. If
this trend, as we hope, gains strength, the road to
meaningful negotiations for a comprehensive settlement of the Middle East crisis may indeed be easier.
May I summarize the views of my delegation with
regard to such negotiations by simply saying: the
sooner they are undertaken, the better it will be for
all concerned and for all peace-loving States.

70. My delegation wishes to emphasize that the
extra time provided by these extensions of the
mandates of UNEF and UNDOF must not be wasted.
My delegation continues to hope that renewed efforts
will now be made in all responsible quarters to bring
about an early resumption of the negotiating process,
including the Geneva Conferentie, with the participation of all the parties directly concerned, so that
genuine negotiations can be arranged without delay,
thus bringing nearer a just and lasting settlement of
the complex Middle East problem.

75. In conclusion, we should like to express our
sincere appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
personal endeavours in the most potentially dangerous
problem facing the Organization in nearly 30 years.
We should also like to extend our thanks to all countries contributing to UNDOF,
to its Commander,
Major-Genera1 Hannes Philipp, and to the officers
and men of the Force for the good job they have done
once again, at times under strenuous circumstances,
In this respect, may I be allowed to recall here
also the contribution made by some of my countrymen at present serving in UNDOF as members of
UNTSO.

71. Mr. VINCI (Italy): In the circumstances prevailing in the Middle East, there is no doubt in our
mind that the extension of the mandate of UNDOF
is more than advisable. We fully share the opinion
of the Secretary-General, who, in paragraph 33 of his
commendable report of 22 November, con,siders “the
continued presence of UNDOF
in the area to be
essential”.
That being the predominant
opinion
existing among the members of the Council, we have
at the same time, met the genera1 expectations in
adopting the resolution introduced by the President and
contained in document S/12246. For the same reason,
my delegation has fully associated itself with the
President’s statement. In fact, we consider it most
appropriate in its contents and timing. I shall explain
that later in my statement.

76. Mr. SCALABRE
(France) (interpretation from
French): Six months ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 390 (1976), by which the mandate of UNDOF
in the Golan area was renewed for a period of six
months. At that time, the French delegation stressed
that that decision ought to give the parties to the
dispute an opportunity to search for ways to establish
a just and lasting peace’in the Middle’ East, Today
we are forced to deplore the fact that the past six
months have not allowed us to make progress in the
matter. We are forced to state that resolution 390
(1976), .which calls upon the parties concerned immediately to implement Security Council resolution 338
(1973), has still not even begpn to be implemented.

72. We feel that the action we have now taken is
the best we could take at this stage, and we wish to
acknowledge the wisdom of the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic for having given its assent to
the proposed extension. We also want to express our
appreciation to the Government of Israel for having
agreed to the renewal of the mandate of UNDOF.

77. Despite the absence of progress, the parties to the
dispute have nevertheless accepted the renewal, for a
8

period of six months, of the mandate of the United
Nations Force stationed in the Golan area. Naturally,
we welcome that decision, which is a manifestation
of good Will. We must stress here how much the
Council’s task is facilitated when the agreement of the
parties to the dispute is made known in advance, as
on this occasion. The initiative taken by Syria should
definitely be considered as a positive factor.
78. The presence of the observer Force is, nevertheless, only really justified by the active pursuit of
peace efforts. We hope that advantage will be taken
of the next six months to make new efforts. That is
the aim of our vote; that was also the SecretaryGeneral’s conclusion in his report which is before the
Council. We are in total agreement with the opinion
as stated in paragraph 32 of the report, that
“Despite the present quiet in the Israel-Syria
sector, there can be no question that the situation
in the Middle East will remain unstable and potentially dangerous unless real progress can be made
towards a just and lasting settlement of the problem
in all its aspects.”
79. At a time when each of us is wondering about
the chances for a return of peace to the Middle East,
renewal of the mandate of UNDOF in the Golan just
now and the renewal of the mandate of the Emergency
Force in the Sinai last month are encouraging signs,
Let us not deceive ourselves, however; if the presence
of UNDOF is essential to maintain calm and to create
an atmosphere conducive to peace efforts, it is not
itself an active element in the negotiation process.
Only political determination will enable us to achieve
a just and lasting peace settlement. We express the
hope that, pending such a settlement, that determination will prevent the adoption of any unilateral
action that would render future negotiations more
difficult.
80. In our view, the peace settlement, I recall once
more, must be based on three principles: evacuation
of the territories occupied by Israel in 1967; recognition of the right of the Palestinians to a homeland;
and finally, recognition of the rights of all States in
the region to live in peace within secure, recognized
and guaranteed boundaries.
81. We express the hope that the necessary conditions will materialize as soon as possible for reconvening the Geneva Conference, and that real negotiations can begin with a view to giving effect to the
principles that I have just recalled.
82. In conclusion, I should like to say how much
my Government appreciates the way in which the
Secretary-General and his colleagues, as well as the
Commander of UNDOF and the various Contingents
under his orders, are fulfilling their difficult tasks.
In Golan as well as in Sinai, the United Nations
daily gives proof of the importance of the role which

it is playing in the search for and in t,he maintenance
of peace.
83. Mr. ELHOFARI
(Libyan Arab Republic): My
delegation has made its position clear on previous
occasions with regard to the creation of UNDOF
and the prolongation of its mandate. Our attitude is
well known concerning Security Council resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973), on which the presence of
UNDOF is based. However, I should like to reiterate
our position.
84. On numerous occasions, in the General Assembly
and in the Security Council, we have affirmed that
those resolutions are irrelevant as a framework for
any just and lasting solution to the Palestinian question and the Middle East problem.
85. We are convinced that General Assembly resolutions 3236 (XXIX) and 3237 (XXIX), reaffirming the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, resolution 3376 (XXX), proposing the means designed to
enable the Palestinian people to achieve their national
rights; resolution 3379 (XXX), condemning Zionism as
a racist movement; and resolution 31/20 regarding the
implementation of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people to return to their homes and property
and to achieve self-determination,
national independence and sovereignty, reflect the profound changes
and developments
in the attitude of the United
Nations and international public opinion, and call for
a review of this question and the method of dealing
with it.
86. For these reasons, my delegation has not participated in the debate on this item and in the vote on
the draft resolution in document S/12246.
87. I should like on behalf of the delegation of the
Libyan Arab Republic to take this opportunity to
express our appreciation to the Secretary-General for
his efforts and for his report to the Council.
88. Finally, Mr. President, since we are approaching
the end of the month, 1 should like to express to you
our sincere congratulations and appreciation for the
manner in which you have directed the important
work of this Council.
89. Mr. AKHUND
(Pakistan): Mr. President, since
I am speaking in the Council for the first time under
your presidency and since this is the last day of
your presidency, I should like to place on record the
admiration and respect which my delegation and
I have for the exemplary manner in which you have
conducted the proceedings of the Council during the
current month. The tact, skill and firmness ofhand with
which you have guided the Council’s deliberations
during the many difficult problems with which it has
had to deal during the current month attest to Your
personal wisdom and to the great experience, including
experience in this chair, which you have brought to
this office.

90. I should like to take this opportunity also to
convey my gratitude to my colleagues who expressed
kind sentiments towards me during the previous
meetings. I value greatly the expression of their confidence and consider its as a reflection of the friendship and close co-operation which my country enjoys
with theirs.

of the Middle East problem has not been due to a
lack of initiative on the part of the United Nations.
It is plain, in fact, that movement towards peace in
the Middle East is being held up because Israel is not
willing to have a settlement except on its own terms
and, in effect, in disregard of the relevant United
Nations resolutions.

The Council has just adopted a resolution
extending the mandate UNDOF for another six
months. We have noted with satisfaction from the
Secretary-General’s
report of 22 November that
UNDOF
has continued to perform its functions
effectively with the co-operation of the parties and
that during the period under review the situation in
the area remained quiet. We join previous speakers
in paying tribute to the members of the Force and
its officers for the devotion and effectiveness with
which they have performed their duties under the
able command of Major-General Hannes Philipp.
By discharging so ably the tasks assigned to them,
these sentinels of peace have also brought honour to
the countries to which they belong.

96. Resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) have
enunciated the two main elements of a durable Middle
East settlement. In accordance with those resolutions,
Israel should withdraw from all the Arab territories it
has occupied since 1967 and negotiations should be
undertaken in order to achieve a just and lasting peace
in the Middle East which will ensure the security and
safety of all the countries and peoples of the region.

91.

97. In its resolutions 3236 (XXIX), 3376 (XXX) and
31/20, the General Assembly has also declared that
the inalienable rights of the Palestinians must be
recognized and implemented.
Those resolutions
stipulate that the Palestinians should have the right
to return to their homes, to exist as a nation and to
have a State of their own.

92. Especially praiseworthy is the fact that UNDOF
has facilitated and continues to supervise meetings
between members of families separated as a result of
the hostilities. It is our hope that the UNDOF mineclearing team, whose mandate has been further
extended, will be able to complete its work soon
and that the inhabitants of the area will no longer
fall victim to mine explosions in the zone and will be
able to go about their daily tasks and occupations
without risk or fear.

98. The current state of no war, no peace in the
Middle East is not to the real advantage of any of the
parties concerned and should not be so considered
by Israel. Israeli settlements are being established on
a permanent basis in many parts of the occupied territories. Also, through administrative acts and policies,
the original character of many areas and cities,
including Jerusalem and Hebron, is being altered. Acts
of repression, intimidation and oppression are being
committed by the occupying Power. Recognizing the
dangers inherent in the situation, the Security Council
adopted a consensus statement on 11 November
[1969th mering],
Israel would do well to pay heed
to it. Israel should also ensure the safety of the
inhabitants of the territories and facilitate the return
of those who had to flee from their hearths and homes.
It should apply the fourth Geneva Convention’
and
refrain from establishing any settlements
in the
occupied territories.

93. In its resolution 390 (1976) of 28 May, the Council renewed the mandate of UNDOF for six months,
called upon the parties concerned to implement immediately Security Council resolution 338 (1973) and
requested the Secretary-General to submit a report
on the developments of the situation and the measures
taken to implement 338 (1973). The Secretary-General
in his reports in documents S/12210 and S/12235 has
quite rightly concluded in paragraph 32 of the latter
that

99. The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
has agreed to the extension of the mandate in the
hope that international efforts will achieve a just and
lasting peace based on the principles embodied in the
relevant Security Council and General Assembly resolutions. The statement of the Government
of the
Syrian Arab Republic [S/12237, LIIIIICS] represents a
stance based on reason and deserves a positive
response from the Council.

“Despite the present quiet in the Israeli-Syria
sector,... the situation in the Middle East will remain
unstable and potentially dangerous unless real
progress can be made towards a just and lasting
settlement of the problem in all its aspects.”
94. We also fully endorse the Secretary-General’s
view that the Agreement on Disengagement between
the Israeli and Syrian Forces [S/i/302/Add. I,
d/r!rc.~ 11 is not a peace agreement but a step towards
a just and durable peace on the basis of resolution 338
(1973). We join him in urging that renewed efforts
should be made to resume the negotiating process.

100. My delegation voted for the resolution extending
the mandate of UNDOF in the belief that the Force is
a potent factor against the recurrence of war in the
Middle East. However, we do. not support the
stationing of the Force on the Syrian-Israeli
border,
or, for that matter, anywhere else, on a permanent
or semi-permanent basis, thus
.- freezing the situation.

95. It is evident from the Secretary-General’s report
that the lack of progress towards a pacific settlement
IO

107. The PRESIDENT
(ktrrpretuzion
,fkm Spunis/z): With the Council’s leave, I should like now to
make a statement in my capacity as the representative of PANAMA.

United Nations Force is not to be used as a
shield for Israel’s policy of annexation. The Council,
in the resolution it has just adopted, has again called
upon the parties concerned to implement
resolution
338 (1973) and has requested the Secretary-General
to submit a report at the end of the six-month period
on developments in the situation and the measures
taken to implement that resolution.

The

108. The decisions which the Council has adopted
today and which appear in documents S/12246 and
S/12247 have, in Panama’s view, greater scope than
the mere extension of the mandate of UNDOF for a
further period of six months, ending on 31 May 1977.
As the main part of its decision states, the Council is
profoundly concerned and determined that the parties
should implement resolution 338 (1973) immediately.

101. No doubt the Secretary-General
wifl take all
possible steps to reactivate the process of negotiations
on the Middle East. He has employed in the past
a number of means available to him for implementing
Council resolutions on the Middle East. We are certain
that the Secretary-General will continue to exert all
efforts and take such additional
measures as he
considers necessary to fulfil the mandate entrusted
to him under the resolution.

109, As the preamble of the resolution states, the
Council is still concerned over the prevailing state of
tension in the area and it agrees with the SecretaryGeneral as to the urgency of achieving real progress
towards a just and lasting settlement of the unstable
and potentially dangerous situation obtaining in the
Middle East by tackling the problem in all its aspects.

102. It is our view, furthermore,
that the Geneva
Peace Conference should be resumed at an early date
with the full participation of all the parties, in&ding
the PLO. Also, other appropriate additional measures
should be undertaken to achieve a just and lasting
peace in the area. In brief, the delegation of Pakistan
supports all possible efforts aimed at achieving a
comprehensive solution of the Middle East problem
in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly.

1IO. The Council’s decision cannot therefore be taken
as an automatic renewal of the mandate UNDOF
devoid of any other meaning. As we understand it,
the Council is not in favour of freezing an abnormal
situation which is unstable and unjust. Quite the
contrary.
The Council has repeatedly expressed its
desire that the parties should achieve a genuine agreement that will ensure a just and stable peace on the
basis of resolution 338 (1973). The will of the Council,
as we interpret it, is that the efforts at negotiation
should be resumed.

103. Mr. BENNETT
(United States of America):
The United States is gratified that the renewal of the
mandate of UNDOF has been expeditiously handled.
Keeping the peace is a goal on which we can all
agree, and UNDOF has done an outstanding job in
overseeing the cease-fire on the Golan Heights. My
delegation would like to commend in particular the
excellent work done by the Secretary-General and the
Commander of UNDOF.

111. That is why my country supported the request
contained
in the resolution
that the SecretaryGeneral should “submit at the end of this period a
report on the developments in the situation and the
measures taken to implement resolution 338 (1973).”
We trust that during that time the Council will be able
to note true progress towards ‘peace and international
co-operation in the region.

104. The co-operation of the Governments of Israel
and the Syrian Arab Republic with UNDOF
has
ensured the success of its mission. It is the two parties
which have kept the cease-fire. Their agreement to
the resolution extending the mandate of UNDOF is
a major element in the CouncilYs action. Today’s
decision by the Security Council is an important contribution to the maintenance of peace.

112. Since the Council has now concluded its agenda,
and since this is the last meeting to be held by the
Council in the month of November, I feel it appropriate to make a few comments at the end of my
tenure as PRESIDENT.

105. In concluding, I’ should like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, for your persistent efforts in
bringing about the agreement of the parties to this
further renewal of the mandate of UNDOF.

113. Since the beginning of November the Council
has endeavoured to cope with a heavy work schedule,
which has been concluded with almost total success.
I say “almost total success” because all the subjects
discussed this month have culminated in decisions
that have helped to enhance the positive image of the
Council with the exception of one case in which the
approval of one of the permanent members .of the
Council was withheld, But, because of the weight
and cogency of the opinions expressed in the course of
the debate, we believe that this subject will doubtless
receive
favourable
reconsideration,
which will
redound to the honour of the permanent member to

106. Mr. HACHEME
(Benin) (inte,pretation
from
French): Mr. President, my delegation justly appreciates the efforts you tiave made throughout the discussions we have been engaged in. We should like to
state that our attitude with regard to the vote was
taken in accordance with clear instructions which we
have only just received. That is why we were not able
to inform the members of the Council in advance.
11

which I have referred and will further the aims and
purposes of the Charter of the United Nations and
assist in strengthening international peace and security.

progressive traditions of the diplomatic
schools of Latin America.

and legal

115. I must conclude by expressing to the members
of the Council my heartfelt appreciation for the
courtesy, support and co-operation they have constantly shown me during my presidency in the course
of this month. I wish to extend profound thanks to
the Secretary-General and to his colleagues in the
Department of Political and Security Council Affairs,
including not only our visible collaborators but also
those who, in their anonymous but essential interpretation booths and in the offices where official
records and public information are prepared, are the
dynamo which keeps the Organization moving. To all
of them, therefore, I offer my appreciation and thanks.

114. I should like to express to the members of the
Council and to the Secretary-General my profound
satisfaction at the work done in the course of this
month. May I, also say that if any merit can be
attributed to the work of the President, it is only that
he has endeavoured to harmonize and co-ordinate the
tasks of the Council in order to achieve unanimous
solutions. All the President did during this month was
to try to follow the path of friendly understanding,
something that is possible only when one takes full
advantage of the wisdom, prudence, diplomatic discretion, experience and co-operation-qualities
that were
constantly displayed by the representatives of the
countries which make up the Council during the
presidency of the representative of Panama. Thus,
like our colleague from Guyana, 1 believe we have
acted in keeping with what the in-coming President
of the Council, Mr. Datcu of Romania, has called the

Note
I United

12

Nations,

Twcrfy

Swic~s, val. 75, No. 973,

p. 287.

HOW TO OBTAIN
United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

NATIONS

Sk PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
monde entier. Informez-vous
auprb
des ventes, New York ou Geneve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

in United

Nations,

New

York

DES NATIONS

DE LAS NACIONES

Unidas estin en venta en librerias
a su librero o dirijase
a: Naciones

00300

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

UNIES

sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations

PIJBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Nacioncs
todas partes del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLICATlONS

publications
may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
your bookstore
or write to: United Nations,
Sales Section.
New

dtpositaires
du
Unies. Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas,
Seccidn de Ventas.

83-60801--April

1985-2,200
