A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/76
11 January 1996

Fiftieth session
Agenda item 76
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the First Committee (A/50/596)]
50/76.

Implementation of the Declaration of the
Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace,
contained in its resolution 2832 (XXVI) of 16 December 1971, and recalling
also its resolution 49/82 of 15 December 1994 and other relevant resolutions,
Recalling also the report of the Meeting of the Littoral and Hinterland
States of the Indian Ocean held in July 1979, 1/
Having considered the conclusions and recommendations reached by the Ad
Hoc Committee on the Indian Ocean during its session in 1995, 2/
Emphasizing the need to foster consensual approaches, in particular
given the prevailing international climate, which is conducive to the pursuit
of such endeavours,
Noting the initiatives taken by countries in the region to promote
cooperation, in particular economic cooperation, in the Indian Ocean area and
the possible contribution of such initiatives to overall objectives of a zone
of peace,
Convinced that the participation of all the permanent members of the
Security Council and the major maritime users of the Indian Ocean in the work
of the Ad Hoc Committee is important and would assist the progress of mutually

1/
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth Session,
Supplement No. 45 and corrigendum (A/34/45 and Corr.1).
2/
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fiftieth Session,
Supplement No. 29 (A/50/29).
96-76099

/...

A/RES/50/76
Page 2

beneficial dialogue to develop conditions of peace, security and stability in
the Indian Ocean region,
1.
Ocean; 2/

Takes note of the report of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Indian

2.
Considers that greater efforts and more time are required to
develop a focused discussion on practical measures to ensure conditions of
peace, security and stability in the Indian Ocean region;
3.
Reiterates its conviction that the participation of all the
permanent members of the Security Council and the major maritime users of the
Indian Ocean in the work of the Ad Hoc Committee is important and would
greatly facilitate development of a mutually beneficial dialogue to advance
peace, security and stability in the Indian Ocean region;
4.
Requests the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee to pursue his
dialogue on the work of the Committee with the permanent members of the
Security Council and major maritime users of the Indian Ocean and to apprise
the Ad Hoc Committee of his consultations and other relevant developments at a
meeting to be held in 1996 for that specific purpose, to take place before the
1997 regular session of the Committee;
5.
Requests the Ad Hoc Committee to submit to the General Assembly at
its fifty-first session a report on the consultations held;
6.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to render all necessary
assistance to the Ad Hoc Committee, including the provision of summary
records;
7.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-first
session the item entitled "Implementation of the Declaration of the Indian
Ocean as a Zone of Peace".
90th plenary meeting
12 December 1995
