S/2018/866

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 September 2018
Original: English

Situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
By its resolution 2423 (2018), the Security Council extended the mandate of the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA) until 30 June 2019 and requested me to report on a quarterly basis on
its implementation, focusing on progress in taking forward the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali (see S/2015/364 and S/2015/364/Add.1) and the efforts of
MINUSMA to support it. The present report contains updates with regard to major
developments in Mali since the issuance of my previous report (S/2018/541).

II. Major political developments
2.
The presidential elections, which culminated with the re -election of President
Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, dominated the reporting period. Signatory pa rties made
some progress in the implementation of the Agreement, including the nomination of
interim authorities at the district level, the creation of municipalities for the Ménaka
and Taoudenni regions, and the adoption of the national security sector re form strategy.

A.

Implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali
3.
On 25 June 2018, the Agreement Monitoring Committee held its twenty-sixth
session to assess, inter alia, the progress made in the implementation of the road map
adopted on 22 March. Participants expressed concern over the lack of progress in
establishing interim authorities at the district level and in operationalizing the mixed
units of the Operational Coordination Mechanism in Kidal and Timbuktu ahead of the
29 July presidential elections, and called upon the parties to create conditions
conducive to a credible electoral process.
4.
On 5 July, the Mission concluded a three-day event focusing on the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security, during which women from all regions of the country met with senior
government and United Nations officials. Participants identified, inter alia, ensuring
the security of populations, including women and children, and facilitating women’s
participation in peacebuilding processes as priorities. Also in July, 45 women from

18-15406 (E)

260918

*1815406*

S/2018/866

the signatory parties and civil society participated in a workshop organized by the
High Representative of the President for the peace process, MINUSMA and the
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women), during which a women-led and independent consultative forum was
created to monitor the implementation of the Agreement.
Political and institutional measures
5.
As requested by the Security Council in its resolution 2423 (2018), the UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Jean-Pierre Lacroix, visited Mali
from 31 August to 5 September and discussed with the Mission’s senior leadership
the draft outline of the pact for peace, which had been drafted after consultations with
the Government and signatory movements. The pact for peace builds on the road map
adopted on 22 March and the benchmarks for monitoring the implementation of the
Agreement. It is aimed at renewing the commitment of the signatory parties to
accelerate the implementation of the Agreement, as well as complementing the
ongoing peace efforts and embracing longer-term objectives.
6.
On 27 June, following consultations with the local communities, the
Government adopted legislation creating 63 territorial collectivities in the Ménaka
and Taoudenni regions, which should strengthen decentralized governa nce and
facilitate the provision of basic administrative services at the local level.
7.
On 26 July and 8 August, following extensive negotiations between the
signatory parties and supported by the Mission’s good offices, the Government
appointed officials to serve as members of the interim administrations of 21 of the
24 districts in the northern regions.
8.
On 20 June, the Council of Ministers appointed 72 administrators, including
5 women. As at 31 August, 31 per cent of civil administrators were pres ent at their
duty stations in the northern regions and in the Mopti region. A temporary increase in
the proportion of civil administrators redeployed in the northern and central regions
to 42 per cent was noted during the electoral period. Five out of six governors and
16 out of 32 prefects were present at their respective duty stations. In preparation for
the elections, the Government deployed five prefects to Kidal, one of whom remained
deployed after the elections. Since the previous reporting period, t here had been a
slight increase in the percentage of appointed judicial and prison officials deployed
in northern and central Mali. As at 5 September, 67.5 per cent of judicial officials and
78 per cent of penitentiary officials in the north, and 94.5 per cent and 95.5 per cent,
respectively, in the Mopti region, were present at their appointed posts, although
insecurity caused absenteeism and the continued relocation of some staff.
9.
With funding from the Government, regional interim administrations
implemented a number of projects to strengthen basic services, social cohesion and
economic recovery in all five northern regions. The projects included the
rehabilitation of a water supply system and the construction of two markets in the
Kidal region, as well as the construction of six dairy farms and a gum arabic
production factory in Taoudenni. In June, the interim administration of Timbuktu
launched a $250,000 project to rehabilitate Lake Horo to improve food security in the
region and prevent conflicts between farmers and herders by demarcating pastoral
space.
10. On 31 May, the Council of Ministers adopted a law on national understanding
that allows for the reintegration of those who were responsible for crimes committed
in the context of events related to the crisis that began in 2012, but have expressed
genuine repentance. The law does not apply to those responsible for war crimes,
crimes against humanity, rape and any other crimes deemed imprescriptible. It offers
compensation for and public assistance to victims.
2/20

18-15406

S/2018/866

11. On 28 August, the Council of Ministers adopted a decree convening the electoral
college and announcing that parliamentary elections would be held on 28 October and
18 November. On 14 September, the Government of Mali announced that the elections
would be postponed until 25 November and 16 December, respectively.
Defence and security measures
12. On 6 July, the National Council for Security Sector Reform adopted the national
security sector reform strategy, which sets forth a national v ision based on the
principles of inclusiveness and representativeness of the security sector in accordance
with the Agreement. The Mission continued to work with the signatory parties on the
development of the security sector reform action plan, the nation al vision for the
reconstitution and redeployment of the Malian defence and security forces, and a
conceptual framework for the territorial police. MINUSMA supported building the
community policing skills of the national police in the Gao, Mopti and Timbuk tu
regions.
13. The good offices of MINUSMA continued to support the implementation of
priority defence and security measures as set out in the road map adopted on
22 March. In Kidal and Timbuktu, the first companies of the mixed units of the
Operational Coordination Mechanism are being established and are currently at half
their expected numbers. The mixed units in Gao, which continued to face challenges,
including a lack of heavy weapons, were not able to provide security during the
electoral period. As at 1 September, 346 elements from signatory parties were
registered in the newly constituted mixed units in Kidal and Timbuktu.
14. In January 2018, the signatory parties agreed on integration criteria and quotas
for internal security and civil services; however, they had yet to agree on integration
quotas for the reconstituted armed forces and other uniformed services. The inability
of the signatory parties to reach such an agreement continued to delay the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration pro cess.
15. In late May, the National Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
Commission, supported by MINUSMA, completed the campaign for the
pre-registration of combatants. The Commission also initiated the registration of
non-signatory armed groups in the Mopti region. Security enhancements for seven of
the eight cantonment sites were completed on 15 August. Cantonment sites have stood
ready to receive combatants since 2016.
16. On 26 July, the Mission completed the rehabilitation of the inspectorat e of
defence and security services buildings in Bamako, as well as in Kati and Sénou,
Koulikoro region, to help to promote the democratic oversight of Malian forces. In
addition, MINUSMA provided office equipment and training in archiving for five
inspectors of the armed forces and internal security institutions and trained
100 members of civil society on security sector reform.
17. MINUSMA did not observe ceasefire violations or instances of heavy -weapons
movements by the signatory armed groups during the reporting period.

B.

Presidential elections
18. The period leading up to the presidential elections of 29 July was marked by
some political tensions and incidents. On 2 June, several political opposition leaders
staged a demonstration in Bamako, despite a ban by the authorities, to demand
transparent presidential elections and equal access to public media. During the
dispersal of the demonstration by the national police, 16 demonstrators and one police
officer were injured. This was a regrettable development that I immediately

18-15406

3/20

S/2018/866

condemned, calling for calm and calling upon the Government to ensure the
protection of fundamental human rights. In an effort to reduce political tensions and
promote a constructive dialogue, my Special Representative, in collaboration with the
Head of the African Union Mission for Mali and the Sahel and the Permanent
Representative of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in
Mali, held meetings with the political opposition parties and senior government
officials. Following the meetings, and with the authorization of the Government, the
political opposition parties planned another march, which was held peacefully on
8 June.
19. The Constitutional Court validated 24 candidatures for the presidential election s.
The campaign, which ran from 7 to 27 July, was generally peaceful despite some
security incidents. Four of the 24 candidates, including President Keita, campaigned
in the city of Kidal. In the last week of the electoral campaign, several candidates
cited anomalies in the electoral process, including the existence of a parallel voter
registry with fictitious voters, “ghost” polling stations and pre-cast ballots in favour
of the incumbent. Following calls for dialogue by my Special Representative and the
international community, the Prime Minister of Mali, Soumeylou Boubèye Maïga,
met on 28 July with candidates to reduce tensions, and, consequently, annulled the
instructions on proxy voting. He agreed to the presence of 10 observers from national
non-governmental organizations, along with international observation missions in the
compilation centres. The Prime Minister called on all candidates to appoint two
members of their teams to confirm the integrity of the national voter register.
20. On 29 July, the first round of the presidential elections was held in a generally
peaceful atmosphere, although 3.8 per cent of polling stations (871 out of 23,041),
including in Mopti (444 stations) did not open because of lack of security or
inaccessibility. On 31 July, several candidates signed a declaration denouncing
irregularities in the electoral process and stating their intention to reject fraudulent
electoral results. On 2 August, the Government published the preliminary results of
the first round of voting, revealing that President Keita and Soumaila Cissé, received
the majority of votes cast, with a turnout of 43.06 per cent. Ten presidential candidates
filed 23 petitions with the Constitutional Court to contest the results and to request
the removal of six judges of the Court for perceived bias. On 6 August, 18 candidates
accused the Government of electoral fraud, and on the following day they organized
a meeting at which they demanded a recount of the votes and the publication of results
by polling stations. On 8 August, the Constitutional Court rejected all petitions and
proclaimed the final results, in which President Keita received 41.70 per cent of the
votes cast, followed by Soumaila Cissé, with 17.78 per cent. The Court confirmed
that the final voter turnout had been 42.7 per cent.
21. As no candidate had received an absolute majority, a run-off election was held
on 12 August. In an improvement compared with the first round, 2.1 per cent of
polling stations did not open (493 out of 23,041) although some se curity incidents
were reported (see below). The improvement was due in part to a reorganization of
the deployment of approximately 6,000 Malian defence and security forces, with the
support of MINUSMA. On 16 August, the Government published the preliminary
results, announcing President Keita’s victory. The following day, Mr. Cissé publicly
rejected the provisional results. After appeals for calm and respect for the rule of law
by the international community, Mr. Cissé agreed to rely solely on the availabl e
political and legal mechanisms to challenge the election results. On 20 August, the
Constitutional Court confirmed that President Keita had obtained 67.16 per cent of
the votes cast, against 32.84 per cent for Mr. Cissé, with a voter turnout of 34.42 per
cent. The Court also rejected 16 legal complaints.
22. Although they noted some irregularities, national and international observers,
including the African Union, ECOWAS, the European Union and the International
4/20

18-15406

S/2018/866

Organization of la Francophonie, found that the elections had been held under
satisfactory conditions and requested that the Government implement corrective
measures to improve the transparency and credibility of the elections.
23. MINUSMA supported the electoral process by providing logistical su pport and
technical assistance to the electoral bodies and other stakeholders. Support included
the transportation of 182 tons of electoral materials to Mopti and the five northern
regions and hiring 64 national electoral assistants. The Mission provided e lectionrelated transportation for 1,840 persons, including interested presidential candidates,
to Mopti and the five northern regions. The United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP), through its $5 million basket fund, funded electoral activities such as the
training of polling agents, outreach and sensitization. The United Nations supported
efforts to increase women’s participation in the electoral process, including through
public education campaigns conducted in the media, as well as in town halls, and
through technical assistance to women’s groups in drafting an advocacy document,
which was submitted to presidential candidates.
24. The Government stepped up the security for the electoral process by deploying
some 25,000 Malian defence and security forces. Following extensive negotiations,
signatory armed groups and splinter groups also deployed their combatants around
polling stations in the main centres of the five northern regions. MINUSMA assisted
Malian defence and security forces in providing technical advice and security,
including increased patrols in the cities of Aguelhok, Kidal, Ménaka and Tessalit, and
positioned 820 peacekeepers on reserve at strategic locations for a period of five
weeks. Sixteen training sessions on electoral security were conducted by MINUSMA
for 465 Malian defence and security elements, including 44 women, in Bamako and
in central and northern Mali.
25. President Keita was sworn into office on 4 September. He reappointed
Soumeylou Boubèye Maïga as Prime Minister. On 9 September, a new Cabinet was
formed, comprising 32 ministers, including 11 women, respecting the 30 per cent
quota for women in appointed positions.

C.

Extension of State authority and support for Malian defence and
security institutions
26. In line with its mandate to support the restoration and extension of State
authority to the northern and central regions of the country, MINUSMA, with funding
from the trust fund for peace and security in Mali, completed the construction of a
base for Malian defence and security forces in the Mopti region on 23 August. The
next day, the Mission’s camp in Gossi, Timbuktu region, was handed over to the
Malian armed forces to support their efforts in the region. The Mission also conducted
an assessment mission to Boni, Mopti region, and Tessit, Gao region, to evaluate the
work required to reinforce the protection of the Malian armed forces ’ camps in those
localities. Within the framework of the memorandum of understanding between
MINUSMA and the Government related to the mutual support between MINUSMA
and the Malian armed forces, the Mission also provided four casualty and medical
evacuations, shared information and conducted patrols with Malian defence forces.
27. The European Union Training Mission in Mali and Operation Barkhane
continued to support and train Malian armed forces. Operation Barkhane launched a
new partnership programme, which would allow selected platoon commanders of the
Malian armed forces to be embedded in an Operation Barkhane unit.
28. MINUSMA, jointly with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and
other international partners, continued to provide technical assistance to the Malian

18-15406

5/20

S/2018/866

specialized judicial unit tasked with anti-terrorism and transnational organized crime.
Specifically, in addition to mentoring and the building capacity of the unit’s
specialized investigations brigade, the Mission, at the request of national authorities,
provided technical assistance at 22 crime scenes in the collection and examination of
evidence at the Mission’s level 2 anti-terrorism forensic laboratory and in mobile data
analysis. During the reporting period, six terrorism-related cases were brought to trial
by the specialized judicial unit, all of which resulted in convictions with lengthy
sentences.
29. The Mission supported the Government in the development of interministerial
security plans for the main prison in Bamako and a prison emergency simulation
exercise aimed at improving coordination among security and defence services in
response to internal disturbances and external attacks. From 31 May to 18 August, the
Mission, in collaboration with international partners, trained 497 members of the
Malian security forces, including 40 women, from Bamako, Gao and Timbuktu on
various policing modules and on human rights.
30. On 10 July, the national policy on preventing and countering violent extremism
and terrorism in Mali and its action plan for 2018–2020 were launched, with the
support of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism. The national policy
encompasses five pillars: prevention, protection, prosecution, response and social
cohesion. During nine training sessions held between 31 May and 17 September, a
total of 179 Malian security forces, including 23 women, were trained in various areas
to build and develop their capacity in preventing violent extremism.

D.

Regional developments
31. On 29 June, a complex attack using a suicide vehicle carrying improvised
explosive devices targeted the headquarters of the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel in Sévaré, Mopti region. It killed 2 Malian soldiers and injured 11
elements of the Joint Force, including 5 from Chad, 4 from the Niger and 2 from Mali.
This was the first complex attack in the Mopti region. At the time of reporting, all
seven battalions of the Joint Force were deployed. In total, the Joint Force had
conducted six inter-army operations since its establishment. On 12 July, General
Hanena Ould Sidi, Deputy Army Chief of Mauritania, was appointed force
commander of the Joint Force, replacing General Didier Dacko; and on 7 August the
police adviser to the Joint Force, Abdellahi Sidi Aly, was appointed.
32. MINUSMA continued to support the Joint Force in line with Security Council
resolution 2391 (2017). On 6 July, MINUSMA reviewed its support plan with respect
to the Joint Force, focusing on the engineering component. Following the attack of
29 June, the Mission expressed its readiness to provide assistance in the construction
of a new Headquarters; that offer is being considered by the Joint Force. The tripartite
mechanism, comprising the Joint Force, the United Nations and the European Union,
identified the effective operationalization of the police component as a priority to
contribute to greater accountability, the rule of law and the prevention of and response
to human rights violations. During his visit to Mali, the Under-Secretary-General,
together with my Special Representative, the Permanent Secretary of the Group of
Five for the Sahel and the incoming and outgoing Joint Force commanders, assessed
the challenges and the urgent needs faced by the Joint Force. They identified a series
of initiatives aimed at ensuring effective, sustainable and predictable financing of the
Joint Force.

6/20

18-15406

S/2018/866

III. Major security developments
33. During the reporting period, the security situation remained of serious concern.
The Group for the Support of Islam and Muslims attacked MINUSMA, Malian
defence and security forces and international forces ac ross central and northern Mali,
particularly in the Gao and Mopti regions. There were also increases in intimidation,
kidnappings and targeted assassinations of both civilians and signatory armed group
members, and in alleged cases of sexual and gender-based violence, especially in the
centre of the country.

A.

Asymmetrical and other attacks
34. The Group for the Support of Islam and Muslims and the Islamic State in the
Greater Sahara enhanced their coordination in the tri-border area between Burkina
Faso, Mali and the Niger, resulting in attacks against Malian defence and security
forces and international forces. Also targeted were civilians accused of collaborating
with the Malian State and groups such as the Groupe d’autodéfense des Touaregs
Imghad et leurs alliés and the Mouvement pour le salut de l’Azawad.
35. On the eve of the presidential elections, elements of the Group for the Support
of Islam and Muslims threatened the holding of the elections and burned and looted
polling stations. On 23 July, the airport facilities of Sévaré came under indirect fire
attack by two rockets, followed by small arms fire; there were no casualties. On
29 July, terrorist groups destroyed or ransacked at least 50 polling stations in the
Mopti, Ségou and Timbuktu regions. Also during the first round, a rocket landed near
a polling station in Aguelhok, Kidal region, resulting in the temporary suspension of
voting.
36. On the day of the run-off election, in the Timbuktu region, unidentified armed
assailants shot dead the head of the polling station in Arkodia and robbed electoral
officers. In the Mopti and Ségou regions, three polling stations were attacked by
unidentified armed elements. A total of three civilians and six members of the Malian
armed forces were killed in attacks during the electoral process in Mopti, Ségou and
Timbuktu.
37. On 4 September, the MINUSMA camp in Ménaka came under indirect attack
from unidentified assailants, resulting in the injury of one international civilian staff
member. This was the first attack that had been carried out against that camp.
38. During the reporting period, 42 incidents involving the use of an improvised
explosive device were recorded, with 38 per cent occurring in the central regions.
Since January 2018, the number of improvised explosive device incidents has
significantly increased, with 133 incidents occurring, compared with 78 during the
same period in 2017. However, there has been a 5 per cent decrease in the number of
casualties compared with the same period in 2017.
39. During the reporting period, armed groups conducted 58 attacks, comprising:
21 against Malian defence and security forces; 16 against MINUSMA and 1 against
a United Nations agency; 17 against signatory armed groups; 1 against Operation
Barkhane; 1 against the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel; and 1 against
a joint convoy of the Joint Force, Malian defence and security forces, the Groupe
d’autodéfense des Touaregs Imghad et Alliés and the Mouvement pour le salut de
l’Azawad. The highest number of attacks were carried out in Mopti (16) and Gao (15),
followed by Kidal (10), Timbuktu (10), Ménaka (5) and Ségou (2).
40. Malian defence and security forces were heavily targeted, and the number of
victims increased: 19 soldiers were killed and 24 injured, compared with 6 killed and

18-15406

7/20

S/2018/866

21 injured during the previous reporting period. Attacks against the Malian defence
and security forces (21) were concentrated mostly in Mopti (13), followed by Gao
(4), Ségou (2) and Timbuktu (2). Moreover, a series of clashes between signatory
armed groups and Islamic State in the Greater Sahara in the Ménaka region left
40 members of the signatory armed groups killed and 4 injured, compared with
26 members killed and 17 injured in attacks during the previous pe riod.

B.

Protection of civilians
41. In the centre of Mali, the security environment continued to deteriorate
significantly, mainly as a result of targeted attacks and intercommunity clashes
between armed self-defence or violent extremist groups. The reporting period
recorded the highest number of civilian casualties since the deployment of
MINUSMA, with 287 civilians killed, including 14 women and 10 children, and with
38 injured and 67 abducted. Several communes in Djenné and Koro districts, Mopti
region, have been caught in a spiral of violence and retaliation, leading to killings and
the displacement of more than 5,000 civilians.
42. The main perpetrators of recent violence are self-proclaimed self-defence
groups, namely, Dan Nan Ambassagou and Dogon Ambassagou. Both are affiliated
with dozos (traditional hunters) claiming to protect the Dogon community, and the
Alliance pour le salut du Sahel, which claims to protect the Fulani community. Some
of the deadliest incidents occurred on 23 June, when self-defence groups clashed in
the Djenné district, killing 24 civilians, including 5 children, and on 1 July in the
village of Bombou, Koro district, when 16 individuals were killed, including 5 women
and a young boy, and resulted in large-scale population displacement. On 8 July,
14 corpses reportedly belonging to members of the Fulani community were found in
a well in Tagari village, Koro district. On the same day, members of the Alliance pour
le salut du Sahel reportedly attacked members of the Dogon community in Dioungani,
Koro district, killing four civilians. On 25 July, up to 17 civilians of the Fulani
community were killed in the village of Somena, Djenné district.
43. During the reporting period, 10 recorded incidents, including 3 in the Kidal
region, 5 in the Mopti region, 1 in the Timbuktu region and 1 in the Ségou region,
involving improvised explosive devices killed a total of 21 civilians and injured
21 others. All of the incidents involved improvised explosive devices that detonated
when hit by a privately owned vehicle.
44. In an effort to stabilize the Mopti region, Malian defence and security forces
were deployed in Kouakourou and Koro towns, which resulted in a decrease in the
number of violent incidents in those localities. The Mission continued to use its good
offices and advocate with the Government to find durable solutions to the
deterioration of the situation. Meanwhile, the limited presence of State authority and
public administrators in rural areas of central Mali has created a s ecurity vacuum in
which violent extremist groups have increased their influence.
45. On 6 and 7 June, MINUSMA provided logistical support for a government
initiative aimed at addressing local conflicts through the operationalization of a
regional reconciliation support team in Mopti. From 11 and 24 June, MINUSMA
conducted Operation Furaji II on the Douentza-Hombori axis, Mopti region, which
led to a reduction in the number of attacks against civilians. On 9 July, MINUSMA
launched an integrated justice and reconciliation project in three villages in Koro
district, Mopti region. The project was aimed at preventing further conflicts between
the Dogon and Fulani communities.
46. On 28 August, following a three-month mediation process led by the Centre for
Humanitarian Dialogue, 34 Dogon and Fulani village chiefs signed an intercommunal

8/20

18-15406

S/2018/866

peace agreement to end violence in the Koro district in the Mopti region. The
agreement includes commitments to ensuring peaceful access to natural resources and
prioritizing the use of traditional mediation mechanisms to prevent and manage
disputes. The agreement was rejected by the Dan Nan Ambassagou group, which
claimed that it had not been involved in the process.

C.

Mine action, weapons and small arms
47. On 7 September, for the first time a group of Malian instructors trained by
MINUSMA delivered an explosive ordnance disposal training course to 30 members
of the Malian armed forces. Malian defence forces, with the technical assistance of
MINUSMA and the European Union Training Mission in Mali, adopted their first
standard operating procedures on improvised explosive device disposal.
48. The Mission trained 65 Malian defence and security forces in explosive threat
mitigation, including members of one Malian armed forces unit and two gendarmerie
mobile teams specializing in improvised explosive device disposal.
49. Efforts to enhance the weapons and ammunition management capacity of the
Malian defence and security forces continued with the training of 14 personnel in safe
and secure storage practices in Timbuktu. Since 2014, MINUSMA has trained more
than 300 personnel, ranging from depot managers and storekeepers to weapons and
ammunition management national trainers, to tackle the illicit transfer, destabilizing
accumulation and misuse of small arms and light weapons.

IV. Human rights situation
50. The human rights situation remained of serious concern. During the reporting
period, MINUSMA documented 129 cases of human rights violations and abuses,
involving at least 518 victims, including 68 women and 32 children, compared with
344 cases and 475 victims during the previous reporting period. There were 54 cases
of extrajudicial execution or other arbitrary killings, 15 cases of abduction or enforced
disappearance, 18 cases of torture or ill-treatment and 8 cases of unlawful detention.
Of the total number of documented cases, members of the Malian defence and security
forces were involved in 18 human rights violations, including 4 cases of extrajudicial
execution. The Group for the Support of Islam and Muslims and other similar groups
were responsible for 47 cases of human rights abuses, while community self -defence
groups were responsible for 49 cases, and signatory groups and other non -signatory
or splinter groups for 15 cases. A total of 64 per cent of human rights violations and
abuses occurred in the Mopti and Ségou regions, 13 per cent in the Timbuktu region,
7 per cent in Bamako, 6 per cent in the Gao region, 5 per cent in the Kidal region and
4 per cent in the Ménaka region.
51. MINUSMA investigated serious allegations of violations of human rights and
of international humanitarian law by elements of the Malian armed forces, in the
context of counter-terrorism operations in central Mali, including the alleged
summary execution of 25 civilians from Nantaka village, Mopti region, on 13 June.
On 19 June, the Ministry of Defence issued a press release confirming the existence
of a mass grave near Nantaka and the involvement of members of the Malian armed
forces in the killing. On 7 July, the Ministry announced the opening of a criminal
investigation into the killing of 12 civilians by members of the Malian armed forces
operating under the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel on 19 May in
Boulikessi village, Mopti region. On 5 September, the Mopti prosecutor requested the
Mission’s assistance in the Boulikessi investigation, as no progress had been made to
date.
18-15406

9/20

S/2018/866

52. During the reporting period, violent extremist groups were responsible for the
arbitrary killing of at least 32 civilians in the Gao, Ménaka and Timbuktu regions.
Islamic State in the Greater Sahara continued to target civilians in the Niger border
area of the Gao and Ménaka regions and allegedly killed at least 22 civilians in that
area. The Groupe d’autodéfense des Touaregs Imghad et leurs alliés and the
Mouvement pour le salut de l’Azawad were involved in the arbitrary killing of at least
five civilians, in the Gao, Ménaka and Timbuktu regions.
53. MINUSMA monitored the human rights situation in the context of the
presidential elections and activated its human rights call centre to facilitate the
reporting of violations. Violent extremist groups accounted for all the election -related
human rights abuses documented by MINUSMA, including intimidation an d direct
attacks against polling stations and against individuals perceived to be supportive of
the elections. Of the 55 security incidents documented, at least 8 may constitute
serious human rights abuses, including the killing of at least three electoral agents
and the abduction of a polling station president in the Mopti region, and four physical
attacks against electoral workers in the Mopti and Timbuktu regions. MINUSMA
conducted 33 sensitization and training sessions on human rights and elections,
benefiting 914 participants, including 220 women.
54. The Mission delivered training courses on human rights for 250 members of the
Malian defence and security forces, 526 members of the civil society and 61 elements
of the Operational Coordination Mechanism. From 21 to 24 June, the Mission and
local partners carried out a sensitization campaign on the prevention of HIV and on
conflict-related sexual violence for 404 women and girls, including internally
displaced persons in Gao, 263 of whom were tested for HI V and referred to health
facilities.
55. The country task force on monitoring and reporting on grave violations against
children in situations of armed conflict verified 58 grave violations against children.
A total of 17 children were killed and 14 were maimed in the Kidal, Mopti, Timbuktu
regions; 12 children were separated from armed groups in the Gao, Mopti and
Timbuktu regions and are following a reintegration programme in Bamako and Gao;
seven cases of attacks and threats against schools and hospitals; and nine cases of
denial of humanitarian access. MINUSMA provided technical and financial support
to the United Youth Network for Children’s Rights, composed of more than 60 youth
and child associations, to implement an online social media platform to d iscuss and
disseminate Security Council resolution 1612 (2005) on children in armed conflict.
56. During the reporting period, MINUSMA documented nine cases of conflict related sexual violence involving at least nine victims, including three minors. These
cases included four rapes and five gang rapes perpetrated by at least 14 unidentified
armed elements in the Gao, Mopti and Timbuktu regions. From January to June 2018,
1,115 cases of gender-based violence were recorded, including 758 cases of sexual
violence. Sixty-eight per cent of the victims were under 18 years of age. The survivors
received 150 reproductive health kits, including post-rape kits.
57. During the reporting period, more than 1,087 individuals appeared before the
Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission. The Commission reported that as at
31 August, it had received a total of 9,360 depositions since 3 January 2017.
UN-Women continued to provide technical support to the Commission in in tegrating
gender into its work.

10/20

18-15406

S/2018/866

V. Humanitarian situation
58. The humanitarian situation continued to deteriorate, mainly as a result of
insecurity in the northern and central regions and the impacts of a poor rainy season
in 2017. Severe floods hit several regions, affecting some 25,000 people. In addition,
intercommunal clashes led to a surge in internal displacement, nearly doubling the
number of internally displaced persons between January and July. Overall, 5.2 million
people now require lifesaving and protection assistance, up from 3.8 million people
in 2017. Consequently, the 2018 humanitarian response plan was revised in July to
reflect the increase in needs, with the number of people targeted by the response plan
increasing from 1.56 million to 2.9 million. The funding requirements increased from
$263 million to $330 million, of which only 32 per cent ($106 million) had been
received as at 6 September.
59. On 12 June, the World Food Programme activated an internal level 3 emergency
for the lean season in the Sahel that would be in place until 29 November. As a result,
from July to September the World Food Programme and its partners scaled up
distributions by 100,000 beneficiaries to provide emergency food assistance to
604,000 persons, including 308,000 women, reaching 65 per cent of those in critical
need. The World Food Programme also provided emergency nutritional assistance to
228,000 persons through blanket supplementary feeding.
60. In early August, the humanitarian country team and the Government, with
logistical support from MINUSMA, provided medical, nutritional and food assistance
to several villages in the Mondoro commune, Mopti region, following reports of
224 cases of malnutrition, including 29 deaths owing to a lack of medical care. On
11 August, Malian authorities, humanitarian actors and MINUSMA provided
emergency assistance, including water, food and non-food items, to more than
360 vulnerable households in Aguelhok, Kidal region, after damage resulting from
severe flooding.
61. From 31 May to 6 September, 55 security incidents, involving mostly compound
break-ins and vehicle thefts, affected humanitarian actors, compared with 50 cases
during the previous reporting period. On 18 June, six international non -governmental
organizations suspended their activities in the Ménaka region owing to insecurity;
five of them resumed their activities on 30 June. On 11 and 26 July, United Nations
armoured vehicles were fired upon by small arms fire in Timbuktu; there were no
injuries as a result.
62. As at 31 July, the Government, with the support of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the International Organization for Migration, had
registered 75,351 internally displaced persons, 526,505 returning internally displac ed
persons, 67,420 Malian returnees from asylum countries and 601 asylum seekers.
Mali hosts 24,368 refugees from various countries and more than 139,573 Malian
refugees remain in neighbouring countries.
63. At the end of the school year, 735 schools remained closed in the Mopti (464),
Timbuktu (88), Gao (67), Ménaka (60), Kidal (42) and Ségou (14) regions, owing to
insecurity, including threats and attacks from violent extremist groups. In June, the
national humanitarian education cluster, in collaboratio n with regional education
authorities, indicated that 1,108 schools had been closed at least once (over a period
of 20 school days) during the 2017/18 school year, affecting 332,400 children. To
mitigate the impact of the forced closure of these schools and ensure access to
inclusive and quality education in accordance with Sustainable Development Goal 4
and its targets, humanitarian actors provided support to the Government and
communities through alternative forms of education in affected regions.

18-15406

11/20

S/2018/866

VI. Economic development
64. Real gross domestic product growth is expected to remain robust at
approximately 5 per cent in 2018, according to the International Monetary Fund. On
6 and 7 June, a joint national budget review conducted by the Government and
technical and financial partners resulted in the recommendations that the tax base be
broadened and that the transfer of budgetary resources to local authorities be
accelerated.
65. On 16 July, the Malian Government presented its voluntary national report on
the Sustainable Development Goals at the high-level political forum on sustainable
development in New York. It highlighted the progress made in societal transformation
and resilience and concerns over increased dependency on international development
assistance. The same day, the Government launched the formulation of a new strategic
framework for economic recovery and sustainable development, based on the
Sustainable Development Goals and the prospective vision for Mali 2040.
66. MINUSMA and UNDP supported the implementation of various aspects of the
national policy on preventing and countering violent extremism and terrorism in Mali
and its action plan, including through the establishment of the offices of the national
directorate and a national observatory on preventing and countering violent
extremism in Bamako, as well as a pilot project on preventing violent extremism in
Mopti, targeting 200 young and teachers.
67. In July, UNDP launched preparatory activities for the organization of a
subregional conference on the economic impact of violent extremism in the countries
of the Sahel region. The Peacebuilding Fund supported workshops for youth
organizations in Bamako, Timbuktu, Mopti and Ségou on radicalism, violent
extremism and the prevention role played by communities. Jointly organized by a
non-governmental organization, the African Centre for the Constructive Resolution
of Disputes and the National Youth Council, these discussions were focused on the
national policy on preventing violent extremism and the causes of and strategies for
eliminating violent extremism in Mali, and were broadcast on local radio stations.

VII. United Nations strategic frameworks and integration plans
68. Pursuant to resolution 2423 (2018), MINUSMA is reprioritizing its efforts and
resources to focus on political tasks and has initiated an internal examination of its
key strategic documentation and plans, including the Mission concept. It has
developed criteria to inform the revision of its footprint in northern and central Mali,
with a view to optimizing and rebalancing its presence, while strengthening its
coordination and planning mechanisms both within the Mission and with the United
Nations country team.
69. On 3 September, the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations and
my Special Representative led a retreat with the United Nations country team and
MINUSMA in Bamako. At the retreat concrete measures were identified to strengthen
integration, including through the presence of the country team in the central and
northern regions of the country, and to help to restore stability in the centre, by
adopting a more multifaceted approach. Participants agreed on the importance of
increasing Malian ownership of the peace process and inclusiveness in its
implementation, notably through the proposed pact for peace. They also defined the
strategic directions of the future integrated strategic framework, which is being
drafted.

12/20

18-15406

S/2018/866

VIII. Capacities of the Mission
A.

Military
70. As at 15 September, 12,231 military personnel had been deployed, out of the
authorized strength of 13,289 personnel, including 39 military observers, 437 staff
officers and 11,755 contingent personnel. Women accounted for 2.64 per ce nt of
military personnel.
71. The implementation of the recommendations resulting from the technical review
conducted in July 2017 continued, including the deployment of staff officers to the
forward command post in Mopti and the establishment of an infor mation operations
cell and the deployment of officers specialized in force protection in Bamako. The
Department of Peacekeeping Operations approved an increase in the statement of unit
requirements of infantry battalions from two to three mechanized compan ies,
including one that must include mine-protected armoured vehicles. Discussions with
relevant troop-contributing countries to adjust the existing memorandums of
understanding and deployments are ongoing.
72. The lack of medium utility helicopters in the Mopti and the Timbuktu regions, and
the lack of contingent-owned armoured personnel carriers, including mine-protected
vehicles, remained the most critical equipment shortfalls. This gap has limited the
operational reach of MINUSMA in certain tasks such as patrolling and providing
escorts, particularly in rural areas, thereby hindering mandate implementation.
73. The deployment of motorized elements of the quick-reaction force in Mopti was
completed in July. A medium utility helicopter unit provided by Canada was deployed
to Gao in July, while airfield support units provided by El Salvador and Jordan were
deployed to Timbuktu and Gao in June and July, respectively.

B.

Police
74. On 6 September, 1,728 police personnel, or 90 per cent of the authorized strength,
were deployed, with 311 individual police officers, of whom 18.65 per cent were
women, and 1,417 formed police unit personnel, of whom 4.73 per cent were women.
75. MINUSMA police continued to require the deployment of an additional formed
police unit, five armoured personnel carriers for deployed formed police units, and
six armoured vehicles for individual police officers. The Mission also requires the
support of Member States to generate 25 individual police officers with specialized
expertise, including in the fields of forensics, investigations, community -oriented
policing, security sector reform, counter-terrorism, serious organized crime and drug
trafficking.

C.

Civilian personnel
76. As at 19 September, MINUSMA had deployed 1,584 civilian personnel,
representing 83 per cent of the total of 1,901 authorized positions (814 international,
898 national and 189 United Nations Volunteer). Women constituted 23 per cent of
civilian personnel overall, including 26 per cent of international positions, 19 per cent
of national positions and 31 per cent of United Nations Volunteer positions.

18-15406

13/20

S/2018/866

D.

Camp construction and securing supply routes
77. In line with the Mission’s plan to optimize its supply chain routes, the transfer
of 14 international civilian staff posts from Bamako to Gao, Mopti and Timbuktu, and
the subsequent reassignment of incumbents were completed during the reporting
period. Since the Cotonou-Niamey-Gao supply route opened, in April 2017, more than
1,400 containers have been moved to Gao along this route without military escort.
78. The rehabilitation of the Gao airstrip was completed on 31 August, which
allowed night operations to resume in mid-September.

E.

Environment
79. As part of the implementation of its interim risk mitigation plan, and in order to
minimize pollution risks, the Mission established a testing protocol and conducted
training sessions on 30 June at all 14 MINUSMA sites, mainly where wastewater
treatment plants were not yet operational. In June, the Mission completed a smartmetering pilot project in Bamako and an energy management assessment in Gao to
prepare the Mission’s energy management plan.

IX. Safety and security of United Nations personnel
80. MINUSMA continued to implement its action plan to reduce peacekeeper
fatalities and injuries. It reinforced the surveillance and protection systems of the
camp in Gao through the establishment of a long-range electro-optical system to
detect movements in the periphery of the camp, in June. Pub lic announcement
systems were installed at the Mission’s regional headquarters and the super-camps in
Gao and Timbuktu to improve the communication of alerts in the event of an attack.
The Mission also strengthened the camp’s perimeter force protection and defensive
features, as well as operation coordination centres, and improved air support
coordination in Timbuktu. MINUSMA established dedicated Mission intelligence
structures and developed training modules on intelligence reporting processes.
81. Although eight peacekeepers and one civilian staff member sustained injuries
as a result of the security incidents referred to in paragraph 39 above, no MINUSMA
personnel, including its contractors, suffered fatalities during hostile acts that
occurred during the reporting period. The Operation Barkhane forces sustained no
fatalities or injuries. While the number of hostile acts against MINUSMA has
remained generally consistent, the past six months have shown a positive trend, with
a 30 per cent drop in fatalities and 40 per cent drop in injuries compared with the
second half of 2017.
82. Training on the search for and detection of improvised explosive devices
provided to MINUSMA troops since 2015 has had positive results, as the rate at which
MINUSMA troops providing escorts for United Nations logistics convoys detect and
neutralize improvised explosive devices has increased to 46 per cent in 2018,
compared with 31 per cent in 2017 and 27 per cent in 2016.
83. The Mission’s support for the operationalization of the specialized judicial unit
on terrorism and transnational organized crime facilitated the monitoring of cases
related to attacks against peacekeepers and improved the cooperation of the Mission
with the unit regarding such investigations. As a result, in June, the special prosecutor
of the unit submitted two requests for assistance in relation to the deaths of
peacekeepers.

14/20

18-15406

S/2018/866

X. Conduct and discipline
84. No allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse were recorded during the
reporting period. The Mission continued to implement the three-pronged strategy for
combating sexual exploitation and abuse and provided training to a total of
1,727 personnel, comprising 1,452 uniformed personnel and 275 civilians, under the
Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy regarding sexual exploitation and abuse.

XI. Observations
85. I wish to commend the Malian people for the peaceful and successful holding
of the presidential elections. Presidential candidates and their political affiliations
demonstrated considerable political maturity throughout the electoral process. The
Government made commendable efforts to organize the elections within the
constitutional deadlines, despite several anomalies and some security incidents in
northern and central Mali. I wish to recognize, in particular, important measures taken
by the Prime Minister, Soumeylou Boubèye Maïga, to promote a constructive
dialogue and address mistrust in the electoral process, as well as the efforts of Malian
defence and security forces, with the contribution of signatory and other armed
groups, to secure the electoral process.
86. I am gratified by the efforts made by the United Nations throughout the electoral
process. I commend the proactive good offices and political support provided by my
Special Representative, including coordinating the actions of the international
community and observation missions of the African Union, ECOWAS, the European
Union and the International Organization of la Francophonie.
87. I wish to congratulate President Ibrahim Boubacar Keita on re-election. The
onus is now on him and his Government to redouble the efforts to implement the
remaining key provisions of the Agreement and move forward on institutional
reforms. In this regard, I appreciate the fact that he mad e the implementation of the
Agreement one of his priorities during the inauguration ceremony held on
4 September. The people and the Government of Mali together must seize the
opportunity to shape the foundations for lasting peace and stability, building o n the
Agreement. In that context, the pact for peace, as requested in resolution 2423 (2018),
offers an opportunity to reinvigorate the peace process. While it is clear that the pact
should not duplicate structures or replace the Agreement, I sincerely believe that it
represents a chance to reinvigorate the implementation of the Agreement. The pact
should include political reforms such as decentralization, security sector reform and
the rule of law, as well as socioeconomic development, based on greater inclusiveness
and agreed benchmarks and with the coherent support of international and regional
partners. I encourage Malian stakeholders and partners, under the leadership of the
Government and with the support of my Special Representative, to take part in its
materialization.
88. I welcome recent progress in the implementation of the Agreement, including
the appointment of interim authorities in 21 districts of the five northern regions, the
progressive operationalization of the mixed units of the Operational Coordination
Mechanism in the regions of Kidal and Timbuktu, and the adoption of the national
security sector reform strategy. While some women were appointed as members of
interim authorities, I urge parties to consider a more meaningful participation of
women in the peace process, which is essential for its success. The upcoming
elections will offer an opportunity to realize the 30 per cent quota for women in
elected positions, in accordance with Malian law.

18-15406

15/20

S/2018/866

89. In addition, I urge the parties to finalize a national vision for the reconstitution
and redeployment of the Malian defence and security forces and of the territorial
police, who are at the core of durable stability and the protection of popul ations. I
encourage the parties to sustain the positive momentum and renewed trust in the peace
process that I witnessed during my visit to Mali in May. Malian parties must live up
to their obligations and commitments, including by respecting the timelines provided
in the road map of 22 March, with respect to which I will report on progress in its
implementation as requested in resolution 2423 (2018).
90. Continuing security incidents that have occurred in central Mali, including
during the presidential elections, underline the depth of the crisis in the region.
Intercommunal conflict, exacerbated by violent extremist groups, is fraying an
already fragile social fabric and is deeply concerning. Too high a human toll has
accrued as a result of the ongoing spiral of violence. I wish to express my heartfelt
condolences to the families of those who have lost their lives as a result of the
deepening insecurity. The Government’s efforts on the integrated security plan for the
central regions is important and must be intensified and ensure simultaneous progress,
not only on security, but also on governance, development and reconciliation. I call
upon the Government to undertake the disarmament of armed groups, prom ote
reconciliation and find durable solutions aimed at protecting civilians.
91. The human rights situation is alarming. It is absolutely imperative that the
Government prevent human rights violations and abuses, including those committed
by Malian armed forces when conducting counter-terrorism operations. Full and
timely investigations into all allegations are essential, as are measures to bring the
perpetrators of these crimes to account. The United Nations stands ready to assist the
Government in this regard, as requested. I also wish to reiterate the responsibility of
the Malian authorities to take all necessary actions to swiftly investigate and
prosecute the perpetrators of crimes and grave human rights abuses against civilians,
as well as those responsible for attacks against humanitarian workers, MINUSMA
and international forces and Malian defence and security forces.
92. I condemn once more the 29 June terrorist attack against the headquarters of the
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel in Sévaré. I have continuously
supported the efforts of the countries of the Group of Five for the Sahel in
operationalizing the Joint Force, and this attack will not diminish my determination
to curb the expansion of violent extremism. I welcome the effort s made towards the
operationalization of the Joint Force, including of the police component, which will
ensure continuity between the operations of the Joint Force and judicial systems in
accordance with the rule of law and human rights. I note the appoint ment and
assumption of duty of a new Force Commander of the Joint Force from Mauritania.
Although the Joint Force is making progress, predictable and sustainable resources,
including from Member States, will facilitate its full operationalization.
93. Investing in sustainable development and stability in Mali would yield tangible
dividends with respect to building inclusive and peaceful societies and preventing the
spread of conflict, extremism and threats to international peace and security to the
Sahel and the broader West African region. Continued attacks have negative
consequences for development opportunities, particularly in the border areas of
Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger. There is a need for countries in the Sahel region to
strengthen cooperation with the United Nations to further advance the implementation
of the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel through the United Nations
Support Plan for the Sahel. It is critical to focus on the prevention of violent
extremism and conflict, including through education and economic opportunities,
especially for youth. I am concerned about the continued closure of schools in central
regions of Mali, which will have a lasting impact on generations of youth.

16/20

18-15406

S/2018/866

94. The humanitarian situation in Mali has also significantly deteriorated over the
past year as a result of increasing clashes and a poor rainy season in 2017. The level
of needs is higher than at any point since the beginning of the crisis in 2012, with
more than one out of four Malians requiring humanitarian assistance. While needs
continue to increase, humanitarian funding has decreased, preventing a timely,
at-scale and appropriate response. Our collective efforts, including through the urgent
funding of the 2018 humanitarian response plan fo r Mali, are even more important
today. I have also called for renewed commitment to reviving the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel to obtain a positive and durable impact across the
Sahel.
95. While the number of attacks continues unabated, I am encouraged by the
reduction in the number of fatalities and casualties among MINUSMA personnel. It
demonstrates that our efforts, and in particular of the Mission, are bearing fruit.
Meanwhile, the requirement for mobility and better-protected forces remains and
affects negatively the implementation of the Mission’s mandate. As requested by the
Security Council in its resolution 2423 (2018), MINUSMA has taken a number of
measures to reprioritize its efforts and resources to implement its core political and
security tasks. Efforts are also being made to strengthen the presence and activities
of the United Nations country team in the central and northern regions of Mali to
tackle the multidimensionality of instability.
96. I wish to express my deep appreciation to my Special Representative for Mali,
Mahamat Saleh Annadif, for his excellent leadership; to all United Nations civilian
and uniformed personnel for their continued hard work in a challenging e nvironment
and under stressful conditions; and to troop- and police-contributing countries,
Algeria, as a lead mediator, the African Union, ECOWAS, the European Union and
other regional organizations, multilateral and bilateral partners, United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes, non-governmental organizations and all other
partners for their invaluable support for peace in Mali.

18-15406

17/20

S/2018/866

Annex I
Military and police strength of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
as at 14 September 2018
Military

Police

Experts on mission,
staff officers and in units
Country

Male

Female

Total

Armenia

1

Austria

2

1

3

Bangladesh

1 409

9

1 418

Belgium

121

12

133

Benin

254

3

257

Bhutan

4

4

Bosnia and Herzegovina

2

2

Burkina Faso

1 636

68

1 704

1

1

2

Cambodia

278

25

303

Cameroon

2

Canada

126

12

138

Chad

1 413

37

1 450

China

387

16

403

Côte d’Ivoire

159

4

163

Denmark

In formed police units

Male

Male

Female

Total

Female

Total police

Total

Male

278

278

Female

Total

1

Burundi

Czechia

Individual police officers

2

5

278

278

22

2

24

139

1

140

161

3

154

22

5

27

133

5

138

155

10

165

16

4

20

16

4

20

17

4

21

17

4

21

19

5

24

19

5

24

5

1

1

Egypt

335

335

El Salvador

141

15

6

134

134

140

140

156

Estonia

3

3

Ethiopia

1

1
1

6

Finland

3

4

5

1

6

5

1

6

France

22

22

11

2

13

11

2

13

Gambia

4

4
7

1

8

7

1

8

11

10

10

21

Germany

411

Ghana

165

165

2

2

Guatemala
Guinea

858

9

10

420

868

21

11

1

1

1

1

2

4

4

4

4

64

7

7

7

7

Hungary
Indonesia

10

Italy

1

Jordan

64

Kenya

10

1

11

Latvia

8

1

9

Liberia

80

6

86

18/20

10
1

18-15406

S/2018/866
Military

Police

Experts on mission,
staff officers and in units
Country

Lithuania

Male

Female

Total

36

3

39

Madagascar
Mauritania

Individual police officers

In formed police units

Male

Male

Female

1
8

Female

Total

Male

1

1

Female

Total

1

8

Mexico

2

Nepal

151

3

154

Netherlands

338

8

346

1

1

New Zealand

Total

Total police

2
3

4

7

3

4

7

16

01

17

127

19

146

Niger

854

9

863

16

01

17

Nigeria

72

15

87

2

5

7

Norway

13

2

15

Pakistan

3

Portugal

3

3

1

1

1

1

Romania

2

1

3

2

2

2

2

Senegal

28

1 078

14

1 092

11

2

13

Spain

1

1

207

Sweden

227

25

252

5

5

1

6

4

Togo

898

38

936

13

Tunisia

2

2

4

20

United States of America

18

18-15406

2

11 850

29

282

28

310

310

2

2

7

5

4

4

13
2

2
2

139

29

339
2

207

Turkey

Total

1

2

Sri Lanka

United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland

14

3

Sierra Leone

Switzerland

125

259

19

278

2

7
4

272

19

291

22

20

2

22

2

2

2

2
7

25

363 12 213

247

49

296

1 350

67

1 417

1 597

116

1 713

19/20

S/2018/866

Map
20/20

Annex II

18-15406
