Article 10

Article 10

The Secretary-General shall assign to each
commission constituted by a United Nations organ under these articles, sta~ adequate to enable
it to perform its duties and shall, as necessary,
seek expert assistance from specialized agencies
brought into relationship with the United Nations.
He shall enter into suitable arrangements with
the proper authorities of States in order to assure
the commission, so far as it may find it necessary
to exercise its functions within their territories,
full freedom of movement and all facilities necessary for the performance of its functions. The
Secretary-General shall, at the request of any
commission appointed by parties to a controversy
pursuant to article 4, render this assistance to
the commission to the extent possible.

Le Sccretaire general affecte a chaquc commission constituee par un organe des Nations Unics
en vertu du present reglement le personnel dont
elle a besoin pour remplir ses fonctions et ii
demande, lorsqu'il s'avere necessaire, le concours
technique d'institutions specialisees reliees a l'Organisation des Nations Unies. II prend, avec les
autorites competentes des Etab, toutes les dispositions propres a assurer a la commission, dans
la mesure ou celle-ci juge necl!ssaire d'exercer
ses fonctions sur leurs territoires, une complete
liberte de mouvement et tous les moyens qui lui
sont necessaires pour s'acquitter de se's fonctions.
Le Secretaire general prete, dans la mesure du
possible, la meme assistance a toute commission
nommee par les parties a un litige conformement
a !'article 4, sur la demande de celle-ci.
Au termc ae ses travaux, chaque commission
nommee par un organe des NatiQns Unies presente Jes rapports demandes par. l'organe en question. Chaque commission nommee par les parties
a un litige OU sur leur demande conformement a
I'artic!e 4, remet un rapport au Secretaire general.
Si le litige est regle, lec!it rapport indique simplement, en principe, les termes du reglement.

Upon completion of its proceedings each commission appointed by a United Nations organ
shall render such reports as may be determined
by the appointing organ. Each commission
appointed by or at the request of parties to a
controversy·pursuant to article 4, shall file a report with the Secretary-General. If a settleme!lt
of the controversy is reached, such report will
normally merely state the terms of settlement.

269 (III). Report of
Council

the

Security

269 (III).

The General Assembly

Rapport du
securite

Conseil de

L' Assemblee generale

Takes note of the report of the Security
Councill covering the period from 16 July 1947
to 15 July 1948.

Prend acte du rapport du Conseil de securitc1
traitant de la periode allant du 16 juillet 1947 au
15 juillet 1948.

Hundred and ninety-ninth plenary meeting,
28 April 1949.

Cent quatre-vingt-dix-neuvihne seance plh1iere,
le 28 avril 1949.

270 (III). United Nations Guard

270 (III). Garde des Nations Unies

The General Assembly,

L'Assemblee gencrale,

Having considei·ed the proposal made by the
Secretary-General for the creation of a United
Nations Guard for the purposes set forth in his
report of 28 September 1948,2

Ayant examine la proposition de creation d'unc
garde des Nations Unies presentee par le Secretaire general aux fins exposees dans son rapport
en date du 28 septembre 19482 ,

Realizing the need for a thorough study of the
matter before concrete action can be taken
thereon,

Reconnaissant la necessite d'une etude approfondie de la question avant que puissent etrc
prises Jes mesures pratiques,

Resolves to establish a Special Committee of
specially qualified representatives of Australia,
Brazil, China, Colombia, Czechoslovakia, France,
Greece, Haiti, Pakistan, Poland, Sweden, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, Cnited Kingdom
and United States of America.

Decide de constituer une Commission speciale
composee de representants particulierement qualifies de l'Australie, du Bresil, de la Chine, de la
Colombie, de la Tchecoslovaquie, de la France,
de la Grece, d'Haiti, du Pakistan, de la Pologne,
de la Suede, de l'Union des Repuhliques socialistes sovietiques, du Royaume-Uni et des EtatsUnis d'Amerique.

The Specwl Committee shall study the proposal
for the establishment of a United Nations Guard
in all its; relevant aspects, including the technical,
budgetary and legal problems involved, and such
other proposals as may be made by Member
States and by the Secretary-General with regard
to other similar means of increasing the effective-

Cette Co,nmission speciale etudiera la proposition de creation d'une garde des Nations Unies
sous tous ses aspects, notamment aux points de
vue des problemes techniques, budgetaires et juridiques qu'elle pose ainsi que toutes :tutres propositions qui seraient presentees par les Etats Membres et par le Secretaire general touchant d'autres

'See Official Records of the t1oird session of tht
General Assembly, Supplement No. 2.
• See document A/656.

'Voir les Documents officiels de l'Assemblee generalt:
troisieme session, Supplement No 2.
'Voir le document A/656.

16

ness of the services provided to the United
Nations missions by the Secretary-General, and
shall prepare a report embodying its observations
and recommendations for consideration during
the fourth regular session of the General
Assembly.

a

methodes analogues destinees
ameliorer l'cfficacite des services mis par le Secretaire general
a la disposition des missions des Nations Unies,
et presentera, aux fins d'examen, a l'Assemblee
generale lors de sa quatrieme session ordinaire un
rapport contenant ses observations et recommandations.

Deur centieme seance pleniere,
le 29 avril 1949.

Two hundredth plenary meeting,
29 April 1949.

271 (III). Appointment of a Special

271 (III). Nomination d'une Commis-

Committee on Method11 and Procedures of the General Assembly

sion speciale des methodes et
des procedures de I'Assemhlee
generale
L' Assemblee genfrale,

The General Assembly,
Mindful of the increasing length of General
Assembly sessions, and of tl.e growing tendency
towards protracted debates in its plenary meetings
and committees,

Preo(c11pee de la longueur croissante des sessions de I' Assemblee generale et de la tendance
de plus en plus marquee a prolonger les debats
en seance pleniere et en commission,

1. Decides to create a Special Committee consisting of Belgium, Brazil, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, Egypt, France, India, Iran, Mexico,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom, United States of America and
Uruguay in order to:

1. Decide de creer une Commission speciale
composee des pays suivants : Belgique, Bresil,
Canada, Chine, Tchecoslovaquie, Egypte, France,
Incle, Iran, Me;x.ique, Suede, Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques, Royaume-Uni,
Etats-Unis d'Amerique et Uruguay, et chargee:

(a) Consider methods and procedures which
would enable the General Assembly and its Committees to discharge their functions more effectively and expeditiously;

a) D'etudier les methodes et Jes procedures
propres a permettre a I' Assemblee generale et a
ses Commissions de remplir leurs fonctions avec
plus d'efficacite et de diligence;

( b) Submit, if possible, a preliminary report
to the General Assembly during the second part
of its third session;

b) De presenter si possible un rapport preliminaire a l'Assemblee generale au cours de la
deuxieme partie de sa troisieme session ;

( c) Transmit a report to the SecretaryGeneral, not later than 15 August 1949, for circulation to Members and for consideration at the
fourth regular session of the General Assembly;

c) D'adresser un rapport au Secretaire general, le 15 aout 1949 au plus tard, pour communication aux Membres aux fins d'examen a la
quatrieme session ordinaire de I' Assemblee gen er ale;

2. Invites the Secretary-General to collaborate
closely with the Special Committee in its work.

2. Invite le Secretaire general a collaborer
etroitement avec la Commission speciale.

Two, hundred and first plenary meeting,
29 April 1949.

272 (III). Observance

in Bulgaria
and Hungary of human rights and
fundamental freedoms

Deux cent unieme seance pleniere,
le 29 avril 1949.

2 72 (III) . Respect des droits de l'homme et des lihertes f ondamentales en
Bulgarie et en Hongrie
"L' Assemblee generate,

The General Assembly,
Considering that one of the purposes of the
United Nations is to achieve international cooperation in promoting and encouraging respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms for
all, without distinction as to race, sex, language
or religion,

Considerant que l'un des buts des Nations Unies
est de realiser la cooperation internationale en
developpant et en encourageant le respect des
droits de l'homme et des libertes fondamentales
pour tous, sans distinction de race, de sexe, de
langue ou de religion,

Considering that the Governments of Bulgaria
and Hungary have been accused, before the General Assembly, of acts contrary to the purposes
of the United Nations and to their obligations
under the Peace Treaties to ensure to all persons
within their respective jurisdictions the enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms,

Conside. ;.,It que le Gouvernement de la Bulgarie et celui de la Hongrie ont ete accuses devant
1' Assemblee generale d'actes contraires aux buts
des Nations Unies et a !'obligation qui leur incombe en vertt1 des Traites de paix d'assurer a
tous, clans leur juridiction respective, la jouissance
des droits de I'homme et des libertes fondamentales,

I. Expresses its deep concern at the grave
accusations made against the Governments of

1. Exprime le profond souci que Jui inspirent
Jes graves accusations portees contre le Gouver-

17
