S/PV.7744

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7744th meeting

Monday, 25 July 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bessho. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Seck
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014) and 2258 (2015) (S/2016/631)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-23162 (E)
*1623162*

S/PV.7744

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014) and 2258
(2015) (S/2016/631)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Stephen
O’Brien, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2016/631, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191
(2014) and 2258 (2015).
I now give the floor to Mr. O’Brien.
Mr. O’Brien: Every time I have briefed the
Council, I have described the horrors of a brutal conflict
characterized by the complete failure to protect civilians,
which has generated gargantuan levels of suffering for
most civilians. Truth be told, words are not adequate to
depict the grim and gruesome reality facing the people
of Syria today. We have seen the hopes of ordinary
Syrians for an end to their nightmare raised and then
dashed time and again as the Government, non-State
armed groups and terrorist groups have relentlessly
continued on a military path that has further devastated
cities, towns, communities and families. As the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights recently
said, “The number of war crimes already committed
surpasses our worst nightmares”.
The fighting and violence have escalated across
several parts of the country over the last few weeks,
resulting in widespread civilian deaths, injury and
displacement. Strikes, by all sides, continue to be
2/26

25/07/2016

launched on and from heavily populated areas from the
air and the ground without regard for civilian presence.
Attacks on other civilian infrastructure remain an
almost daily occurrence in some areas. A recent World
Health Organization (WHO) report indicated that
health care is attacked in Syria more than in any other
place on Earth.
The undeniable fact is that today, in many places,
civilians in Syria are as much at risk as they have
ever been, owing to the parties’ continued blatant
disregard for international humanitarian law, whose
primary and overarching principle, as advocated by but
also supposedly enforced by the Security Council, is
the obligation to protect civilians from the effects of
armed conflict.
I am deeply alarmed by the disturbing developments
in and around Aleppo city. Hundreds of mortars,
missiles and projectiles were launched on both eastern
and western Aleppo in past weeks, resulting in scores of
deaths and hundreds of injuries. Since 7 July, civilian,
humanitarian and commercial movements in and out of
eastern Aleppo City have come to a halt. Castello Road,
the last remaining access route in and out of the east
of the city, as I alerted the Council in my two previous
briefings, where an estimated 250,000 to 275,000
people reside, has now been cut off due to the fighting.
The United Nations and our partners prepositioned
stocks in sad but all too real anticipation of such
developments, and food in east Aleppo is expected to
run out by the middle of next month. While medical
supplies are available for a longer period, I am
extremely worried about the continuing attacks on
medical facilities in eastern Aleppo, such as that on a
hospital in Alma’adi neighbourhood, which has now
been hit three times in the last month alone.
Indeed, over the last 48 hours, we have received
reports, which are in the process of being verified, of
attacks on or near several facilities in Aleppo City and
in the countryside. Such attacks have a devastating
multiplier effect — not only killing people and
destroying facilities, but leaving thousands unable to
get even basic care at a time when they need it most.
I cannot stress enough how critical the situation is
for those trapped in eastern Aleppo city. That population
is at serious risk of besiegement as the fighting closes
in and their access to basic necessities runs out. Our
highest priority is to ensure access through both crossline or cross-border operations, under the existing
16-23162

25/07/2016

The situation in the Middle East

resolutions of the Security Council, so that we can
replenish stocks and ensure people’s access to the basic
necessities of life. The international community simply
cannot let eastern Aleppo city become yet another, and
by far the largest, besieged area. This is medieval and
shameful. We must not allow this to happen, but the
clock is ticking. I urgently call upon the parties and
those with influence to act now to establish a weekly,
48-hour humanitarian pause for eastern Aleppo city so
that the United Nations and partners have safe, regular
and sustained access to the quarter of a million people
trapped behind the front lines. This must be a full
United Nations call — not just from me as the United
Nations humanitarian chief — it must come from the
Security Council.
I am equally alarmed by reports of deteriorating
humanitarian conditions and urgent medical evacuation
needs in Madaya, Fo’ah, Zabadani and Kefraya,
where more than 62,000 people are and continue to
be besieged. Despite the approvals granted by the
Government of Syria over the past three months for the
United Nations and humanitarian partners to provide
assistance to besieged civilians in the four towns, the
United Nations and partners have not been able to
access the towns because of tension among parties to
the agreement, heavy aerial bombardment in Idlib and
shelling on Fo’ah and Kefraya. We should all remember
the disturbing images of starving children in Madaya
earlier this year, many of whom died even after aid
was finally allowed in. Let me be clear: we will see
such images again unless the parties enable immediate
and unconditional humanitarian deliveries to the four
towns. This is no hollow warning; this is highly likely
to occur again unless the Council enforces access.
Urgent medical evacuations must also be
immediately available where needed. The current titfor-tat arrangement, which has led to children dying
in one of the towns because there is no equally sick
child in another location to evacuate at exactly the same
time, should be a shameful blot on the conscience of the
parties and those who support them. In any event, such
a callous tit-for-tat arrangement is not in compliance
with international humanitarian law. The only measure
for humanitarian access and action is to meet needs,
not reciprocity. I call on all parties to allow the sick and
wounded to exit the four towns and all other besieged
areas to get the medical care they need to survive,
and put an end to the tit-for-tat approach. Medical

S/PV.7744

evacuations are not a question of politics or military
advantage, but of basic humanity.
I have highlighted Aleppo city and the four towns
today, but members will find similar conditions in
many more places: the tens of thousands trapped and
exposed to fighting in Menbij with no humanitarian
support; or the reports of dozens of civilians killed
in strikes in Tokhar, in rural Aleppo; the continued
bombardment of Douma, Darayya and Khan El-Shieh,
in rural Damascus; and relentless attacks by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant on the besieged parts of
Deir ez-Zor city. I am also gravely concerned about the
situation at the berm along the Jordanian border, where
the number of people seeking shelter from the fighting
inside Syria increased exponentially in recent months.
The vast majority of those stranded are children,
women and elderly people, as well as those in need of
medical care, including hundreds of pregnant women.
It is baking hot, totally arid — a no-man’s land of a
barely living hell.
The fact is that across Syria approximately
5.5 million people are in need in hard-to-reach and
besieged areas with little physical protection and
limited access to basic life-saving assistance. Of that
number, some 590,000 people remain totally trapped
in besieged areas. If I may, let me take a moment to
describe what it is actually like to live in those areas.
Most of those people are completely desperate
for an escape from the constant fighting, shelling and
snipers that engulf their lives. Parents have no food
for their near-starving children. Malnutrition is so
severe that children die as a result. There is no running
water or electricity. Prices for the little commodities
that reach those areas are dozens of times higher than
in neighbouring communities, and thus simply not
affordable for those already reduced to nothing. They
are places with little education, and where sexual
violence, child recruitment and early marriage are
commonplace. Imagine a place where a pregnant woman
cannot give birth safely because she cannot receive the
necessary painkillers or the care that is needed. They
are places where those fortunate enough to find care all
too often die in their beds when their medical facility
is hit. And yes, in Syria, there are unspeakable sexual
crimes against children — it is abhorrent and on our
collective watch.
When you look beyond the numbers, Mr. President,
that is the reality that people are facing in those areas

16-231623/26

S/PV.7744

The situation in the Middle East

day in and day out. It is not the fighters or those at
checkpoints who are suffering and dying in such ways.
It is the civilian population, the most vulnerable,
children, women, disabled persons and the elderly.
Those are indisputable facts, and they speak for
themselves. Surely none of us, no one here, is immune
to those horrors, which constitute daily life for so many
of our fellow human beings who just happen to have
been Syrian in Syria when their world exploded around
them over five years ago.
The life-or-death situation in many parts of the
country is exactly why we press from every possible
angle to get regular and sustained access to all besieged
and hard-to-reach areas. It is true that some progress
has been made this year. Overall, we have now reached
over 1 million people in besieged and hard-to-reach
areas. We have reached each besieged area at least once
this year, including 400,000 of the 590,000 people,
including as well through ongoing airdrops to 110,000
people in Deir ez-Zor city. Significant progress was
made on approvals by the Government of Syria for
the July inter-agency convoy plan, with 34 out of 35
locations approved for convoys, including, for the
first time, all requested besieged areas with the full
package of assistance. Those breakthroughs, however
incremental, are proof that, when there is enough
political will, it is really possible to reach people in
desperate need of life-saving assistance. I thank those
with influence on the parties for bringing their weight
to bear on the issue, especially recent initiatives by
the United States and the Russian Federation, not least
the Russian Federation’s Ambassador and his team
in Damascus.
At the same time, we have to recognize the
enormous access challenges still in front of us. The
escalation of fighting and insecurity continues to
further constrain access. Beyond Aleppo and the four
towns, we have seen that very clearly in July, as even
with Government of Syria approvals we have been
unable to reach many other locations, such as Darayya
and Duma, due to bombing and shelling and fighting
along key access roads. The United Nations and partner
cross-border operations from Turkey and Jordan have
also been affected by insecurity along border areas and
key access routes, thus affecting our ability to reach
tens of thousands of people.
Arbitrary restrictions and obstructions continue to
limit or obstruct where we deliver aid, to whom and
how often. Notwithstanding the high level of approvals
4/26

25/07/2016

for the July inter-agency convoy plan, the Syrian
authorities only authorized us to deliver to 75 per cent
of the population estimated by the United Nations to
be in those areas. The team on the ground continues
to press for the delivery of aid based on independent
United Nations needs assessments, as called for by the
Security Council in its resolutions
Even when approvals are granted and the large
amount of paperwork is completed, permits given by
the Government centrally do not always translate down
to their security forces. In particular, despite repeated
calls for the free passage of all medicines and surgical
equipment in aid convoys, from the Council and others,
medical and surgical items continue to be excluded
or removed from midwifery kits, paediatric kits, and
diarrheal-disease sets, depriving thousands of people
each month — I repeat: midwifery kits, paediatric kits,
and diarrheal-disease sets. This deliberate denial of
essential medicine and surgical equipment undermines
the very basis of humanitarian action. Meanwhile, some
non-State armed groups have also attacked, threatened
and refused to cooperate with humanitarian workers.
And sustained United Nations access to areas under the
control of ISIL, such as parts of the Raqqah and Deir
ez-Zor governorates, remains extremely limited.
Throughout Syria, United Nations agencies and
partners from non-governmental organizations continue
their tireless efforts to meet the urgent humanitarian
needs of the Syrian population, often at great personal
risk. We saw that first-hand on 29 June, when during
a convoy to Irbin and Zamalka, one of the drivers of a
supply truck was shot in the chest, and another round
struck an armoured vehicle. I would like to recognize
the bravery of those who risk their lives every time they
cross conflict lines and borders or enter active conflict
areas to provide much needed life-saving assistance to
those in need and remind those who sometimes carp
that gaining the Government of Syria’s permission is
the only way to mitigate these live and present mortal
dangers to our brave United Nations colleagues and
their partners, many of them local Syrians. Collectively,
through these efforts, we are reaching millions of people
per month through regular programming, cross-border
and cross-line activities, as well as air operations. It
is vital that all humanitarian organizations, personnel
and other assets — wherever they are based, wherever
they are operating, or however they deliver assistance
in Syria — be provided all necessary protection by all
16-23162

25/07/2016

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.7744

parties to the conflict, as afforded under international
humanitarian law.

I shall now give the floor to the members of
the Council.

Let me be frank — we need to urgently regain the
momentum on protection and access. The momentum
created in the first half of the year and since the
creation of the International Syria Support Group’s
humanitarian task force must be the platform for a
step change in the protection and access situation for
civilians into the second half of this year. That must
include, first, a restoration and consolidation of the
cessation of hostilities and an end to indiscriminate
attacks that recklessly kill and injure civilians. It is
well within the power of all parties and those who back
them to minimize civilian casualties and avoid further
crimes and atrocities. They must do so. Civilians and
civilian infrastructure are not pawns to be sacrificed,
but are specially protected under international law.

Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you, Sir,
for agreeing to hold this meeting in open session today.
Enough is enough. We need to break with tradition and
have this debate in public because it is vital that the
world hear the reality of life in Syria. I therefore thank
Under-Secretary O’Brien for his sobering briefing.

Secondly, it must include all necessary action from
the parties and their supporters to ensure safe, sustained,
unhindered and unconditional access. That must
include humanitarian truces and pauses in the fighting,
so that we can reach those civilians trapped behind the
front lines and that they can reach life-saving services
not available in their areas. Better still, of course, is for
all the fighting to stop.
Thirdly, it must include an immediate end to
the sieges that still collectively punish hundreds of
thousands of civilians mercilessly. Anything less than
the full lifting of the sieges will never be enough, and
we cannot pretend otherwise.
I will close by repeating what I and my colleagues
have said many times. The crisis must end with a
political solution, not a military victory. But we should
make no mistake as to the current humanitarian
trajectory; despite some sentiment and even rhetoric
within the international community, the available
protection space is shrinking, humanitarian conditions
are worsening and the level of despair is rising. Those
cannot and must not become accepted trends to which
the international community seemingly resigns itself
as the search for a political solution continues. The
international community has shown unity of purpose
before and must show it again before it is too late and
we face the prospect of losing another generation of
Syrians to conflict and misery.
The President: I thank Mr. O’Brien for his briefing.

It is also vital that the world hear each and every
member of the Council respond to the horrors described
today. We cannot hide away behind closed doors. We
cannot stay silent in the face of such barbarism. Hundreds
of civilians are being killed and injured in attacks from
the air and ground. Hundreds of thousands more are
now suffering in an ever-expanding humanitarian
crisis. As we have just heard, eastern Aleppo city is
now encircled by the regime. The Castillo road, a vital
route for food, medicine and supplies, is cut off. Three
hundred thousand people are now effectively besieged.
Yet another humanitarian catastrophe awaits.
We have seen this before, and we know what happens
next. Only six months ago, we held an emergency
briefing on the siege of Madaya (see PV.7605). We all
remember the pictures of emaciated children from that
town — children like Olah, only 12-years-old, who died
after the regime ignored requests to evacuate her. She
starved to death. The Syrian American Medical Society
reports that 64 others suffered the same horrific fate.
We owe it to Olah, her family and the people of
Madaya to stop history repeating itself in Aleppo.
There are 300,000 reasons why we cannot afford to
fail, but we are running out of time. We welcome the
foresight of the United Nations to preposition food
supplies in the city, but those supplies will feed less
than half the city’s population and only for a month.
Food prices are soaring, the price of flour has doubled,
the price of vegetables has tripled and it is only going
to get worse. We all know what is needed: sustained
and unhindered humanitarian deliveries. All of us here
today — the Council, the United Nations, the world
outside the Chamber — must keep pressing for such
access, both for Aleppo and all other destinations
agreed in the July plan.
We support Under-Secretary O’Brien’s call for
a weekly 48-hour pause to allow aid into Aleppo,
and I call upon all other Council members to express
their support today. We again call on Russia to use its
influence on the regime, not just to reopen the Castillo

16-231625/26

S/PV.7744

The situation in the Middle East

road and other routes, but also to respect fully the
cessation of hostilities, so that convoys can proceed
securely and Syrians can live safely. Those are not
unreasonable requests. They are not even new requests,
and yet they have fallen on deaf ears time after time and
week after week. Without sustained and unhindered
land access, we must continue to push for air access,
and we look to the World Food Programme and the
United Nations for an update on their plans to request
approval for such delivery.
So far this month, only two besieged places have
been reached by the United Nations. The report of
the Secretary-General (S/2016/631) explains that that
is because of security concerns. That comes as no
surprise, given the regime’s military offensives. It is
also because of administrative delays. I am sorry,
but no person or child should ever face starvation
because of an administrative delay. The Council should
therefore be united in its condemnation of any effort
to delay or restrict access. As the Secretary-General’s
report makes clear, granting access should never be
conditional, dependent on political negotiations or used
as a bargaining chip in talks.
As crucial as humanitarian access is for the people
of Aleppo, Madaya and so many other places in Syria, it
will count for very little if the bombs keep falling. I was
e-mailed recently by Dr. Hatem, a Syrian paediatrician,
who I have quoted in the Chamber before. He wrote to
me:
“There are close to 90,000 children in Aleppo. In
front of each of them, now lies the siege and above
them the threat of bombs”.
What good is it to feed, to clothe, to heal someone
only for them to die under the rubble of a bomb blast?
In Daraya, over 700 barrel bombs fell in less than three
weeks. That is on average 1 bomb every 40 minutes for
20 days. In Aleppo city, only this weekend, 6 medical
facilities were attacked within the space of 24 hours.
The only paediatric facility in east Aleppo was hit twice
within 12 hours. These are just a handful of examples;
there are many more. Such attacks are unconscionable.
They are unjustifiable. And yet they are commonplace.
Al-Assad’s consistent disregard for the cessation of
hostilities is an affront to the Security Council and to
the International Syria Support Group.
In the coming weeks and days, therefore, it is not
enough to grant unhindered access to all besieged
areas. It is not enough to unblock Castello road. We
6/26

25/07/2016

need to see all of that and more, including a genuine
recommitment to the cessation of hostilities, an end to
the bombing of medical facilities and an end to attacks
on civilians. That is the only way to save the people of
Aleppo and the people of Syria. As Doctor Yahya of the
Aleppo Children’s Hospital told me by e-mail earlier
today, if nothing is done, we are surely facing death.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Last
February, the adoption of the cessation of hostilities
agreement provided a spark of hope for a reduction in
violence that would open the way to an emergence from
the crisis and to the negotiation of a political transition in
Syria. Two months later, at the end of April, the regime,
supported by its allies, began its attack on Aleppo and
extinguished that hope. At that time, France, together
with the United Kingdom, took the initiative to bring
the Security Council together on 4 May (see S/PV.7687)
to denounce the tragic situation being faced by Aleppo
and the hundreds of thousands of inhabitants who were
still living there.
The regime, with the complicity of its allies, had just
launched an offensive that sounded the death knell for a
cessation of hostilities. The agreement on the cessation
of hostilities, as we feared, was just a smoke screen to
hide with the utmost cynicism an exclusively military
strategy, which aimed, under the pretext of combating
the Al-Nusra Front, to encircle all the areas held by the
opposition. What the regime cannot control, it seeks
to destroy. Hospitals were destroyed just yesterday in
Aleppo, in total violation of international humanitarian
law and resolution 2286 (2016), which we adopted by
consensus a few weeks ago.
During this entire time, the regime has continued
to violate Security Council resolutions, international
humanitarian law and the most basic humanitarian
principles. It has continued to attack civilian populations
and non-terrorist armed groups. By observing and
supporting the regime’s attitude, some members of the
Security Council are jeopardizing their responsibility
and their credibility.
The brutality has continued to worsen in Aleppo
city and province. After experiencing indiscriminate
attacks and daily barrel bomb attacks, the city of
Aleppo is now being besieged. The Castello road,
which was the last accessible route to provide it with
water, provisions and medicines, has been cut off by the
regime’s allied forces. In many respects Aleppo is for
Syria what Sarajevo was for Bosnia. It is a crossroads
16-23162

25/07/2016

The situation in the Middle East

city, a martyred city. The symbolic crossroads city of
Aleppo, which is thousands of years old and is part of
humankind’s heritage, is a place where many countries
have clashed and intermingled, leaving profound
and diverse imprints on the city — again, today is a
martyred town. This symbol of civilization is now
being subjected to a medieval type of siege. What a
downfall and, frankly, what a disgrace that is.
There are still about 300,000 people living in
besieged Aleppo, soon to be deprived of everything
and at the mercy of the cruelty of the regime’s militia.
Therefore, I ask: Can the Security Council, 20 years
after the siege of Sarajevo, passively accept the reprise
of a war crime of such barbarous tactics? Those
responsible for those crimes must not go unpunished.
The calendar provided for by resolution 2254
(2015) sets 1 August as the deadline for establishing a
transitional authority with full executive powers. For
the Security Council, respecting that deadline is a test
of the real will of the regime and its supporters to reach
a political solution.
At our most recent consultations, Special Envoy
De Mistura collectively informed us of the fact that,
without any progress in the cessation of hostilities and
the humanitarian situation, no credible resumption of
the negotiations would be possible. As we now meet,
this tragic scenario is indeed emerging. Aleppo has
become Syria’s martyred city. If it is besieged enough,
it could become the graveyard of the Vienna process,
as there will be no lasting political solution or effective
combating of terrorism, while Syrian civilians continue
to be massacred.
As was stressed publicly by the French Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Jean-Marc Ayrault, France cannot
close its eyes to the tragedy taking place in Aleppo.
We cannot allow the Aleppo siege to continue without
responding. Therefore, France has three demands.
First of all, we formally call upon the allies of the
regime, the members of the Security Council and the
International Syria Support Group (ISSG) to assume
their responsibilities so that the Syrian regime and its
allies immediately stop their attacks on Aleppo. The
lives of dozens of thousands of people and the future
of a negotiated political solution, as well as the shared
fundamental values of the Organization, are at stake.

S/PV.7744

Secondly, to relieve the suffering of the population,
we call upon for the immediate establishment of a
humanitarian ceasefire in Aleppo and Ghouta.
Thirdly, we call for an immediate lifting of all the
sieges and for rapid, safe and unhindered access to
all people in Syria, pursuant to the obligations under
resolutions 2139 (2015), 2185 (2014), 2254 (2015) and
2268 (2016). The Syrian authorities must respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law, and
they must also abide by Security Council resolutions.
The ISSG mechanism; the Geneva task force; the
efforts of Mr. De Mistura, which we support; and the
appeals for bringing together the opposition will all
achieve nothing because of the Aleppo siege. Let us be
clear: there will be no possible cooperation with those
who are responsible for this crime while it is being
committed and they bear a heavy responsibilty in the
face of history.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Under-Secretary-General Stephen O’Brien for
his briefing.
At our most recent open debate (see S/PV.7740), my
delegation spoke about working methods. We said that
it was positive if Security Council members were to
begin to express themselves in this open forum, rather
than doing so only in closed consultations when the
format of the meetings involved briefings followed by
consultations. For that reason, we would like to make
just a brief statement at this stage.
We are concerned about the lack of a solution to
the grave humanitarian situation in Syria, which affects
millions of people who are suffering from destruction,
hunger and extreme violence. Cruel practices, which
represent war crimes, such as the use of hunger as a war
tactic, are taking place in Syria. This deplorable tactic
is being used by parties to the conflict to inflict hunger
on the millions of besieged people, including children.
The besieging of towns as a tactic of war continues
to be one of the situations that should most urgently
draw the attention of the Security Council, as it does
not affect just the lives of people living under extreme
conditions because of the lack of food, but also because
it results in a lack of access to medicines and all the
basic supplies necessary to meet their most basic needs.
Uruguay is concerned about the recent events
that have taken place in the east of Aleppo city and
the closing of the Castello road, which was the last

16-231627/26

S/PV.7744

The situation in the Middle East

remaining access route to that area, the closing of
which prevents the circulation of civilians, trade and
humanitarian aid. Recently, Council members heard
about improvements in the delivery of humanitarian aid
in certain besieged cities, including some that had not
received aid in years. However, at the same time, we
learned with shock and horror the news of the bombings
that occurred in those same cities immediately after the
arrival of aid, as was the case in Daraya. The ongoing
deliberate attacks perpetrated against hospitals where
health-care personnel have been the victims is worrying;
this situation calls for compliance with resolution
2286 (2016) adopted by the Council last May. Today,
we have received information about new bombings in
Aleppo that have caused civilian deaths as well as the
destruction of hospitals, including a blood bank.
The humanitarian crisis in Syria can also be
seen through the displacement of millions of people
trying to escape the horror. The extreme seriousness
of their situation is causing these people’s extreme
vulnerability, whether they be internally displaced by
lack of access to a minimum standard of living or those
who manage to flee the country only to become easy
prey for organized crime.
The situation of children in Syria is extremely
worrying. The effects of conflict on children is
compromising the future of an entire generation.
According to recent data from UNICEF, more than 8
out of 10 Syrian children — more than 8 million — have
been affected by war and are in need of humanitarian
assistance, including those within Syria and those
who are refugees in neighbouring countries, namely,
Lebanon, Jordan, Iraq, Turkey and Egypt.
In addition, one in three children in the
country — approximately 3.7 million in total — has
been born since the conflict began, with the result that
they know only violence, fear and displacement. In
this context of despair and chaos, Uruguay considers
it necessary to redouble international efforts to prevent
Syrian children from becoming a lost generation as a
result, inter alia, of the lack of educational opportunities,
child-soldier recruitment and forced marriages at an
early age.
Accordingly, the recent and terrible case of
beheading of a Palestinian boy by the Nour Al-Din
Al-Zenki group is a barbaric and cowardly act. How
far have we come? Is it no longer enough to recruit
children? Do they also have to cut their heads off
8/26

25/07/2016

with knives? Uruguay rejects and expresses its strong
condemnation of this savage act. We would add, further,
that there is no God or religion that accepts an atrocity
of this nature.
We support Mr. Stephen O’Brien’s request for a
weekly 48-hour truce in Aleppo.
Finally, Uruguay wishes to reiterate once again
the importance of making greater progress towards a
political solution that facilitates moving forward in the
peace talks under way and which supports a process of
transition. We are convinced that this is the only way to
achieve lasting solutions to the current conflict, taking
into account the provisions of resolutions 2254 (2015)
and 2268 (2016) of this Council.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): To say the least, the
humanitarian situation in Syria remains of grave
concern to us. The regime and its allies continue to
pursue their own military objectives with complete
and cynical disregard for the still-existing cessation of
hostilities and their obligations under the May statement
of the International Syria Support Group, to which no
one seems to pay any attention any longer. Damascus
has made no effort to save the political momentum but
instead is keeping the Syrian people hostage to its plans
to change the equation on the ground by military means.
We are alarmed by the dozens of deaths and
hundreds of injured as a result of a systematic shelling
by the pro-regime forces and its allies in both eastern
and western Aleppo in the past weeks. As the head
of delegation of the International Committee of the
Red Cross in Syria recently said, the situation in
Aleppo is devastating, with the city being constantly
bombed. We share concern that civilians on all sides
are unable to find shelter, food and medical care. We
call on all sides to the conflict to protect civilians and
civilian infrastructure.
In a number of meetings we have raised the issue
of the situation along the Castello road. Now the fears
that we expressed have become a reality. Food supplies
in eastern Aleppo are sufficient only until the end of
July, and health care is not available. A humanitarian
catastrophe is looming for some 300,000 people.
Humanitarian access to eastern Aleppo city must be
restored without any delay or preconditions.
Assessing the state of implementation of the July plan
for cross-line deliveries, we stress again the importance
of observing the principle of no conditions attached with
16-23162

25/07/2016

The situation in the Middle East

regard to the type of assistance to be provided. We are
dismayed by the fact that in almost half of the locations
the Syrian authorities have allowed lower numbers of
beneficiaries to receive the humanitarian aid than the
United Nations had projected. In this context, we join
the United Nations and other colleagues in calling
on all parties to the conflict to immediately provide
unconditional, unimpeded and sustained access to
the people in besieged and hard-to-reach areas across
Syria, or at least to agree to the establishment of the
weekly 48-hour humanitarian pause.
An improved humanitarian situation can only be
achieved through the political resolution of the conflict.
However, as we are less than a week away from the
1 August target date, we unfortunately do not see any
positive changes that could lead to the resumption of
the negotiation process. Without tangible progress on
the political track, the best we and the Syrian people
can hope for is reliance on irregular and interrupted
deliveries of humanitarian aid by the United Nations
and other actors, which is rather dismaying after all
the efforts devoted to alleviating the suffering of the
Syrian people.
We need to ask ourselves how many more briefings
like today’s we will have to hear before it is too late.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): In the five
years since the beginning of the conflict in Syria and
its consequences, caused in part by the involvement of
outside parties, the country has suffered immeasurably
and the international community has been unable
to end the carnage, which cannot be achieved until
reconciliation takes place. The parties are not interested
in Syria itself, which has become fertile soil for terrorist
groups and foreign terrorist fighters coming from
various countries around the world, thereby making it
fertile soil for chaos and sectarianism.
We have seen the Secretary-General’s recent report
on the humanitarian situation in Syria (S/2016/631).
Despite the relative progress that has been achieved
towards ensuring the access of humanitarian aid since
the beginning of the work of the International Syria
Support Group, so far we have only seen the military
zones and targets increase and the number of external
players involved, including those taking part in military
activities, expand. Unfortunately, innocent victims
are still dying in Syria. Furthermore, some people are
using the unprecedented humanitarian crisis to achieve
their own political goals.

S/PV.7744

For its part, Egypt has made efforts and concentrated
on the process of ensuring humanitarian access, and we
have achieved some progress in that regard.
We have sent a complete convoy to a number of
towns, including Damascus, Dara’, Qunaytirah and
Suwayda’, and we will persist in our efforts. We call
upon the members of the Security Council and the
international community to focus on providing whatever
support it can to the Syrian people on the ground
without politicizing or trading on the humanitarian
crisis in Syria.
Only a political solution will effectively put an end
to the suffering of the Syrian people. We are all aware
that the only formula for such a solution is the one
agreed by the international community, as set out in
various resolutions, including resolutions 2254 (2015)
and 2268 (2016) on the cessation of hostilities in Syria.
In that regard, I recall that this solution represents our
final opportunity to put an end to the Syrian conflict. In
a constantly evolving international political situation,
there is little time left, and what is possible today might
turn into a missed opportunity tomorrow.
Allow me to reiterate that the current international
consensus is based on a number of pillars. First, a
cessation of hostilities in Syria is a prerequisite for
establishing a complete ceasefire in the country.
Secondly, a political transition must be attained
through negotiations between the Syrian Government
and the broadest possible spectrum of opposition
groups, pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/523, annex). Thirdly, we
must work to improve the humanitarian situation and
deliver humanitarian assistance to those in need of
it in Syria, including in the besieged areas. Fourthly,
we must combat the terrorism and extremism that run
rampant in Syria. In the coming period, implementing
those pillars will depend primarily on the international
community’s determination to put an end to the crisis
and to comply with those agreements. It will also
depend on the International Syrian Support Group’s
efforts to ensure that those measures are implemented.
In that context, I reiterate Egypt’s support for the
cooperation and coordination between the Russian
Federation and the United States as co-chairs of the
International Syria Support Group. We welcome their
tireless efforts at the political level and in terms of
ensuring humanitarian access in Syria. I once again
call on them to promptly agree on how to address the

16-231629/26

S/PV.7744

The situation in the Middle East

situation on the ground, including by strengthening
the implementation of the cessation of hostilities and
preventing terrorist organizations and those groups
affiliated with them from sabotaging it. Furthermore,
they should push for the launch of direct negotiations
between the Syrian parties as soon as possible, under
the auspices of Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura.
Despite the fact that the terrorist groups are
clearly not parties to the ceasefire in Syria, we note
that there has been an incomprehensible hesitation and
politicization in dealing with those groups. That has led
some armed groups to collaborate openly with terrorist
organizations, particularly the Al-Nusra Front — the
Syrian branch of Al-Qaida. We believe that such a
brazen challenge to the international community can no
longer be tolerated. In that connection, we call on the
international community to set a timetable for including
those groups on the list of terrorist organizations should
they continue to cooperate with the Al-Nusra Front.
Continuing to show complacency and turn a blind
eye will only serve to encourage terrorism. Terrorist
fighters who belong to so-called moderate groups have
begun to emulate the beastly and sick acts perpetrated
by Da’esh. They recently filmed the beheading of a
child and posted the footage on social media.
In closing, allow me to call on and plead with all
domestic, regional and international parties in Syria, on
behalf of the Egyptian and Arab peoples, to have mercy
and spare the Syrian people from the consequences of
their score-settling and narrow political interests, and
to be willing to compromise, if only partly, on those
interests in order to show mercy and compassion to
the innocent mothers and children of Syria who have
committed no political sins.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I thank
Stephen O’Brien for his briefing. As Stephen O’Brien
has described, the humanitarian situation in Syria is
devastating. The numbers verge on incomprehensible,
although we know that for Syrians, their ordeal is all
too real. And as Mr. O’Brien has confirmed, despite
the improvements that had been made in recent months
in respect of access, the overall humanitarian situation
is worse. This humanitarian catastrophe is not just a
product of indifference by the parties and their backers
to the suffering of the Syrian people; in many cases, it
is deliberate, and humanitarian access is manipulated
for military advantage. Hospitals are routinely
targeted. The fight against terrorism is used to justify
10/26

25/07/2016

indiscriminate attacks on civilians and any group that
opposes the regime.
It is completely unacceptable that siege and
starvation continue to be employed as methods
of warfare. The recent closure of Castello road is
particularly concerning, putting up to 300,000 more
civilians in eastern Aleppo at risk of starvation. In this
regard, we fully endorse Stephen O’Brien’s call for a
48-hour humanitarian pause in and around Aleppo.
It is also unacceptable that civilian neighbourhoods
are being shelled and medical facilities bombed. In
many cases, it appears they are deliberately targeted,
in blatant violation of international law and resolution
2286 (2016). As we have heard, five medical clinics were
hit in Aleppo province on 24 July alone. The growing
humanitarian situation on the Jordan-Syria border is
also of great concern. Over 100,000 people are now in
need of ongoing assistance. It is a bleak picture, bleaker
still because every bomb and blockade takes us farther
away from the political solution to this brutal conflict.
There has been progress. We acknowledge Syria’s
positive response to the United Nations June and July
plans. We welcome the efforts of the United States and
Russia, as humanitarian co-chairs of the International
Syria Support Group, to get aid to the people who need
it. We acknowledge the extensive effort that Russia has
been making on the ground to facilitate access and to
ensure that agreements made by the Syrian regime are
kept. While the level of approvals in July represents a
slight improvement, it still provides for assistance to
less than 50 per cent of Syrians in need, and that is if all
the aid gets through, which it regularly does not.
Too often, we see the Syrian Government using
administrative obstacles to block humanitarian access.
We agree with the Secretary-General that humanitarian
access must not be a one-off or occasional event.
It cannot be limited to particular segments of the
population or to specific kinds of aid. It is not a favour or
a bargaining chip for negotiations — it is an obligation
under international law. There are 5.47 million people
living in besieged, hard-to-reach and priority crossline locations. Providing intermittent, symbolic access
to a few of these areas each month is not enough. We
call on the Syrian Government to fully implement the
July plan based on the needs assessment conducted by
the United Nations. The continued removal of certain
items, including medical supplies, is unacceptable.
What possible justification can there be for removing
16-23162

25/07/2016

The situation in the Middle East

paediatric kits and diarrhoeal disease sets from
convoys?
We also call on all parties to the conflict to take
all feasible measures to protect civilians, as required
under international humanitarian law and reaffirmed
in various Council resolutions including resolution
2258 (2015) in order to safeguard the lives of all
civilians living in Aleppo and elsewhere in Syria.
We all need to pressure the parties and their backers
to prioritize ending the suffering of the Syrian people
over their own narrow aims. This means getting the
cessation of hostilities back on track, ending the brutal
and cynical attacks on civilians and hospitals, and
getting humanitarian assistance to the millions who
need it. Tangible improvements on the ground are a
humanitarian imperative. They can also help create
the space and momentum needed for a successful
resumption of intra-Syrian talks and progress towards
the sustainable political resolution to this conflict that
the Syrian people so desperately need.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I am largely in agreement with the statements of the
Ambassadors of Egypt and New Zealand.
I thank Mr. O’Brien. After listening to his
briefing on behalf of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, we note once
again that the hell that is the war in Syria has no limits.
The glimmer of hope we saw late last year is on the
brink of being extinguished. There is a pressing need to
restore a cessation of hostilities throughout the country.
We thank the United States and the Russian Federation
for their efforts to revitalize resolution 2268 (2016).
We trust that they will bear fruit in the coming days
and that this meeting will have a positive effect on the
tragedy befalling the Syrian people.
Only five months ago, we were taking the first
steps to isolate the terrorist groups in Syria and thereby
normalize the lives of its civilians. Humanitarian
access was improving. Up to 1 million people have
received assistance in 2016. Nevertheless, today we
are witnessing an escalation in fighting that could
jeopardize all the gains we have achieved. Often,
attacks are carried out without the slightest regard for
the basic tenets of international humanitarian law.
It is unconscionable that there have been 40 attacks
on hospitals and clinics in Syria so far this year,
according to the World Health Organization. The latest
was on the Omar bin Abdulaziz hopsital in Aleppo.

S/PV.7744

No less tragic is the fact that the Syrian regime is
removing medical supplies from the convoys, despite
pressure from the international community and the
Russian Federation. I cannot say it often enough — this
is unacceptable.
We continue to receive reports of barrel-bomb
attacks in urban zones. As the Deputy Ambassador of
Uruguay so aptly said, the abduction and subsequent
decapitation of a child in Aleppo, as captured in a
video that was circulated on social media last week, is
absolutely inhuman. The child was only 11 years old,
and the most savage brutality imaginable ended his life.
Finally, I want to mention a worker from the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East — a Palestinian by the
name of Yaser Mahmoud Shuaeeb — who lost his
life on 17 July, also in Aleppo, as he was driving a
humanitarian convoy. I reiterate the pressing need for a
cessation of hostilities. Meanwhile, we urge all parties
to the conflict to respect international law, which
mandates the protection of civilians. Specifically, we
wish to highlight two essential actions that must be
implemented immediately.
First, we call for humanitarian pauses in the
fighting, with a view to facilitating humanitarian
access, including food distribution, and simultaneously
allowing for the most urgent medical evacuations.
With regard to Aleppo, I welcome Stephen O’Brien’s
proposal to establish weekly 48-hour pauses in the
fighting. I also fully align myself with the three
proposals made by the French Ambassador. Secondly,
we call for a clarification of the state of the access
route to east Aleppo, the so-called Ca. According to
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2016/631), the lives of
between 200,000 and 300,000 people depend on that
route, which has been unusable since 17 July.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The multi-year conflict eroding Syria today,
due to terrorists fuelled with weapons from the outside,
violations and flows of internally displaced persons and
refugees, has seen a deterioration in the humanitarian
situation in Syria. At the same time, following the
establishment of the ceasefire regime, we have seen
some progress. Humanitarian access has increased
significantly and difficulties are being discussed in
the special format of the International Syria Support
Group.

16-2316211/26

S/PV.7744

The situation in the Middle East

25/07/2016

The Government of Damascus is doing a great deal
to ensure that, in such a difficult context of internal
armed conflict, its citizens can enjoy a normal life. As
a result of the unrelenting work of Russian specialists
based in Hmeimim, the number of residential areas
participating in the ceasefire is now 209. More than 60
armed opposition movements have stated their intention
to implement the ceasefire regime. There are ongoing
talks with armed militias about extending the ceasefire
to the governorates of Daraa, As-Suwayda and Homs.
Russia is providing humanitarian assistance to Syrians
through both the State and civil society. In this regard,
we stress the need to establish a sound process for the
return of internally displaced persons to reconciled
regions and to rebuild public infrastructure there.

We are deeply worried about information that, as a
consequence of strikes led by the United States coalition
in the area of Manbij, in the north of the country, dozens
of people, including women and children, have been
killed and injured in camps. We are struck by the fact
that not a single word has been said about this incident
in the statements made by the representatives of the
United Kingdom, France and other participants in the
coalition. We hope that this incident will be discussed
in detail by the representative of the United States, who
will take the floor after us. We do not need promises of
investigations. We have been waiting five years for an
investigation into civilian bombing victims in Libya,
but we still have not heard a word about that either. I am
therefore sure that United States military knows how
the situation stands now.

The priority format for humanitarian operations
remains by land, with the direct agreement of the
Syrian Government. As a last resort, airdrops could be
used. Air delivery has become a lifesaver for hundreds
of thousands in Deir ez-Zor, besieged by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham. Humanitarian supplies are
dropped with the active participation of Russian forces.
This has been effective for the provision of assistance
to those in Al-Hasakah, and we can therefore only
welcome the opening of the air bridge in Qamishli.
However, let us not forget that the situation arises from
the fact that Turkey has been blocking the crossing
point from Nusaybin for several months now. We hope
that Ankara will make the right decision to alleviate the
suffering of Syrian civilians.

The news of the atrocious attack on a Palestinian
boy, beheaded by bandits from the Harakat Nour al-Din
al-Zenki, was heart-wrenching. Some have supported
this armed group and its cronies in Syria, calling them
moderate opposition members, including them in the
ceasefire regime, and by any and all means protecting
the group from due payback. It is high time for the
Security Council to add to the list of terrorists wreaking
havoc in Syria.

We call on the United States, the United Kingdom
and other allies of Turkey and the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization to provide Turkey with the necessary
assistance. I recall that when we discussed the opening
of the crossing point to Damascus, our Western partners
imposed preconditions or linkages almost every day. We
stress that it is unacceptable for fighters to use civilians
as human shields. It is well known that opponents of
the Syrian Government often use this tactic, trapping
people in blocked-off residential areas.
We do not question the need for humanitarian
assistance, including in besieged areas. However,
we believe that the Government of Syria’s military
operations to block and destroy terrorists aim to
reinstate law and order. In a number of cases, as a
result of such actions, fighters terrorizing locals have
signalled their readiness to lay down arms.
12/26

As a result of the intensified actions carried out
over the ceasefire period by Jabhat Al-Nusra and its
allies, the situation in Aleppo remains urgent. Terrorists
use the ceasefire regime to receive reinforcement from
abroad, resupply and mobilize fresh forces, including
through the recruitment of minors. As in other besieged
areas, the fighters entrenched there are regularly
provided with military assistance. The Castello Road
is no exception; we have information to the effect that
this route is actively being used not for the provision
of humanitarian assistance to civilians, but to provide
terrorists with weapons and armaments, as well as for
the passage of jihad-mobiles with suicide bombers.
We also know that those in eastern areas of Aleppo
can easily move by day to the western part of the city,
where the situation is significantly better. Of course,
however the situation might be in Aleppo, there is a
need to prevent a humanitarian disaster there.
Just a few words on Darayya: fighters holed up
there are carrying out broad artillery strikes, making
the provision of humanitarian assistance impossible.
At the same time, the supplies that do get there are
flowing into the markets of eastern Ghouta. These
types of commercial arrangements have characterized
16-23162

25/07/2016

The situation in the Middle East

extremist-controlled areas. Our delegation has always
spoken about the futile effect of unilateral sanctions
against Damascus. Such measures should be lifted, as
they cause suffering to people.
First and foremost, there is a need to lift the ban on
the provision of medications and fuel. The intermittent
pitting of Security Council members one against the
other on the humanitarian dossier, the imposition
of new ultimatums on the Government of Syria and
calling upon Russia to bring pressure to bear on the
Government is counterproductive. We believe instead
that people should go to Damascus, establish working
contacts and actually do something useful. It is clear
that foreign sponsors are not upholding their obligations
with respect to working with the opposition. They
have primary responsibility for a lack of humanitarian
access in terrorist-held areas, first and foremost Fo’ah
and Kefraya, where the food situation is extremely
difficult. Incessant shelling by jihadists there is killing
peaceful resident.
Fighters continue with artillery strikes, and
the people suffer. We call upon United Nations staff
to carefully discharge their mandate, uphold the
sovereignty of Syria, not deviate from the principles of
neutrality and impartiality, and work to provide help for
all those in need, not just those who are in territories
controlled by the opposition. We really cannot shake
the impression that the spotlight is being intentionally
focused on the provision of humanitarian assistance to
those areas where the Government of Syria is carrying
out counter-terrorism operations. In certain areas
controlled by the Government, where people are just
as much in need, humanitarian convoys do not seem to
be any special hurry. These double standards must be
done away with; all need help without exception and
without any artificial linkages with those areas in Syria
approved by Damascus.
Tasks have to be realistic and cooperation close
with the Syrian Government. There is a need to heed the
Government’s view, including in the design of supply
routes. The justified view of Damascus in ensuring
security for humanitarian staff is often not taken
into account. This was recently demonstrated by the
incident in which a driver from the Syrian Red Crescent
sustained injuries in a hastily equipped humanitarian
convoy sent by night.
Just a few words on politics: let us stop the footdragging and resume United Nations-led Syrian talks.

S/PV.7744

Russia is sparing no effort to bring the sides to a
peaceful settlement on the basis of international law.
An integral element of this strategy is cooperation with
the United States, as co-Chair of the International Syria
Support Group, as well as with other partners in this
very special format. We hope that all partners will seek
to shore up rather than erode achievements.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General O’Brien for his briefing
and for his special attention to the 250,000 to 275,000
Syrians trapped in eastern Aleppo.
Let us put eastern Aleppo in some context. For
years, the Council has called on the Al-Assad regime
to end the brutal sieges that have inflicted suffering
on hundreds of thousands of Syrians, who have been
deprived of the food and medicine needed to survive.
The community of Darayya, outside Damascus,
besieged by the regime, received no United Nations
aid for more than three years. Communities in eastern
Ghouta received no United Nations deliveries for more
than two years. After long and painful negotiations,
negotiations that should never have been necessary
in the first place, the United Nations and its partners
barely managed to reach Syria’s 18 besieged areas this
year. Often the United Nations was able to send only a
single convoy, and more often than not the Al-Assad
regime removed supplies from those convoys before
they could reach civilians.
It was actually hard to imagine how Syria’s
humanitarian situation could get worse, and yet
Al-Assad’s military advances around Aleppo,
undertaken with Russia’s support, now threaten to
bring the suffering of the Syrian people to a new low.
We have spoken repeatedly and in great detail over the
past six months about the horrific starvation of Syrians
in the besieged areas of Madaya and Darayya. Eastern
Aleppo, by comparison, has up to seven times as many
people as those trapped in Madaya and up to 75 times
as many as in Darayya. Eastern Aleppo is quickly
falling victim to the Al-Assad regime’s typical pattern
of starve-and-surrender tactics. Over the past month
the Al-Assad regime flagrantly violated the cessation
of hostilities by attacking Aleppo. The regime and
its supporters have cut off Castello Road, the only
remaining supply route for the more than 250,000
Syrians living in the eastern part of the city, severing
their access to food, fuel, medicine, clean water and
other essential supplies.

16-2316213/26

S/PV.7744

The situation in the Middle East

Brave and courageous humanitarian workers such
as those Mr. O’Brien described continue to try to
deliver medical supplies and aid on smaller roads at
great, great risk, but alternative options for delivering
humanitarian aid are diminishing rapidly. Airstrikes
by the Al-Assad regime and by Russia are making the
use of those other roads totally precarious. Russia, as
a co-sponsor of the cessation of hostilities, must halt
these attacks and persuade the regime to do the same,
and they must ensure the reopening of the Castello
Road. Russia, the Al-Assad regime and other groups
fighting around Aleppo should heed the call of the
United Nations for a weekly, 48-hour pause to allow for
the delivery of essential supplies.
Look at what people are going through: a doctor,
Samer Attar, who recently returned to the United States
from volunteering in Aleppo, described the scene in
clinics after attacks by the Al-Assad regime: “Patient
after patient, non-stop, was wheeled into the small
emergency room. I saw mutilated limbs, dismembered
bodies, dead children, screaming patients. People
literally bleed to death in front of you and there is
nothing you can do about it”. Imagine being a doctor in
that circumstance.

25/07/2016

this conflict. We note that the opposition has condemned
this crime and promised to bring those responsible for
his death to justice in a transparent manner, something
that we have never heard the Al-Assad regime do when
faced with similar allegations of atrocities. Instead,
despite countless videos, reams and reams of elaborate
photographic evidence and hundreds of thousands of
eyewitness reports gathered by credible independent
actors, we get from the Syrian regime time and again
only blithe, uncurious but always dogmatic denials — a
cold, cruel indifference to the fate of the Syrian people.
I would also note that the Russian Federation
has never once acknowledged even the possible
involvement of the Russian Air Force in the horrific
strikes that have resulted in significant civilian
casualties, nor has Russia acknowledged the huge
number of Russian strikes against opposition groups
that signed up for the cessation of hostilities — the
very groups, in fact, mentioned by the representative
of the Russian Federation. The Russian Federation is
in an extremely weak position to point fingers at the
United States in the Council. We look forward to Russia
opening just a single investigation into strikes that have
killed civilians.

Feras Badawi, a journalist in eastern Aleppo, told
Human Rights Watch, “We have not seen vegetables
in weeks, and airstrikes are not giving us a break”.
Ibrahim Al-Leith, a volunteer first responder with
Syria Civil Defence, described the long lines forming
at shops, because “we are really expecting a famine in
a few days”.

The situation in Syria’s other besieged areas remains
dire. Even excluding Aleppo, 196,500 more Syrians are
living in besieged areas than were in January. These
Syrians depend on sporadic aid deliveries, which are
all too often disrupted by the regime’s bureaucratic
pretexts or by fighting on the ground. In no single
month this year has the United Nations been allowed
to reach even half of Syrians living in besieged areas.
United Nations Special Adviser Jan Egeland recently
warned that Madaya was on the brink of starvation.
And the regime continues to dispute the numbers in the
United Nations beneficiary list — a cynical attempt to
further reduce how much aid gets delivered, in the rare
instances that aid gets delivered all. The United Nations
should be determining what is needed, how much and
where — and not the regime, which has long practiced
collective punishment and indiscriminately branded
civilians as terrorists.

In another deeply alarming development, a video
circulated last week that showed rebel fighters beheading
a young boy in Aleppo. The brutal killing of this boy,
reported to be 12-year-old Abdullah Issa, is appalling.
The United States condemns in the strongest terms this
unconscionable act as well as the unlawful targeting of
children and the use of child soldiers by all parties to

The regime’s actions also continue to take a severe
toll on the health sector. This month alone, forces
loyal to Al-Assad twice removed medical supplies
from convoys bound for the besieged community of
Al-Waer in Homs. What exactly did the regime take? It
took midwifery kits to help deliver healthy babies and
treatments for diarrhoea. It is obscene.

Aleppo’s residents are not even safe when they
get to a hospital. According to the United Nations, the
Omar bin Abdul Aziz hospital in eastern Aleppo has
been hit three times since June. Airstrikes reportedly
struck yet another hospital in the Jebel Saman district of
eastern Aleppo on 19 July, killing at least six civilians
and injuring 17, and, as we have heard just in the last
48 hours, we have seen reports that the regime has
bombed four more hospitals, including one that cared
for children.

14/26

16-23162

25/07/2016

The situation in the Middle East

In May, the Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2286 (2016), which calls for the protection of
medical personnel and facilities. Yet hospitals, clinics
and medical personnel are still being struck regularly
by the regime and Russian forces. In recent days, it
was reported that air strikes conducted by the Global
Coalition to Counter the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant may have caused a large number of civilian
casualties in Manbij. The United States will carefully and
thoroughly review any and all credible information that
we can gather about the incident, including information
from organizations within Syria that document harm to
civilians. We are also now trying to investigate those
events. This is a process that is complicated by the
extremely limited access of Syrian civil society groups
and others to areas controlled by the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant. We are determined to do whatever
we can to understand what took place.
The United States goes to great lengths to reduce the
risk of non-combatant casualties, and complies with the
law of armed conflict in its operations. It will continue
to do so. If we determine that civilians were harmed in
Manbij by our strikes, we will acknowledge it and look
at what steps can be taken, consistent with the policies
that President Obama announced in his executive order
of 1 July on pre- and post-strike measures to address
civilian casualties in United States operations. This is
an extremely important issue.
In conclusion, last week, Secretary Kerry travelled
to Moscow in an attempt to address the two main
forces undermining the cessation of hostilities — first
and foremost, the rampant violations by the Al-Assad
regime, including the targeting of both civilians and
groups that are supposed to be protected, as well as
offensives led by the Al-Qaida affiliate in Syria, the
Al-Nusra Front, which increasingly poses a threat to
our interests. In Moscow, the United States and Russia
agreed on a series of concrete steps that, if fully
implemented, could restore the cessation of hostilities
and create space for Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura’s
efforts to launch a genuine political transition process.
Our technical experts have been working on the details
for implementing such steps. Ultimate success is of
course far from assured, but we know that we have a
responsibility to try and exhaust all diplomatic options.
Moving forward requires a period of reduced
violence. If Aleppo remains under siege, it is hard to
see how that is going to work. As we speak, Aleppo’s
residents are struggling to find food and medicine

S/PV.7744

for their families. Maher Abu al-Walid, a 25-year-old
resident, said in an interview, “We are not starving yet,
but we are all panicking now”. He has to support his wife
and 7-month-year-old daughter, Sham, as food supplies
are running low and prices are increasing. Imagine for
just one moment what it must feel like to realize that,
within in a few days, every shelf at your local market
will be bare and that you may have no place to go and
no way to afford the food that your 7-month-old infant
desperately needs. All of us here must do our utmost to
ensure that Maher’s fear does not become a reality — a
reality that far too many in Syria are already enduring.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Under-Secretary O’Brien for his briefing.
Conflict has recently intensified in parts of
Syria, resulting in civilian casualties, the destruction
of medical and relief facilities and the obstruction of
United Nations humanitarian relief operations. At the
same time, we have also taken note of the fact that
humanitarian assistance in Syria over the first six
months of this year has yielded some results.
China is very sympathetic to the suffering that the
Syrian people have endured over the past five years.
We urge the Syrian parties concerned to effectively
implement the relevant Security Council resolutions,
comprehensively open up humanitarian access, cease
hostilities as soon as possible and create the conditions
necessary to enable the United Nations to continue
to carry out its humanitarian relief programmes. The
international community should lend a helping hand
and provide assistance to Syria and the neighbouring
countries that are taking in refugees, so as to help
alleviate the suffering of civilians in besieged and hardto-reach areas and refugees located outside Syria.
A political solution is the only way out with regard
to the situation in Syria. It is also the fundamental way
out for a solution to the relevant Syrian issues, including
the Syrian humanitarian issue. The international
community should be firm and unwavering in
undertaking a political solution to the Syrian issue,
continue to allow the Syrian people determine the
future and fate of Syria, continue to have the United
Nations play its primary role in pursuing its good
offices, firmly support Special Envoy de Mistura’s
work, and launch the next round of Geneva talks as
soon as possible. All Syrian parties should follow the
principle of resolving easier issues first and difficult
ones later, take a step-by-step approach, meet each

16-2316215/26

S/PV.7744

The situation in the Middle East

other half-way, build mutual confidence and gradually
find a solution acceptable to all.
China has been actively supporting efforts to ease
the Syrian humanitarian situation. Through multiple
channels, China has provided numerous forms of
humanitarian assistance, including food and supplies,
to Syria and other countries in the region. China wishes
to work with the international community and continue
to contribute to easing the humanitarian crisis in Syria.
Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. O’Brien
for his briefing and commend him on his work at the
helm of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs. We also commend his team.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela appreciates
the progress made with regard to the humanitarian
situation in Syria during the first half of this year, which
was acknowledged by the Secretary-General in his
latest report (S/2016/631). Accordingly, so far this year,
approximately 1 million people have received some
form of help from humanitarian agencies. While the
situation is not ideal, with constant clashes occurring
in numerous parts of Syria, it is a fact that convoys
carrying humanitarian aid have reached various areas
of the country where their assistance is required — a
fact that we see in a positive light.
In that regard, we welcome the recent delivery
of humanitarian assistance to the people of Qalaat
al-Madiq, which received 40 convoys of aid intended
for 32,000 people. In general, we note that there has
been real progress in the humanitarian area. However,
it has been limited in scope by the delicate situation
that the country is undergoing owing to the actions
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS), the
Al-Nusra Front and other armed non-State actors, which
have increased activities in some areas of the country.
The situation in Aleppo is particularly worrying
since groups that some international actors call the
“moderate opposition” are simultaneously fighting the
Al-Nusra Front terrorists. This military collaboration
affects the political settlement of the armed conflict. As
has been reiterated in various resolutions, terrorist and
associated groups are excluded from the negotiations
and should be fought.
The cessation of hostilities has established areas of
peace that have helped civilians attend to their urgent
needs. That is why we must build on the ceasefire and
advance the strengthening of local ceasefire agreements
16/26

25/07/2016

with a view to achieving a political agreement to put
an end to the conflict. We should therefore like to
take this opportunity to express our support for what
by Mr. O’Brien proposal concerning weekly, 48-hour
humanitarian pauses. That would help to alleviate the
difficult conditions in which civilians find themselves.
We recognize that in some cases the situations on the
ground make it difficult for humanitarian agencies to
carry out their work; it is therefore necessary to lift
the sieges in all affected areas and comply with the
provisions of resolution 2268 (2016). We condemn the
practices that violate international humanitarian law.
We recognize the current cooperation between the
Syrian authorities and the World Food Programme,
an institution which has reached more than 4 million
people and undertaken 70 airdrops for the inhabitants
of Deir ez-Zor. Al-Raqqa is one of the areas where
humanitarian needs have become more acute because
of the control being exercised by ISIS, which is referred
to in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2016/631).
We also pay tribute to the humanitarian
agencies deployed in the field. They are undertaking
commendable work in adverse and highly risky
conditions. We repeat that these agencies must not be
military targets, much less actors in the armed conflict.
Their only task is to provide assistance to those who
need it most, in accordance with the provisions of
international humanitarian law. However, their work
should be coordinated with the State concerned, in
accordance with international law.
We reiterate our condemnation of ISIS for
systematically denying access to humanitarian
assistance to the civilian population, as well as for
enforced disappearances, criminal actions against
ethnic minorities, women and the recruitment of
children in the areas it controls and the use of civilians
as human shields, which we have been informed is
taking place in Manbij. ISIS, the Al-Nusra Front and
their associates have become the greatest threat to
peace and stability in the region. Their influence must
be fought with all the necessary means, in accordance
with international law.
Similarly, we join others in rejecting today the
recent beheading of a 12-year-old Palestinian boy. That
happened in Aleppo and was executed by an armed
group called the “moderate rebels”, which enjoys
international support. So far we have not heard any
condemnation of that brutal murder by those who are
16-23162

25/07/2016

The situation in the Middle East

financing these groups. These terrorist practices are
no different from those executed by the Al-Nusra Front
and ISIS. Moreover, their actions are in violation of
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
They represent a war crime and those responsible must
be brought to justice.
We take this opportunity to condemn the
recruitment of minors. That practice undermines the
provisions of the Council with regard to children in
armed conflict.
Finally, we reiterate that overcoming the
humanitarian crisis depends on putting an the end to
the armed conflict. That is why we reaffirm our support
for the efforts of the Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura
to establish peace and to find a political and peaceful
solution to the Syrian armed conflict. However tragic
the situation may be on the ground, it must not be an
obstacle to bringing the parties to the conflict to the
table. We therefore call on the parties and those with
influence on them to resume the political negotiations
as soon as possible. Like all members of the Security
Council have said, the situation requires a political
solution and we must endeavour to make that a reality.
The prolongation of the conflict will mean only more
suffering and destruction for the Syrian people.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to commend Mr.Stephen O’Brien,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for the clarity
of his briefing. I would also like to commend the
high quality of the twenty-ninth report (S/2016/631)
presented to the Council, pursuant to resolution 2168
(2013), 2171 (2014) and 2258 (2258). Today, it is quite
clear that the cessation of hostilities, which is crucial
for humanitarian assistance and a sine qua non for
the peace process, is seriously compromised. That is
demonstrated by clashes between the Syrian army and
opposition armed groups in various areas, including
Damascus, Rif Dimashq and eastern Ghouta, which
have resulted in numerous victims and injured.
Like previous speakers, I would like to convey my
deep concern given the escalation of military actions
taken by the Government forces in Aleppo, which have
resulted in many victims, including many civilians, in
particular children.
Along the same lines, the Senegalese delegation
condemns the attacks by armed groups against the
part of the city that is under the Government’s control,

S/PV.7744

which have led to many civilian casualties. That
is why we recall the obligation that falls on warring
sides under international humanitarian law and human
rights law, as the increasing bombings threaten those
on the ground — between 200,000 and 300,000 people
in Aleppo — as a result of the blocked Castillo road,
the only route to access the eastern part of the city.
We also call on the Syrian authorities, with the help
of the International Syria Support Group (ISSG), in
particular the co-chairs — the Russian Federation and
the United States of America — to work to ensure that
the Syrian populations can be assisted by responding to
the request of humanitarian players to implement the
weekly cease-fire. It is worth noting that in addition
to more than hundreds of dead, many wounded, this
violence has resulted in the displacement of tens of
thousand people, in particular in Idlib, where according
to figures 45,000 fled air strikes.
Children continue to bear the brunt of the war. In
addition to issues of civil status, family displacements
and early marriage, the phenomenon of child soldiers
remains of utmost concern. My delegation would like to
know the fate of 150 children who were kidnapped from
the Thib Antar school to serve as child soldiers, when
they should have been taking exams.
With
regard
to
humanitarian
assistance,
my delegation welcomes the ongoing efforts of
stakeholders, in particular those of the United Nations
and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, to alleviate the
suffering of the millions of Syrians affected by war.
However, let us not lose sight of the fact that the goal
of providing 1,500,000 people with assistance, which
was established by the United Nations, has not been
achieved owing to violence and administrative delays.
We would therefore call upon the Government to work
to ensure that the goal of 1.2 million people be reached
in July.
There is a particular need for further authorizations
for United Nations staff. While such authorizations
have allowed for progress in the provision of aid to
besieged and hard-to-reach areas, the number of people
living in such areas has increased by approximately
900,000 — from 4.6 million to 5.45 million — mainly
due to the violence.
The ongoing destruction of public infrastructure,
such as markets, schools and hospitals, particularly
in the Aleppo and Idlib governorates, continues to be
of concern for us. In addition, erratic access to basic

16-2316217/26

S/PV.7744

The situation in the Middle East

social services, such as electricity in cities, is affecting
some 2 million people. In that context, UNICEF’s
commendable efforts to provide more than 3 million
litres of water to 2 million people should be welcomed.
The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East is experiencing
difficulty in deploying at some of the camps in Yalda,
from which the camp at Yarmuk is provisioned for
the purpose of serving Palestinian refugees. That is
due to clashes between the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant and the Al-Nusra Front, which is a real
source of concern for us. We welcome the efforts of
the World Health Organization and UNICEF thanks to
which 772,000 children have been vaccinated, which
represents 53.6 per cent coverage. We would like to
take this opportunity to ask about those children who
have not been reached due to violence in the localities
of Deir ez-Zor and Raqqa.
The Senegalese delegation welcomes the excellent
cooperation that United Nations bodies continues to
enjoy with the Turkish and Jordanian Governments.
My delegation would like to take this opportunity to
pay due tribute to the members of the medical and
humanitarian staff, who continue — sometimes at the
risk of their lives — to help the Syrian people in their
quest for peace and dignity.
Finally, my delegation would like to reiterate its
belief, which is shared by everyone here, that only a
political solution, which is being discussed in Geneva
under the auspices of the United Nations, can help end
the Syrian humanitarian catastrophe. We therefore
call upon stakeholders and the countries of the region,
as well as the International Syria Support Group,
particularly its Chairs, to push for peace in the region.
After six public debates on the humanitarian
situation in Syria and one public debate on the political
situation, the Security Council should scale up its
effort to help reach a political solution, pursuant to
the obligation we imposed on ourselves in resolution
2254 (2015) with the 1 August deadline for starting
the transition process. Terrorist organizations are
taking full advantage of the situation in Syria, with the
growing risk of our seeing them take hold of materials
out of which they are going to make weapons of mass
destruction. The terrorist contagion is spreading, which
means that the Security Council has to do everything it
can to stop it.
18/26

25/07/2016

Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Stephen O’Brien for his briefing on the
disturbing humanitarian situation in Syria.
Most regrettably, the conflict in Syria continues
while the parties completely disregard their obligations
under international humanitarian law and the
relevant Security Council resolutions. This is an
irrational war that is disproportionately affecting the
civilian population.
After a short respite, with the partial cessation of
hostilities and improvements in humanitarian access,
we are now witnessing the escalation of violence
in and around the city of Aleppo, with hundreds of
thousands trapped by the fighting and unable to access
basic assistance. As the Security Council tries to exert
pressure for the cessation of hostilities and a return
to negotiations, the parties on the ground continue
to strive for military gains. The closure of the last
remaining access route in and out of eastern Aleppo,
cutting off all civilians from humanitarian assistance,
is just the latest demonstration of the total disregard
there is for the Council’s resolutions and international
humanitarian law.
Although we fully support humanitarian agencies
in their efforts to address critical life-saving assistance,
such as food, medical supplies and fuel, and its supply
to all besieged and hard-to-reach areas, the recent
escalation in fighting between Government forces
and non-State armed groups should lead us to focus
on where these non-State armed groups are acquiring
weapons and resources. One issue that is barely
mentioned in our discussions is the fact that regional
and international stakeholders are not being held
responsible for providing the means that allow this
bloody war to continue. Paradoxically, humanitarian
assistance is blocked or is made hard to reach for those
in need, while the means to make war continue reaching
the parties to the conflict.
In conclusion, we urge the parties to return to
negotiations so that a political solution to this bloody
war may be found and so that humanitarian agencies
may have unconditional, safe and unhindered access
to all those in need. We condemn the air strikes and
bombings in eastern and western Aleppo in the recent
weeks that have resulted in numerous deaths and
injuries, among which there were many children, as well
as the destruction of hospitals and other vital civilian
infrastructure. While we support the establishment of
16-23162

25/07/2016

The situation in the Middle East

a humanitarian truce, as requested by the SecretaryGeneral, to allow humanitarian agencies access to
those in desperate need of food and water, among other
basic necessities, we emphasize that the proliferation of
terrorist groups and other non-State armed groups poses
a dangerous threat, not only for Syria but for the entire
region. The Security Council and the International
Syria Support Group must step up concerted efforts to
cut off the flow of arms into Syria and jointly combat
the growing threat of radicalism and terrorists.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Stephen O’Brien for his briefing, which brought
into the Security Council the gruesome reality of the
besieged areas in Syria and the horrendous suffering of
the people there. That has prompted my delegation, and
me, to ask to take the floor in response.
Earlier this month we waited in anticipation as
access was granted by the Syrian authorities to the
United Nations to bring its humanitarian programme
to the 34 out of 35 besieged and hard-to-reach areas,
either partially or in full. We had high hope that it was
a positive development building on the breakthrough
following the 1 June deadline by the International Syria
Support Group, and that it would lead to more sustained
access to all besieged and hard-to-reach areas. The
promising outlook we had at the beginning of the month
quickly diminished, however, with the disturbing news
that about 300,000 people in eastern Aleppo had been
cut off from humanitarian assistance, thereby triggering
death and a constant struggle against starvation.
The closure of the Castello road more than a week
ago effectively blocked civilian and humanitarian
movement, and it is deeply worrying that trapped
civilians are being subject to heavy shelling, as violence
in Aleppo escalated. Much to our horror, civilian
casualties and fatalities are increasing, and hospitals
and other medical facilities continue to be targeted
and destroyed. Indiscriminate attacks and air strikes
in Aleppo resulted, inter alia, in the death of almost
100 civilians in bombings last Tuesday. We welcome a
commitment to investigating that unfortunate incident.
While we know the importance of the fight against
terrorist groups in Syria, such attacks must not be at
the expense of civilians. A humanitarian pause at this
critical juncture should be given serious consideration.
The revolting beheading of a 12-year-old Palestinian
boy in Aleppo last week, allegedly perpetrated by a
member of the moderate opposition, highlights the

S/PV.7744

plight of children in Aleppo. In addition to more than
200,000 children killed in Menbij last week, the United
Nations Children’s Fund has reported that a further
235,000 are trapped in the area. Priority must be given
to allowing civilians, especially children, to flee to
safety from their homes. The unspeakable crimes
committed against them must end.
The Council only recently welcomed the Iraqi
Government’s approach, which consisted of applying
a pause in the fight against the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant in Fallujah to facilitate the safe passage
of civilians, protected from mortars and missiles. The
same standard must be applied to Aleppo. We must
hasten the political process, abandon these sieges and
end this carnage. Delays would only cause more deaths
and bring the dehumanizing level of suffering to a
new low.
The President: I will now deliver my own statement
in my national capacity.
I thank Under-Secretary-General O’Brien for
his detailed briefing. Japan expresses strong concern
about the increasingly desperate situation in Syria. It
is intolerable that eastern Aleppo, Menbij and some
other places appear to be on their way to being added
to the list of besieged locations. We are disappointed
that July’s humanitarian access plan has been poorly
implemented thus far. We commend the enormous
efforts made by the United Nations, such humanitarian
bodies as the International Committee of the Red Cross
and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, and the co-chairs of
the International Syria Support Group to secure access
to besieged and hard-to-reach areas.
Meanwhile, it is obvious that increased airstrikes
and fighting on the ground block and delay sustained
humanitarian access. Mr. O’Brien reminded us of the
importance of implementing our own resolutions,
especially resolution 2286 (2016), which addresses the
protection of civilians, medical personnel and facilities.
This resolution does not focus on any specific conflict
area, but Syria is a place where such protection is
definitely necessary. In that regard, ongoing efforts by
the United States and Russia to extend the cessation of
hostilities to hotspots like eastern Aleppo are critically
important.
Even a temporary ceasefire can allow the United
Nations and humanitarian bodies to reach those Syrians
who are desperately awaiting interagency convoys.
Japan fully supports Mr. O’Brien’s proposal to hold

16-2316219/26

S/PV.7744

The situation in the Middle East

weekly, 48-hour cessations of hostilities to secure
United Nations inter-agency humanitarian access. I
wish to conclude by stating that Japan, along with other
Council members and the International Syria Support
Group, will continue to support and work towards a
lasting political settlement.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I have just two or three brief comments to
make.
First, with regard to my American colleague’s
response to the question of the bombing in northern
Syria, which, according to press reports, has killed
many civilians, I will not conceal my surprise at her
remark that the investigations would be conducted
based on information from civil society groups. So
there are no American drones, no American special
forces in Syria, no coalition special forces, no United
States satellites with intelligence capacity, no video
recordings, which are made by all modern-day bombers
when they make a hit. I would not like to believe that the
United States-led alliance is in such a woeful military
state. This reference to civil society makes me think
that we are never really going to know the truth; it will
all be swept under the carpet.
With regard to Ms. Power’s assertion that Russia
has never acknowledged or investigated, allow me
to recall that whenever an insinuation arises here,
she immediately starts talking very loudly about
this in the Security Council without even waiting
for corroboration. In fact, investigations took place
immediately, and the very same day or the next day,
at our briefings with the Ministry of Defence, we
demonstrated the unjustified nature of the insinuations
made in the course of the propaganda war surrounding
Syria. I truly hope that the United States-led coalition
will act with similar openness.
Lastly, I would like to make a general comment.
I am not sure whether it is a coincidence or perhaps
intentional that we are increasingly digressing into
the concrete details in the Security Council. There are
two groups that discuss such matters: the humanitarian
group and the group for the ceasefire. In Geneva they
discuss details, but the Security Council is, after all, a
20/26

25/07/2016

political body. But we are digressing into discussions
concerning Aleppo, the Castillo road and many other
situations. We can discuss that, of course, but what I am
saying is, let us not lose sight of the bigger picture — the
root causes of the tragedy and dynamics in Syria.
It all began with an effort to topple a legitimate
Government and promote regime change. At that time,
the idea of using terrorists for that purpose did not seem
so bad. Finally, it was understood that terrorists could
take power in Syria, as was the case in Iraq, and then
another huge error was made, namely, the preparation
of the so-called moderate opposition, which was
supposed to fight not with the Government but with
terrorists. Those groups were immediately routed and
went over to the side of the Al-Nusra Front and other
terrorists, taking with them the weapons that had been
given to them by the Western sponsors of these reckless
programmes.
Therefore, had the Syrian border been closed
to military convoys — as we have said on many
occasions — and and had the Castillo road been open
only to humanitarian convoys, we would not be faced
with situation prevailing in Aleppo today. If the United
States had made good on its promises, which it has been
making for at least half a year, to separate the Al-Nusra
Front from the so-called moderate opposition, then we
would not have the situation that is prevailing in eastern
Aleppo and some other areas of Syria.
With all my criticism of the United States, which
I have been unable to avoid, I want to confirm that we
continue to work with the United States as co-chairs
of the International Syria Support Group. It is very
tense, difficult work, and I hope we can soon build
the international community’s capacity to combat the
Al-Nusra Front and other terrorist organizations so
as to radically improve the humanitarian situation in
Syria in combination with political talks whose speedy
resumption we are pressing for.
The President: The representative of the United
States has asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I would
like to say a couple of words in response.
First of all, I think that it would be very useful if
the Russian Federation could circulate the results of its
investigation to the Council. Personally, having been
very concerned about Russian strikes — particularly
on hospitals in Aleppo and other areas that the Syrian
16-23162

25/07/2016

The situation in the Middle East

regime has decided to pursue during the cessation of
hostilities — we would welcome those investigations
but would also be curious about whether Russia, in
those investigations, has ever acknowledged harming
civilians in its strikes in the Syrian theatre. It would
be very useful to have that information shared with us.
The second point is, I think, more fundamental, as
one of the things that has created such division over the
Syria conflict. Fundamentally, if the like and the unlike
are lumped together, if the parties to the cessation of
hostilities are lumped together with those who have
rejected the cessation of hostilities, if civilians are
lumped together with the Al-Nusra Front and the
Islamic State in the Iraq and the Sham, and if those
who have been lumped together are targeted along with
terrorist groups, not only will innocents just minding
their own business who do not deserve to be targeted
be killed — something that has happened in spades and
that the Syrian regime has done from the beginning of
the conflict — but the seeds for more conflict will be
sown, more terrorists will be created and a conflict that
has gone on and caused too much heartbreak already
will be prolonged. Therefore, from a peace and security
standpoint, a core reason to distinguish between parties
to the cessation of hostilities and terrorist groups,
between terrorist fighters and civilians who find
themselves stuck in their vicinity is to save innocent
lives and to promote peace and security.
Thirdly, as I said in my earlier remarks, we are
deeply invested in the United States-Russian effort to
bring peace to Syria. I think it is fair to say that in the
early days of that effort we saw a material return and
significant benefit for some people in Syria. We saw
more access to besieged areas than we had ever seen
before. Every one of the besieged areas, as I also noted
my remarks, has now been reached, albeit some places
with only one convoy. We saw a reduction in violence,
which was a huge relief to people in those parts of
Syria who got to experience that reduction in horrific
violence.
But let us be real: the description at the outset of the
Russian Ambassador’s remarks was not a description
of Syria. It might be a description of some kind of
Potemkin village in Syria, but Aleppo is burning.
Aleppo is being besieged. The single lifeline to the city,
and to nearly 300,000 people, has been cut off by this
regime, backed by that regime. We are deeply invested
in trying to make this work, but we have got to see the
siege of Aleppo end and access restored — or all of

S/PV.7744

our good intentions are going to be for naught and this
conflict is going to continue, along with the terrorist
threat and the refugee flow that emanate from it, with
all that has meant for the neighbouring countries and
for Europe, and all that it will mean for the global order.
Let us start with Aleppo. Let us get Aleppo right. Let
us save people. And let us continue to invest — again,
in the kind of cooperation that is needed to bring this
conflict to an end. Part of that cooperation means
distinguishing between terrorist actors and those who
would deliberately target civilians — as the regime
does — and those who do not.
The President: The representative of the
Russian Federation has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I do not agree with a number of the observations
made by Ms. Power, but I would simply like to note that
she rightly pointed out that it is important to distinguish
between the moderate opposition and Jabhat Al-Nusra,
which is exactly what we are saying. As for the rest,
I am not going to engage in dispute, as I would like
to end on a positive note and I want to hear from our
colleague the Rermanent Representative of Syria.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syria) (spoke in Arabic): First of all,
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this meeting. I would also like to thank
you because, during this meeting, we have heard the
views of the members of the Security Council. As an
open meeting, this is truly an opportunity to listen to
the views of different countries about the changing
situation in my country, Syria. In that regard, I would
like to share some comments on the subject we are
dealing with today.
The Security Council is meeting today to discuss
the twenty-eighth report of the Secretary-General
(S/2016/631) on the humanitarian situation in Syria.
The Council has already adopted resolutions 2139
(2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014) and 2258 (2015), on
what has been referred to as the humanitarian crisis.
Nevertheless, we have not achieved the hoped-for
improvement in the humanitarian situation in Syria.
Syrians are therefore rightfully asking why their
suffering has not been alleviated after almost five and
a half years since the beginning of the international

16-2316221/26

S/PV.7744

The situation in the Middle East

25/07/2016

terrorist war waged against my country by several
countries, including members of the Security Council.
The Ambassador of Angola was quite right in asking
why we do not hold regional and international parties
accountable for the continued humanitarian crisis and
the international terrorist war against my country. That
is a vital question that must be asked.

to close the borders in order to make it impossible for
terrorists to reach Aleppo. But there was no response.
That led to the entry of tens of thousands of genetically
modified terrorists from all over the world, who came
to be called the “moderate opposition” or “non-State
armed groups”. Those groups did what they did
in Aleppo.

Bringing about a sustainable end to the suffering
of the Syrian people cannot be achieved by prolonging
their suffering indefinitely, or by holding them hostage
to political blackmail — as certain capitals are trying
to do by putting the Syrian people between a rock
and a hard place and forcing them to choose between
ongoing terrorism or abandoning their country to
chaos. We cannot improve the situation by issuing
dozens of reports or by holding periodic meetings and
sensationalist conferences — nor, in fact, by providing
humanitarian assistance to one region over another.
However important such humanitarian assistance may
be, it must be provided equally to all regions. The socalled coalition forces — led by the United States of
America — will not put an end to the suffering by
destroying grain silos, electrical facilities and power
plants, costing the Syrian people money and effort that
are difficult to repay; nor by making light of the relative
geography of Syrian bloodshed; and nor by establishing
dubious alliances to eliminate terrorism. Instead, it
can be achieved by seriously combating terrorism, as
is being done by the Syrian Government with the help
of the Russian Federation, at the request of the Syrian
Government itself, which has led to an improvement in
the humanitarian situation in certain regions of Syria.

In response to references made to Castello road, I
would like to say that the Syrian Government has not
closed that road. Instead, it is attempting to open and
liberate it from the terrorists who use it to block the
flow of humanitarian assistance into Aleppo and Idlib.
The Government is also attempting to deny terrorists
coming from Turkey entry via that road. Terrorism is
the main cause of the Syrian crisis, first and foremost;
furthermore, the unilateral coercive measures that
have paralysed economic activity are another cause of
the humanitarian crisis in my country. A sustainable
solution would therefore consist in combatting terrorism
by implementing the resolutions of the Security Council
itself, in coordination and full cooperation with the
Syrian Government and free of the double standards
and hypocrisy that have been demonstrated by certain
parties in the fight against terrorism. Such a solution
must also avoid making Syria a magnet that would
attract more terrorists.

The solution is clear to us all, including the entire
Council and Mr. O’Brien. It means dealing with the
root causes of the crisis that has been imposed on the
Syrian people. This is a crisis that has been imposed
on — not created by — the Syrian people. Some
members of this organ insistently and deliberately
ignore the real cause of the humanitarian crisis in Syria
and of the exacerbation of the crisis. They attempt to
ignore the reasons that led a large number of Syrians
to seek refuge in the areas of our country controlled by
the Government and many others to do so abroad. The
basic cause of this crisis is terrorism.
As we informed members at the beginning of the
crisis in this very Chamber, Aleppo had not experienced
any terrorist activities in the first year and a half. We
had called upon Council members to assist the Syrian
Government in pressuring the Government of Turkey
22/26

The representative of the United States of America
spoke earlier of the crimes perpetrated against a
young Palestinian refugee by the Harakat Nour al-Din
al-Zenki, a group of Turkish origin. She spoke of those
who slit the throat of a child as “rebels” but she did
not call them terrorists. The same holds true for other
terrorist groups, including the Jaysh Al-Islam, the Jaysh
Al-Fatah and others. Turkey, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and
other countries should end their support for the armed
terrorist groups that, in certain villages of Syria, have
committed atrocious acts against civilians whom they
use as human shields.
They must also stop legitimizing these armed
terrorist groups in Syria by referring to them as the
“moderate armed opposition” or as “non-State armed
groups”. All such epithets seek to convey neutrality,
but they are incompatible with the provisions of the
Security Council’s own anti-terrorism resolutions. The
mere fact of not calling terrorism by its name sends a
false message to hundreds of terrorist groups that their
terrorism is legitimate so long as it is undertaken in
defiance of the Syrian Government and they continue
16-23162

25/07/2016

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.7744

to destroy infrastructure and to open the way to further
human and material loss.

by some, both within and outside the Security Council,
as a “moderate opposition army”.

French aircraft recently bombed the village of
Al-Tukhan, killing 164 people whom Da’esh had taken
hostage and was using as human shields. But when the
leaders of Da’esh heard the French President claim that
he would seek vengeance for the attack in Nice, they
gave orders for the village to be evacuated. Thus, the
Da’esh fighters left Al-Tukhan just before the French
bombing. The French airforce went ahead and bombed
the village anyway, claiming twice the number of
victims as the Nice attack. The President of France
had sought revenge for Nice by killing 164 civilians in
that Syrian village. Who used those villagers as human
shields? It was Da’esh who killed civilians under the
cloak of the mission of revenge launched by the French
and United States airforces.

These entities are said to be a part of the moderate
opposition, but their supporters have turned them into
monsters and cannibals whose favourite pastime is to
take selfies with their decapitated innocent victims,
and who push people from the rooftops and burn their
victims alive in Aleppo and the villages. We can never
know the names of the many thousands of women and
children who have been taken hostage in the cities of
Syria. We will never know their names, but they are
the victims of horrendous crimes against humanity.
We need no investigations, evidence or police dogs to
identify those responsible for those acts. We know who
they are.

We have submitted dozens of examples of similar
acts through official channels. I will not scroll through a
lengthy list of names, as was done by the representative
of the United States, because it would take me weeks to
list all the victims of terrorist attacks in Syria. Let us
instead name those who attacked Le Bataclan and the
offices of Charlie Hebdo in France, or who perpetrated
the attacks in San Bernardino, Munich and Bangladesh.
Why not give the names of all the groups that have
committed such terrorist acts? Why not call them the
“armed opposition”? Why do we say that terrorism in
Syria is carried out by the moderate opposition, instead
calling their attacks “terrorist acts carried out by
terrorists”? There is no legitimate, halal terrorism on
one side and non-legitimate terrorism on the other. It
is all terrorism, and it is our people who are suffering
from it.
The proof of what I am saying lies in the fact that, a
few days ago, the Harakat Nour al-Din al-Zenki terrorist
group decapitated a 12-year old Palestinian boy. In an
horrific act, they cut off his head. That organization is
said by certain States to belong to the moderate armed
opposition. Those very same Governments have assisted
such entities by providing media support since late 2011.
The practices of those terrorist groups do not differ one
whit from those of similar terrorist groups, including
Jaysh Al-Islam, Ahrar Al-Sham, Jaysh Muhammad
Abu Ubaidah Al-Muhajir, Al-Liwa Al-Tawhid, the Badr
Martyrs’ Brigade, the Army of Mujahideen, the Islamic
Front, the Jaysh Al-Fatah, the Turkistan Islamic Party,
the Sultan Murad Brigade and others that are described

We cannot explain how some members of the
Security Council that claim to protect human rights
and the rule of law continue to prevent some of those
groups from being included on the list of terrorist
organizations. They know that if they were to do so they
would be giving them the green light to continue to kill
and decapitate. That reveals their total lack of sincerity
in their fight against terrorism, which they use as a
political weapon to pressure the Government of Syria,
which has met its constitutional obligations with respect
to protecting its citizens and combatting terrorism.
Nevertheless, we cannot work alone. We need
the Council’s support, and we need it to understand
the scope of the threat posed by the terrorism we
are facing in Syria, in the region and throughout the
world. This danger is beginning to affect Council
members themselves, in their own countries. I am
firmly convinced that the citizens of the countries that
have been engulfed by this wave of terrorist acts can
legitimately ask themselves about the reasons that are
leading their countries’ Governments to turn a blind
eye to such acts.
Talk of combating terrorism and the lifting of
unilateral coercive measures brings me to the second
step needed to resolve the humanitarian crisis, that
is, support for a political solution, because combating
terrorism can only contribute to success in that respect.
The solution should ensure that there is respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Syria, as affirmed by all relevant resolutions of the
Security Council on Syria. This is in keeping with
the provisions of the United Nations Charter and the
principles of international law, so as to ensure that

16-2316223/26

S/PV.7744

The situation in the Middle East

abuses and crimes that contravene these principles
are not repeated, as was the case in Iraq, Libya
and elsewhere.

(spoke in French)

In this regard, the Government of my country
has closely read the statement issued following the
visit of the American Secretary of State to Moscow
on 15 July. In that statement, both parties, Russia and
the United States, asserted the need to combat the
terrorism fomented by the Al-Nusra Front and Da’esh.
The Syrian Arab Republic, which is at the forefront
in terms of combating this global scourge, welcomed
the statements and reiterates that we are committed
to finding a political solution to the Syrian crisis that
meets the aspirations of the Syrian people and ensures
their support. We are ready to pursue the inter-Syrian
dialogue without any preconditions in the hope that the
dialogue will lead to a comprehensive solution devised
by the Syrian people themselves, without foreign
interference and with the support of United Nations and
the international community.

(spoke in Arabic)

I wish to reiterate that the Syrian Government fully
supports its commitment and obligation to alleviate the
humanitarian suffering of the Syrian people. We are
prepared to take every step necessary at the national
level to reach that goal. We will continue to cooperate
with the United Nations by facilitating its mission, but
that cooperation is not just a one-way street. The United
Nations also must cooperate with the Government of
Syria and coordinate with it with it with regard to the
various humanitarian issues rather than take issue
with Syria and criticize it, which will not lead to any
positive results.
The United Nations and international organizations
active in Syria could not have achieved what they did
over the five years of this crisis in terms of providing
humanitarian assistance to millions of Syrians on a
monthly basis had it not been for the cooperation,
facilities and protection provided by the Syrian
Government. This is not a favour we are doing, as long
as Syrian people in need benefit from such humanitarian
assistance and there is respect for sovereignty.
I would like to recall what was said on 12 December
2012 in Marrakesh, when an attempt was made to create
an opposition. The French Minister for Foreign Affairs
at the time, Mr. Fabius, said, “The jihadists are active
in Syria”. He said,
24/26

25/07/2016

“I cannot do anything to prevent French
jihadists from going to Syria”.
That was said by a former Prime Minister. When
French terrorism struck in Nice, at the Bataclan and
against Charlie Hebdo, the French President took
revenge by bombing the village of Manbij, killing 164
civilians.
I could say a great deal more, but owing to time
constraints I will end here.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. O’Brien
to respond to the comments made and questions raised.
Mr. O’Brien: I shall be brief and simply seek to
address some of the questions that were raised and then
leave it at that.
In particular, I was asked by the representative of
Spain to give a little bit more detail on the Castello road
issue, and, as I said in my statement, eastern Aleppo
City is currently at serious risk of besiegement, and a
besieged eastern Aleppo would add at least a quarter
of a million people to the current number of besieged
civilians, bringing this to somewhere near 1 million
people. In order to prevent this from happening,
since 7 July, civilian, humanitarian and commercial
movements in or out of the eastern part of Aleppo City
have, as the Council is aware, come to a halt, and we
need to reposition food stocks that would be sufficient
for at least one month for the 150,000 people in need of
food assistance in eastern Aleppo.
Basic health supplies, excluding anaesthetics and
surgical items, will be sufficient for about four to
five months, so long as water continues to be pumped
through the water-pumping stations. The entire Aleppo
City is located in eastern Aleppo, so we have tried to
establish an access route across the conflict lines via
our United Nations hub in the Government-controlled
western Aleppo City. There is, as was referred to by
another representative, some movement between east
and west. A request was included in the July convoy
plan and has been approved by the Syrian authorities.
We have, however, not yet been able to go because of
the security situation. So the question about the Castello
road is an absolutely key moment, as will be clear from
the point of view of why we are asking for a 48-hour
humanitarian pause. Because the Castello road is now
16-23162

25/07/2016

The situation in the Middle East

so damaged, it cannot take large lorries, only very
small lorries; so in order to get the necessary quantities,
we need a longer period of time for the added number
of trucks to be able to proceed and, indeed, to return
once they have delivered. So that is why the Castello
road issue and the clarification that was sought is so
absolutely vital and therefore a crunch point.
I was also asked by the United Kingdom
representative about the continuing United Nations
plan on airdrops to access besieged areas and, as
is well known, the United Nations is using various
logistical methods to bring assistance to people in need
throughout Syria by every means possible, land, sea
and air. The World Food Programme, as has been noted
already, has developed concrete plans for airdrops and
air bridges to other locations, so International Syria
Support Group members are aware of what is needed to
make this a reality.
The World Food Programme has indicated that
the consent of the Government of Syria and security
guarantees from all parties would be a precondition; in
any event, it is a precondition of the civilian operators
of those proposed air operations. So we continue to plan
for airdrops and air bridges, as we have said all along,
but land access remains the priority. It is the safest; it
is able to get much more value by far for the financial
resources made available to support the provision of food
and non-food items to those in humanitarian need and
is therefore the most effective. It takes approximately
six weeks of daily helicopter rotations to transport the
equivalent amount of food that was delivered by road
from Damascus to Al-Dameer on 1 June in one convoy,
which was for 22,500 people. Therefore, until we have
land access to reach all besieged locations, all options
remain on the table. Of course, that is part of the
discussion we are having with Member States to help
us get the most effective and efficient access routes
available. But the air plan remains.
I think the representative of the Russian Federation
asked a question about safety and security in night
deployment. On 29 June, we deployed a convoy to
Arbin and Zamalka. Due to the process of receiving
facilitation letters, the loading of the convoy could be
done only in the afternoon. Therefore, while we have to
look after the safety and security of our personnel, and
look to all the parties to provide it, that has to apply to
both night and day. I would, however, like to reiterate
my call that the priority has to be for daylight movement.
I repeat my thanks to the Russian Federation for its

S/PV.7744

facilitation in the most recent cases in that regard. It
certainly allows not only for needs assessments, but for
safer and more secure delivery.
I was also asked — or at least concern was
expressed — by the representative of the Russian
Federation about the possibility of bias in terms of
whether the United Nations was providing assistance
to all the millions of people who have needs on a
completely neutral and impartial basis. I would just
like to reiterate my assurances that, through all the
modalities that we deploy each month, our assistance
is purely judged on humanitarian principles, which I
think he has acknowledged. It is assessed and delivered
exclusively on a needs basis. Our staff are, clearly,
not only very conscious; it is part of their professional
approach as the United Nations — and indeed our
partners — to be impartial, neutral and independent.
That is a deep principle that we as humanitarians very
much know we must adopt and adhere to, as it is the
licence by which we can most likely gain access in all
circumstances, both now and in future.
I would repeat to the Council that we would ask all
members to help us get access on that needs basis, as it
has been shown that there is no equivalence — although
there are many more numbers at the moment in
besieged areas — with regard to areas besieged by
the Government of Syria and areas besieged by other
parties to the conflict. We are seeking equally to
address those who are besieged in Fo’ah and Kafraya,
as part of the four towns agreement, as much as we
are in Deir ez-Zor, where 110,000 people besieged by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant continue to be
in severe humanitarian need. As I say, each and every
one who has humanitarian needs is not an equivalence
in terms of numbers; each and every person is being
assessed irrespective of the overall quantum. Again,
our assessment is always based on need.
The final point I would like to conclude with, if I
may, is to welcome the fact that the broad, emerging
sense that calls for a 48-hour humanitarian pause,
in particular into eastern Aleppo city, seems to have
caught a sense of appropriateness, proportionality,
immediacy and urgency. I sense there is an amber-togreen light, if I can put it that way, within the Security
Council. I would like to say how significant that would
be. It would be a genuine point of progress, it would
help us, through humanitarian pauses in those active
areas of fighting where there is imminent besiegement
affecting, as we have heard, many more hundreds of

16-2316225/26

S/PV.7744

The situation in the Middle East

thousands of people than we have already been dealing
with, to reach those civilians trapped behind the front
lines, and they could reach life-saving services, which
they simply cannot access at the moment.
That is why, realistically, we need at least 72 hours’
notice for a 48-hour window of calm to deliver in
those locations. My team on the ground has developed
a proposal, which was presented to the International
Syria Support Group humanitarian task force last
week, to ensure safe, periodic, facilitated humanitarian
access into eastern Aleppo: a proposed 48-hour pause
every mid-week, that is, eight days per month, so that
cross-border actors could deliver aid for about 250,000
people, including the 150,000 already in need of food
aid, and to prevent others from becoming equally
vulnerable. Such a pause would rely on the United
Nations monitoring mechanism that already exists
with regard to access from Turkey. As I said earlier in
my response to the representative of Spain, 48 hours
is necessary to allow sufficient time for the smaller
trucks, which we now need to use along the Castello
road given its current state of damage, as well as the
number of returning empty trucks to give us sufficient
supplies on a regular basis. The proposed pause — and
I think this is an important point to mention — would
also entail a medical evacuation component, so that we
not only have goods in but we have evacuations out.
That was a central point of my initial remarks.
For the cross-line operation, as opposed to the
cross-border, a convoy targeting 60,000 civilians, out
of the 120,000 that we have requested as the United
Nations, in eastern Aleppo for July has been approved
by the Government of Syria. That was done prior to
the escalation to Aleppo. A request for increased
assistance, I suspect, will be presented as required in
the coming months.
I just wanted to give that detail so that the Council
is fully aware of what that would entail if that is an
emerging point of consensus.
The President: I thank Mr. O’Brien for the
clarifications he has provided.
The representative of the Syrian Arab Republic has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I now
give him the floor.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syria) (spoke in Arabic): I apologize
for asking for the floor again. I will not take too much

26/26

25/07/2016

time. I would just like to share with the members of the
Security Council some information that has not been
part of this meeting.
First, I regret that no one mentioned the fact that
terrorists in the Wadi Barada region — outside of
Damascus near Madaya, which, as some members
already know is under siege, or so it is said — have
bombed the only source that provides drinking water to
the city of Damascus. That means that the inhabitants
of Damascus, 7 million civilians, have been deprived of
drinking water because the moderate armed/genetically
modified armed opposition blew up the main source of
water for the city.
Secondly, I would also like to remind the Council
that terrorists of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria
burned alive a family in a public square — father,
mother and a 2-year-old child — because they wanted
to escape Raqqa. No one mentioned what happened
with this family or what occurred with the Wadi Barad
water source, not even Mr. O’Brien.
With regard to bombing Aleppo, there are
airstrikes from east Aleppo and from west Aleppo.
However, Mr. O’Brien did not say who was striking
from those parts of the city. They are the terrorists we
are fighting — the terrorists that the Western alliance
claims to be fighting. They are the terrorists who cross
over from Turkey, who are financed by the corrupt
regimes of the Gulf — Saudi Arabia and Qatar, to name
them. Those are terrorists who are striking Aleppo
from the east and the west.
We genuinely hope that, when the UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs wants to
talk about events in Syria and says that there is shelling,
he mentions the party striking. More than 100 people
were killed or injured in Damascus alone. I will send
the Council official letters including the names of the
victims — scores of them, women and children — killed
in Damascus, in restaurants and public parks. The
same goes for Aleppo. We therefore ask: who are the
perpetrators? Why was that not mentioned?
The President: I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

16-23162
