S/PV.7464

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7464th meeting

Wednesday, 17 June 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ibrahim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Malaysia)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gimolieca
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Hmoud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Bosah
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-18174 (E)
*1518174*

S/PV.7464

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Mr. Hervé Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations; Lieutenant General Yohannes
Gebremeskel Tesfamariam, Force Commander of
the United Nations Mission in the Republic of South
Sudan; Major General Michael Lollesgaard, Force
Commander of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali; and Major
General Michael Finn, Chief of Staff of the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its the agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to hold this meeting with all of our Force
Commanders, taking advantage of this encounter that
takes place every year. This is a great opportunity to
spend the whole week discussing with our military
colleagues all the challenges that they face. Let me
very clear, Mr. President: every single one of our Force
Commanders has a story to tell — of courage and
determination, but also of challenges. Those stories
are a reality for which we should be grateful to them,
because of the attitude that they display with the support
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and, in
particular, the Office of Military Affairs. While each
of them has a story to tell, we thought that this year it
would be of particular interest to focus on three issues,
which are so relevant to the situations that face us at the
present time.
First, we will hear from Lieutenant General
Yohannes Gebremeskel Tesfamariam, who, after
being Force Commander in Abyei, is now performing
the same duties in South Sudan, where he faces the
tremendous challenges associated with the protection
of civilians in situations that the Security Council
knows too well. We will then hear from Major General
Finn, who, as the Force Commander and Chief of Staff
of the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization,
faces a context that has changed massively in what used
2/31

17/06/2015

to be a classic peacekeeping operation. However, in that
aggravated situation, he faces the particular difficulty
of the caveats imposed by troop-contributing countries.
I think that is something useful that the Security
Council could take into account.
Last but not least, we will hear from Major
General Lollesgaard, who recently took command
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). That will
draw attention to the issue of asymmetric threats, and
the particular and very challenging environment that
he experiences on a daily basis at the Mission. As
members may remember, MINUSMA has experienced
more casualties than any other operation in the past
20 years — which is quite revealing of modern-day
peacekeeping.
I will say no more; each of the generals will
make his points. Let me just take this opportunity to
publicly thank them all very much once again for their
commitment and their dedication to duties that have
never been as difficult as they are nowadays.
The President: I thank Mr. Ladsous for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Lieutenant General Tesfamariam.
Lieutenant General Tesfamariam: I am honoured
to be here today to discuss the protection of civilians
in South Sudan, the primary task entrusted to the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
Let me start by expressing my deep appreciation to the
Mission’s personnel, who, under the able leadership
of Ms. Ellen Margrethe Løj, the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative for South Sudan and Head of
UNMISS, continue to work courageously to protect
tens of thousands of civilians under the threat of
physical violence, safeguard human rights and facilitate
the work of the humanitarian community in delivering
assistance to the millions of South Sudanese in need.
I particularly thank the troop- and police-contributing
countries that have provided much-needed uniformed
personnel and assets.
In a situation of ongoing conflict such as that in
South Sudan, where the parties and allied forces pay
little heed to the laws of war, peacekeepers struggle to
implement their protection-of-civilians mandate. The
challenges facing UNMISS are numerous.
First, restrictions imposed by the parties on access
and the freedom of movement fundamentally hamper
even our most basic efforts to protect civilians. Both

15-18174

17/06/2015

United Nations peacekeeping operations

sides continue to violate the status of forces agreement,
while obstructing or delaying the movement of
contingent-owned equipment and demanding illegal
access. Furthermore, those bearing the primary
responsibility for protecting civilians are themselves
perceived as constituting threats to the safety of
civilians.
Secondly, as we saw last month in Upper Nile state,
UNMISS protection-of-civilians sites have increasingly
been caught up in the crossfire. During the fighting in
Melut on 19 May, the Mission base was hit by more than
20 artillery shells and stray bullets. Nine internally
displaced persons (IDPs) were killed and 11 wounded.
UNMISS has been engaging the leadership on all sides,
urging them to cease combat operations and respect
the inviolability of United Nations premises. UNMISS
troops have also been taking reinforcement and surge
measures to protect civilians seeking shelter and
have been allowing for the delivery of humanitarian
assistance.
Thirdly, we face the challenge to the Mission’s
efforts to protect vulnerable people, regardless of
their location. Protecting civilians is not just about
providing a secure static location, nor is it about
demonstrating a static presence. Rather, our focus is
on enabling the movement of civilians and proactively
protecting them in their areas of origin, securing their
traditional movements and enabling them to go about
their livelihoods. The Mission has been projecting its
presence outside its bases, conducting robust short- and
long-duration patrols to deter violence against civilians,
and proactively engaging vulnerable communities
through the establishment of forward operating bases
in Malakal, with plans to establish similar facilities
in Bentiu and Bor, since the pull factor of our static
protection sites cannot be ignored.
Some IDPs are encouraged to stay at the protection
sites for an extended period of time because of the
services provided. Since armed conflict broke out in
December 2013, these sites have grown and continue
to grow. There are now over 136,000 IDPs sheltering at
seven protection-off-civilians sites. For many who have
had no other choice than to seek protection, as well
as for those who see them as access points for service
delivery, the sites now provide a more convenient
and secure place in which to live. We must assess the
sustainability of this arrangement. Without a viable
peace throughout the country, we must genuinely

S/PV.7464

assess how long the Mission can, and should, provide
protection to those currently inhabiting the sites.
Beyond those challenges, the successful
implementation of the Mission’s protection-of-civilians
mandate requires effective command and control,
steadfast commitment from the troops and sufficient
resources. From a military standpoint, command and
control is absolutely critical. The operational-level
protection-of-civilians strategy must be delivered at the
tactical level in contexts where days, and even weeks,
can pass without direct contact between commanders
and their subordinates. As peacekeepers in the field,
the strategy is necessarily decentralized: the unit
commanding officers have considerable freedom
of action. As such, they are a key force enabler and
a critical link in the protection-of-civilians chain.
It is therefore essential that there be trust within
the chain of command, as well as confidence that
commanders’ orders and intent are understood and will
be implemented without fail.
The protection of civilians also presupposes a
steadfast commitment to the safety and security of
the people in one’s area of operations. It is based on
the understanding that those responsible for such
protection are willing to take proactive measures and
to put themselves between the threat and the civilians
when required. Although an armoured unit may be
technically capable of a military or police engagement,
that technical capacity alone is not sufficient to protect
civilians. I believe that willingness is a peacekeeping
operation’s greatest protection asset.
Lastly, the protection of civilians requires
significant logistical, financial and human resources
that fit the mandate, expectations and realities on the
ground. The limitations that we face in that respect,
particularly the absence of critical enablers such as
close air support, adequate logistics, intelligence,
reconnaissance and responsive casualty and medical
evacuation capabilities, negatively affect our early
warning and daily operations.
In conclusion, I should underline that the protection
of civilians is a responsibility shared among key actors,
including the international community and the host
authorities. Success at the operational level depends
upon well-trained and well-equipped troops who have
the right mindset for deterring potential aggressors
and reducing levels of violence. Passive forces invite
aggression and manipulation, leading to increased

15-181743/31

S/PV.7464

United Nations peacekeeping operations

risks for all. Finally, successfully protecting civilians
requires innovative leadership that translates into
effective actions on the ground. The Security Council
plays a key role in holding accountable those who harm
civilians or directly obstruct our efforts to protect them.
The President: I thank Lieutenant General Tesfamariam
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Major General Lollesgaard.
Major General Lollesgaard: It is a great honour
to speak in this forum on the subject of operating
in an asymmetric environment. As the Council is
aware, I command the force of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA), and in answer to the question
underlying the topic — whether or not MINUSMA is
geared to operate in an asymmetric environment — I
would say no, not really. I have some good assets, but
overall there are some major shortfalls that make us
extremely vulnerable.
Since Mali is often on the Council’s agenda, I
will not explain the threats and challenges in the
country in detail. While we consider the Platform and
the Coordination coalitions to consist of so-called
compliant armed groups, it is primarily, but not only,
the jihadist groups that are hostile to MINUSMA. Their
preferred methods are improvised explosive devices
(IEDs), suicide attacks, laying mines along our routes,
ambushes and shelling our camps with rockets and
mortars. The consequence is that MINUSMA has by
far the most fatalities among United Nations mission
troops, with 36 soldiers killed and more than 200
wounded since 2013, something that deeply concerns
and upsets me.
We have a robust self-defence mandate for
conducting peacekeeping in such an environment.
However, we cannot, and should not, be mandated to
conduct offensive operations against the threats we face.
We are therefore limited to trying, mainly defensively,
to protect the population and ourselves as well as we
possibly can. In my opinion, that requires the ability
to master three main functions. The first of those is
understanding the environment — who, when, where,
how and so on. Only through that understanding can
we prevent attacks, either by influencing the leadership
or deterring groups by being in the right spot. We also
need strong situational awareness in order to monitor a
ceasefire in such a vast country. Secondly, we have to
reassure the population and convince them to believe

4/31

17/06/2015

in the possibility of a future without the armed groups.
And while doing that, we must be able to protect
ourselves.
It is with the first function, that of understanding,
that we have the good news. In MINUSMA we have
implemented a new intelligence concept — the All
Sources Information Fusion Unit. In support of that
I also have at my disposal special operations forces
and helicopters. Accepting intelligence-gathering
as an integrated function of our operations is a huge
step forward in the United Nations modus operandi. I
now have a number of sophisticated assets, including
unmanned aerial vehicles, and a strong, centrally
placed intelligence staff capable of doing the
assessments. We have come a long way, and I am now
definitely being provided with good, solid intelligence
that helps me understand the environment. However, if
we — the United Nations — continue to operate in such
environments, we have to exploit that concept further.
We need more intelligence-gathering assets at the
lower levels and, most important, we need the staffing
capacity to make better use of the intelligence. I am
making a strong push for the full manning of all my
headquarters with, importantly, the proper skills set.
Intelligence is a priority.
The next function is reassuring and convincing the
population. The best way to counter an asymmetric
threat, of course, is to get the people’s support. If
the population believes in the alternative — in the
peacekeeping force — they will be reluctant to support
terrorists or other armed groups, including bandits,
and eventually such groups could lose their hiding
places. The Mission has a strong public information
section that works effectively with the media, issuing
communiqués, making radio news and so forth. But
we need what I would call an information operation
concept that combines all our messaging activities in a
coordinated manner. Commanders and soldiers on the
ground should talk and interact more closely with the
population, talking about what we are doing, why we
are there, what is going on and so forth. By combining
those messages with quick-impact projects and other
outreach activities, we will be able to create a positive
perception of the force, and of what is an alternative
to war, in a coordinated way. I am therefore happy to
see that the first draft of MINUSMA’s new mission
concept actually mentions information operations. That
is also why I have now established a small information
operations cell in my planning section at force
headquarters. We should exploit that concept further.
15-18174

17/06/2015

United Nations peacekeeping operations

While working on understanding the environment,
preventing attacks and convincing and reassuring the
population — in a word, stabilizing the situation — we
have to protect ourselves. Anything that moves by
road in an environment as hostile as that in northern
Mali has to be protected. That means protected against
mines, and all units should be able to search for, detect
and avoid mines and IEDs. It goes without saying that
eight United Nations soldiers sitting in the open air on
top of a soft Landcruiser pickup do not stand much of a
chance if the vehicle is hit by a mine or IED. The same
goes for unprotected civilian supply trucks. In short,
we must make sure that any contingent operating in a
hostile environment is well equipped with protected
vehicles for troops operating outside the camps.
We should also provide well-protected camps with
good living conditions, particularly when we set up
camps in contested areas where troops conduct risky
operations out of their camps on a daily basis. They
need a safe haven to come home to. We can never
achieve full protection against everything, but our
troops deserve to be well protected in their camps
against shelling or suicide-vehicle IEDs, which in
Mali is unfortunately not always the case. However, I
should add that we are working on improving that by,
among other things, implementing new technology, an
example of which is the indirect fire warning device.
Soldiers also need access to proper accommodation,
water, power sources and a basic level of welfare. I am
aware that much of that is basically the responsibility of
troop-contributing nations, one that I believe should be
assessed and certified before the contingent is allowed
to deploy. But to the extent that a unit does not bring
those capacities into the Mission, I suppose it is only
the United Nations that can help them.
Finally, I should mention that we need robust
logistics. What do I mean by that? The proven United
Nations system, whereby mission support delivers
supplies using civilian contractors throughout the
mission area, may work in certain well-established,
low-threat missions. But it does not work in a hostile
environment like that in Mali. To be very specific, north
of the Niger River, the hostilities are so imminent and
the road conditions are so poor that it is irresponsible
to keep going there with old, fragile civilian trucks
that are unprotected and driven by people who are not
soldiers. That is one of the main reasons that we cannot
sufficiently support our troops and our camps in the
north. Therefore, we strongly need a military logistics
unit to work in the most hostile parts of the country.

S/PV.7464

It is not so important who commands the Mission
support — whether it be the Force Commander — but
the capacity is important. We also need the requisite
aviation assets to help manage the burden of supplying
distant bases, and we need contractors with the right
equipment to be able to transport effectively along
difficult supply routes, even in areas that are not highly
contested.
Let me say a few words on training. It is of the utmost
importance that United Nations forces be properly
trained before deployment. Among the most important
issues are patrolling, procedures and techniques, basic
counter-IED capability, how to call for helicopters to
evacuate casualties, the code of conduct and weapons
training. There are other important skills as well, for
instance, how to conduct crowd control. I say that
because I have experienced that many of my troops are
not good enough at those basic skills. I am sorry to say
that I believe that we have suffered losses, because of
insufficient predeployment training, that could have
been avoided. The most important skill of all those
mentioned is counter-IED training. Every single soldier
needs to be able to search, detect and avoid IEDs and
mines at a basic level. That training is quite simple to
obtain. It does not require a very demanding training
programme, and it will save lives. If we can manage to
improve the predeployment training level, therefore, I
will promise to maintain the skills of the troops once
they have arrived in the Mission. If I did possess the
envisaged mentor teams, the overall effectiveness of
the Force would be enhanced.
To conclude, drawing on my personal experience
from MINUSMA for a general recommendation, I
am not in doubt that in future there will certainly
be a continuous need for peacekeeping operations
in asymmetric environments. I do not doubt that the
United Nations will be called upon to establish those
kinds of missions, because who else would? But if we
want to be able to do it — and do it effectively — we
need to be fully capable of facing that environment in all
aspects. That means having the capability to face hostile
armed groups hiding among the population and to face
challenging climates, geography and infrastructure. To
do that, we need to be properly trained. We need to be
properly equipped with protected vehicles, to put a big
effort into counter-IED and robust logistics, to protect
the camps, to have proper intelligence, and we need to
ensure that all staff posts are manned and manned with
skilled officers. I know that sounds like a lot, but it is
what we need if we want to be able to survive in an

15-181745/31

S/PV.7464

United Nations peacekeeping operations

asymmetric environment. I know well that to achieve
it, we are demanding a lot from ourselves internally
in the United Nations, for instance, from the Mission
support, but also from the Member States paying the
bill. I am also well aware that we are fully depending
on troop-contributing nations providing the units that
can do it.
Let me finish by assuring the Council that, under
the circumstances, we are doing just OK in a way.
While conducting operations, we work very hard in
the Mission to improve capabilities and standards by
stepping up our training efforts. New equipment is also
coming in, and first and foremost, I am lucky that in
general I have brave, robust, courageous soldiers who
every day face the threat without shying away. But we
need to prepare and support them better.
The President: I thank Major General Lollesgaard
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Major General Finn.
Major General Finn: It is an honour and a
pleasure for me to be invited to speak today on the
subject of caveats and impediments to command and
performance. Since I was appointed Head of Mission
and Chief of Staff of the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization (UNTSO), almost two years
ago, the subject and effects of caveats imposed by
many of the 25 troop-contributing countries (TCCs)
have never been far from my attention. The UNTSO
military component is made up of approximately 153
unarmed military observers. My key tasks as the Head
of Mission for UNTSO are to assign well-trained
military observers under the operational control of
the Force Commanders of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF). Focusing
on supports to the Force Commander of UNDOF has
been provided by Observer Group Golan, tasked within
UNDOF to observe and report violations in the area
of separation, located east of the disengagement line
between Syria and the Israeli-occupied Golan, and the
areas of limitation on both sides of the disengagement
line, the Alpha side in the Israeli-occupied Golan and
the Bravo side in the Syrian-controlled Golan.
Since the outset of the conflict in Syria, and
especially as it spread to the Golan, we have all faced
legitimate concerns regarding the safety and security of
our personnel, including the UNTSO unarmed military
observers of Observer Group Golan. Unfortunately,

6/31

17/06/2015

while UNDOF, UNTSO, the United Nations
Department of Safety and Security and the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations have sought to improve
security measures and reduce risks, several of our
troop-contributing countries imposed national caveats
that restrict where their observers could deploy. Caveats
are a controversial subject, and their impact on United
Nations missions has been much discussed. Indeed,
they impose significant restrictions on multinational
operations and often restrict the operational role and
functions of individual national contingents or United
Nations military observers employed on multinational
missions such as UNTSO.
Returning to the work of UNTSO, the deterioration
of the situation in Syria has led to a number of countries,
as stated, imposing restrictions on the activities of their
personnel assigned to Observer Group Golan on the
Syrian-controlled side of the ceasefire, which I referred
to as the Bravo side. At one stage in 2013, all except
seven of our 25 TCCs had caveats of varying effects
on their observers deployed in Observer Group Golan.
It even reached a situation where, if one more troopcontributing country had imposed restrictions, UNTSO
would have been unable to meet its commitment to
provide professional, trained military observers to the
Force Commander of UNDOF on the Bravo side of the
area of separation.
To give an idea of the effect of caveats, when the
Force Commander of UNDOF and I briefed our TCCs in
April 2014, I mentioned that only six nations provided
over 75 per cent of the observers deployed on the Bravo
side — that is, on the Syrian-controlled Golan. Naturally,
the situation posed an undue burden on those nations,
including in terms of exposure to risk. The restrictions
also affected performance in that they complicated my
efforts to maintain the desirable mix of three observers
of different nationalities in any observation post in
order to ensure better impartial reporting as well as
an appropriate mix of experienced and inexperienced
officers in teams and in our observation posts. It also
limited the flexibility to assign officers of those nations
to other locations where UNTSO operates — at our
headquarters in Jerusalem, at our liaison offices in
Beirut, Damascus, Jerusalem and Cairo, or to Observer
Group Lebanon, the operation within UNIFIL in south
Lebanon.
Caveats imposed distinctions among military
observers and the roles they perform, affecting the
morale of individual observers. As the Secretary-

15-18174

17/06/2015

United Nations peacekeeping operations

General has reiterated in his reports on UNDOF,
those restrictions have hindered the implementation
of UNDOF’s mandate, and they limited the capacities
and hampered the operational flexibility of Observer
Group Golan, on whose skills UNDOF relied move
heavily when the deteriorating situation required
increased focus on static observation and reduced
mobile activities.
I fully understand what drove the imposition
of those restrictions, and I share the desire of troopcontributing countries to see the risks to their deployed
personnel mitigated to the greatest extent possible. In
peacekeeping missions, removing the threats of course
rests ultimately with the parties to the conflict and with
those with influence over them. But I worked closely
with the Force Commander of UNDOF to carry out
a range of mitigating measures, including improved
medical evacuation and casualty evacuation capacities.
We raised and reinforced perimeter fences and equipped
observers with advanced night vision equipment with
remote viewing to allow them to anticipate threats.
Work continued right up until our eventual relocation
from the area of separation by UNDOF in September
2014. We fitted our observation posts with ballistic
skirts and bulletproof glass on the observation towers.
We reassured TCCs by emphasizing the tight
coordination between the Force Commander of
UNDOF and myself and by the provision of contingency
planning that was, and still is, manifested by regular
evacuation exercises and the deployment of security
parties for the observation posts to either augment or
replace unarmed observers, if required. That close
coordination, reflecting the priority placed by the
UNDOF Force Commander and myself on safety and
security, was demonstrated as recently as last month,
when heavy firing over the course of a week impacted
one of our observation posts.
Under-Secretary-General Ladsous has continuously
stressed the importance that his Department and
all peacekeeping operations place on the safety and
security of personnel in the field. He has emphasized
that contributors’ personnel are our most critical asset.
Since September of last year, all UNTSO observers, as
well as the majority of UNDOF personnel, have been
relocated to the Israeli-occupied side of the ceasefire
line, due to the security situation, as a further mitigation
measure implemented by my colleague the Force
Commander of UNDOF in conjunction with DPKO.

S/PV.7464

Yet seven countries — not counting the four
permanent members of the Security Council — that
contribute observers but whose military personnel
are restricted by the Disengagement Agreement from
serving on the Golan continue to impose caveats. While
that has limited impact at the moment, the limitations
on performance and flexibility will again come to the
fore when a decision is eventually made to return to the
Bravo side. When that might occur will be determined
on the basis of very best assessments of the security
conditions, which UNDOF, with our support and that
of DPKO, is continually monitoring. Therefore, the
removal of the remaining national caveats remains a
priority issue.
A recent review of UNTSO led by DPKO highlighted
the mitigation measures that have been implemented
by UNDOF and UNTSO in respect to the operations
and physical security of military observers in Observer
Group Golan. The review recommended that UNTSO
contributors with caveats should be strongly urged to
lift them. It also recommended reducing the number of
military personnel contributed to UNTSO by countries
that continue to have restrictions on the deployment of
their military personnel, increasing the contributions of
those that do not have caveats and expanding the pool
of UNTSO TCCs by inviting new contributors without
caveats.
With the support of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, some of those recommendations have been
adopted, including the deployment of United Nations
military observers from new TCCs and reducing the
numbers of United Nations military observers from
countries with national caveats. In addition, senior
staff appointments or positions in the mission are being
filled only by countries without caveats.
Caveats impact all United Nations peacekeeping
missions, not just UNTSO. They restrict a commander’s
ability to exercise command and control and are an
impediment to performance. I fully recognize the
national interests that drive caveats, but I also see that
caveats threaten to drive a wedge between contributing
nations, also threatening United Nations peacekeeping
and observer capabilities. It is welcome that the HighLevel Independent Panel on Peace Operations has made
important recommendations in that regard.
Despite those challenges, the presence of United
Nations peacekeepers on the Golan has played a key
role in helping to prevent the Syrian conflict from

15-181747/31

S/PV.7464

United Nations peacekeeping operations

becoming a Syrian-Israeli conflict. Our well-trained
observers continue to provide impartial and expert
reports. I encourage contributors to UNTSO to continue
to provide officers with the right profile and experience
to match the challenges ahead.
I am grateful to all our TCCs for the support they
continue to give to the work of peacekeepers during
these challenging times. In particular, I extend my
thanks to those nations that enable the deployment of
their officers to all areas of UNTSO’s area of operations,
without restrictions.
The President: I thank Major-General Finn for his
briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank
the Malaysian presidency of the Security Council for
convening this annual public debate on peacekeeping
operations. I would also like to thank Mr. Hervé Ladsous,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
the Force Commanders of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), and the Chief of Staff of the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO) for
their briefings. Finally, I welcome the presence of the
other Force Commanders, including the Commander of
the African Union peacekeeping force in Somalia, who
join us today.
Chad would like to pay homage to the 123,560
members of the 16 United Nations peacekeeping
operations currently under way around the world.
Peacekeeping soldiers spare no effort to fulfil their
mandates, despite inadequate resources and the
difficulties of all kinds that they face, including the
security environment that confronts them. I would like
to make several additional observations.
With respect to the protection of civilians, Chad
rejects the abusive use of the concept of using force
against States without regard for their political and
sovereign independence. A number of countries,
particularly in Africa, continue to suffer from that
situation.
We recognize that the presence of the United
Nations in failed States or those that are about to
become so, constitutes a guarantee of security for
defenceless civilian populations that faces all manner of

8/31

17/06/2015

threats. Protection of civilians is an essential task that
is part of the mandate of virtually all United Nations
peacekeeping operations. That protection must also be a
moral obligation. However, we must ensure that we have
a common understanding of the concept at all levels,
including strategic, operational and tactical ones. It is
also important that the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and regional organizations, especially the
African Union, strive to elaborate and, if need be,
reach agreement on the principles for the protection of
civilians for their respective organizations.
Providing a peacekeeping operation with a mandate
for the protection of civilians is insufficient unless that
operation possesses the necessary human, logistical and
material resources to discharge its mission. A number
of operations are finding it very difficult to implement
their mandates due to insufficient human, material and
intelligence resources, as well as weak deployment in
the main areas where tensions prevail. That is the case,
for example, with UNMISS and with the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic, but it also applies to many
others. In addition to providing a physical presence
that enables them to protect thousands of civilians, as
we have seen in South Sudan, the United Nations can
and must do better by investing more in prevention
and mobility. Nor should robust intervention to protect
civilians be excluded. In that regard, we reiterate our
support for the early warning and rapid intervention
mechanism of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, whose effectiveness has been proved.
Today, the circumstances on the ground mean
that we have to be proactive. We have to understand
that when the United Nations is unable to carry
on with the task expected of it, namely, to protect
defenceless civilians, it will not avoid criticism, such
as that levelled against it following the genocides in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and in Rwanda. In addition,
peacekeeping operations — without undermining
traditional principles such as the consent of the
parties, impartiality and the non-use of force except
in cases of legitimate self-defence or defence of the
mandate — must undertake offensive operations when
the situation so requires. That is important for disarming
armed groups that are attacking and harassing civilians,
as is unfortunately the case in a number of countries,
including the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Mali.

15-18174

17/06/2015

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Furthermore, pursuant to Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations, peacekeeping operations are
authorized to utilize force to protect both the assets and
staff of the United Nations. Therefore, when required,
they have to use such force to prevent attacks against
their facilities, soldiers and supply lines.
With regard to sexual violence and abuses against
women and children, we wish to underscore the
importance of increasing the number of female staff
in peacekeeping operations, including in positions of
responsibility. We wish to welcome the appointment
of a woman, Major-General Kristin Lund, as Force
Commander of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force
in Cyprus, and we urge the Secretariat to appoint more
women at similar levels of authority.
Concerning Mali and the asymmetric landscape
in which the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
is operating, the list established and updated by the
Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee in accordance with
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) indicates that
there are 24 entities associated with Al-Qaida in Africa,
including 7 that are active in Mali.
Given the realities on the ground, we wonder if
MINUSMA is undertaking a fight against terrorism
instead of peacekeeping. Moreover, MINUSMA’s
contingents do not have the training or the materiel,
logistics or intelligence neceessary to tackle the
current situation in northern Mali. It is urgent
that States possessing the necessary capacities
provide the resources just mentioned to troop- and
police-contributing countries so that they will be
capable of discharging their mandate. The credibility
of the United Nations and the whole of the international
community is at stake there.
The work carried out by the international forces and
MINUSMA must be time-limited, because their mission
is not to remain in Mali forever. Therefore, in keeping
with the principle of national ownership, the focus
should be on strengthening Mali’s national defence and
police forces, which bear the primary responsibility
for the defence of the country. In addition, in terms of
regional ownership, emphasis should be placed on the
Nouakchott Process on the Enhancement of Security
Cooperation and the Operationalization of the African
Peace and Security Architecture in the Sahelo-Saharan
Region. The will of African States, especially those of
the group of five Sahel States — Burkina Faso, Mali,
Mauritania, the Niger and Chad — is not lacking. The

S/PV.7464

assistance of partners such as the United Nations could
be decisive.
Moreover, trouble-makers and those who attack
the United Nations must answer for their actions.
Therefore, the Malian authorities should spare no effort
to undertake investigations to identify and bring to
justice the perpetrators of attacks against MINUSMA,
whether they be rebels or terrorists. We know it is very
difficult to distinguish between a rebel and a terrorist in
northern Mali. However, through intelligence work and
strengthening of human intelligence-gathering within
MINUSMA, we can assist Mali in achieving this and
punish those who should be punished.
My country has paid a heavy price in Mali, but
nothing can stem our resolve to continue to help this
fraternal country. We are getting ready to deploy 335
additional soldiers and one constituted formed police
unit there in the near future.
With regard to UNTSO, we welcome the work of the
military observers and encourage them to continue to
fulfil their mission of observation. We know that many
troop-contributing countries are experiencing great
difficulties when it comes to deploying their experts to
certain areas because of security concerns. No doubt
this has a considerable impact on the implementation of
the mandate of the military observers. Peacekeeping is
not a risk-free activity. Unfortunately, many countries
contributing to peacekeeping are not ready to evolve
and adapt to unforeseen and dangerous situations. We
regret that attitude, which must change.
I would like to pay tribute to United Nations
peacekeepers and to express my sympathy and
condolences to the Governments and the families of
those who have lost their lives during their mission.
I conclude by asking three questions directed at the
Major-General Lollesgaard of MINUSMA. What do we
need to do to improve the situation in northern Mali
and to prevent asymmetric attacks against MINUSMA?
Does he believe that the idea of a rapid intervention
force by the Sahel States could be useful to MINUSMA?
MINUSMA is the second-most-dangerous United
Nations operation, after that deployed to Somalia
during the 1990s. Given this, what does he intend to
do and what does he expect of the United Nations to
minimize the risks in terms of loss of human lives?
Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): We welcome the UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Hervé Ladsous, Leiutenant-General Tesfamariam,

15-181749/31

S/PV.7464

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Force Commander of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan, Major-General Michael Lollesgaard, Force
Commander of the United National Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and MajorGeneral Michael Finn, Head of Mission and Chief
of Staff of the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization. We thank them for their briefings. We
express our deep appreciation for the very interesting
and useful insights provided.
We acknowledge the dramatic change in the nature
and scope of United Nations peace operations worldwide.
With reference to the Secretary-General’s remarks
on 11 June 2014 (see S/PV.7196), at present United
Nations peacekeeping missions are forced to operate
in situations where there is no peace to keep. Thus the
field personnel entrusted with the mandate to protect
civilians are themselves increasingly under threat and
forced to counter asymmetric and unconventional
attacks while carrying out other complex mandated
tasks, including protecting the civilian population.
The three topics introduced by the briefers reflect
the complex reality of the environment in which peace
operations are deployed. I shall briefly address each of
them, namely, the challenges involved in the protection
of civilians, the challenge of operating in an asymmetric
environment, and the challenges arising from caveats
and impediments in the command and performance of
peace operations.
The protection of civilians has become the central
feature of the mandates approved by the Security
Council, and the primary reason to deploy a United
Nations peacekeeping mission. However, at present
this core objective of United Nations missions is
seriously challenged by repeated cycles of violence,
weak governance and reoccurring instability, even
in countries where peace agreements have been
successfully implemented.
From the United Nations perspective, interpreting
the concept of the protection of civilians consists
of a three-tiered approach as part of a mission’s
strategy — with dialogue and engagement as the first
tier, the provision of physical protection as the second
and the establishment of a protective environment as
the third. Those concepts are key elements in ensuring
a mission’s success. However, the lack of resources and
effective information gathering and analysis undermine
the efforts of States working towards unity of purpose
with the different troop-contributing countries within
a mission. Law and order problems and inadequate
10/31

17/06/2015

training and preparation of military forces are also
challenges that the Council must address in a timely
manner. Corrective measures are necessary to avoid
failure and ensure the best conditions for a mission’s
success.
Operating under an asymmetric environment
is the most extreme situation facing contemporary
peacekeeping missions, which were originally designed
as a separation force to maintain trust or an armistice
agreement between symmetric opposing regular armed
forces. At present, as the assessment review shows,
an asymmetric environment in which a peacekeeping
mission operates poses major security and safety
issues to peacekeepers, who are mandated, as their
core objective, to protect civilians. That is further
compounded by the increasing threat of regional
terrorism, particularly in Africa, with the use of
vehicle-based bombs and improvised explosive devices
and suicide attacks increasing the numbers of casualties
among United Nations personnel. It is therefore
necessary to establish a comprehensive asymmetrical
threat approach as part of a strategic framework aimed
at this deadly threat, while maintaining the military and
civilian components, thereby permitting the mission to
effectively accomplish its mandate.
Finally, the conditionality imposed by caveats acts
as an impediment to command and performance, given
that unity of command and control is of paramount
importance in any mission’s performance and success.
Also, some Member States contributing troops or
police to peacekeeping missions impose caveats, such
as with regard to the location of deployment, the types
of actions that units are not allowed to undertake
and parallel rules of engagement. These, against the
backdrop of an operational link between a contingent
and their capitals, often result in the disobedience
of orders on the part of the Force Commander. That
is a totally unacceptable situation, as it hampers the
mission’s operational capabilities. We are of the view
that troop- and police-contributing countries should
strictly respect the chain of command, since the
failure to follow coherent and consistent orders of the
Force Commander may lead to wrongdoing and even
catastrophic consequences to all those involved, while
damaging the reputation of the entire United Nations
system.
In conclusion, we express our deep appreciation
for the convening of this meeting, for the briefings
provided and for the interaction afforded between

15-18174

17/06/2015

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Council members and the Force Commanders as heads
of the military components on the ground.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the presidency for convening this informative
meeting. We also welcome the briefings by the UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations and
the Force Commanders of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), as well as the Chief of Staff of the
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization, as part
of a joint effort towards achieving peace and security.
I will begin by recalling my country’s commitment
to peacekeeping operations since 1948 and by reiterating
our willingness to continue cooperating on this task,
which is the responsibility of all.
The three issues under discussion are absolutely
relevant and interrelated and reflect the new situations
and challenges and the changing reality involving
today’s peacekeeping efforts. Regrettably, the civilian
population remains the most affected by conflicts, most
of which are intra-State in nature. The Council and the
international community as a whole are therefore called
upon to provide adequate protection for the civilian
population and to adopt comprehensive strategies,
taking into accoutn the specific needs, especially of
women and children.
We reiterate the need for adequate protection-ofcivilians training for the military, police or civilians
to be deployed. Chile has been contributing for more
than a decade through the Chilean Joint Peacekeeping
Operations Centre, which is in charge of preparing
and training national or foreign personnel prior to
deployment.
The Rights up Front Action Plan reaffirms the
central role of human rights in the work of the United
Nations. Respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law are ultimately the key concepts
underlying the protection of civilians.
Missions play a role as a source of information and
in keeping records to ensure that those responsible for
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law are held accountable for their actions and
do not go unpunished. We support the zero tolerance
policy concerning missions. At the same time, we must
ensure sufficient dissemination of the protection-ofcivilians policy and existing complaints mechanisms to
the civilian population and within the missions.

S/PV.7464

With regard to the situation in UNMISS, recent
reports indicate an increase in internally displaced
persons and increasingly complex conditions requiring
the protection of civilians, including sexual violence
perpetrated with impunity, used as a tactic of war.
Recognizing the efforts undertaken by the Mission, we
would like to ask about the greatest challenges faced
by UNMISS in carrying out its mandate, specifically
regarding the protection of civilians? Do the briefers
believe that the troops have been sufficiently trained,
as of today, to carry out the protection of civilians
mandate?
The efforts already mentioned are taking place in
a difficult environment where, above and beyond the
nature of the conflict, actions by terrorist groups or
transnational organized criminal networks are taking
place. Those new challenges require better-trained and
-equipped troops and strengthened national capacities.
The use of intelligence, particularly as a prevention
tool, seems appropriate to address such asymmetric
threats. The experience in Mali bears that out
and reveals the need to predict conflict scenarios.
However, it is vital that this activity be provided with
a clear regulatory framework. We understand that the
discussion should take place among the membership
of the United Nations, particularly the troop- and
police-contributing countries within the framework of
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. In
that regard, we would like to know about MINUSMA’s
experience in managing information and if it led to
increased security on behalf of the troops and civilians.
We recognize the importance of the troops deployed
on the ground responding to a chain of command to
ensure the success of the assigned tasks. However, that
does not prevent the troop-contributing countries from
determining the conditions and locations under which
their forces will be deployed at the time of the signing
of the respective memorandums of understanding and
according to their capacities and means in relation
to particular situations. The early conclusion of such
memorandums allows the Department of Operations
Peacekeeping to know in advance the elements and
units available to meet the different scenarios.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank the three peacekeeping operations Force
Commanders for their briefings. Their first-hand
accounts and suggestions are useful and can help us to get
a better idea of the actual deployment of peacekeeping
operations and the difficulties peacekeepers face, all

15-1817411/31

S/PV.7464

United Nations peacekeeping operations

of which is in the interest of improving the efficiency
of the Security Council’s work. China wishes to pay
its highest tribute to all the Force Commanders present
and all the United Nations peacekeeping personnel on
duty for their professionalism, which is characterized
by dedication, devotion and willingness to sacrifice.
The current international situation has undergone
profound changes. There are threats from terrorist
organizations, situations where there is no peace to
keep, and changes in terms of the growing size of
peacekeeping operations. These new developments
demand that peacekeeping operations adapt to the
changing times and embrace innovation.
China supports the initiative of the SecretaryGeneral to conduct a review of peacekeeping operations
during the seventieth anniversary of the United
Nations. We welcome the report submitted by the
High-level Independent Panel on United Nations Peace
Operations. We expect to further refine mandates,
strengthen capabilities and improve the efficiency of
United Nations peacekeeping operations through this
review, so as to bring peace and hope to host countries
and peoples and realize the goal of maintaining
international peace and security.
Taking into account the views expressed by the
three Commanders, I wish to make the following four
points on peacekeeping operations.
First, the basic principles of peacekeeping
operations should be upheld unswervingly. The
success of the United Nations arises from compliance
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, and peacekeeping operations are no
different. Continued adherence to the basic principles
of peacekeeping operations — the consent of the
parties to the conflcit, impartiality and non-use of force
except in self-defence and defence fo the mandate — is
fundamental to guaranteeting their smooth conduct,
ensuring their fairness and impartiality and winning
the support of Member States. We must persist in
applying those principles. At the same time, we must
refine the rules of engagement and guidelines for troopcontributing countries in the light of changes in the
peacekeeping environment and mission mandates, so
as to better implement the principles of peacekeeping
operations.
Secondly, the mandates of peacekeeping
operations should be practical and feasible. In order
to solve regional hot-spot issues, we need to have a

12/31

17/06/2015

comprehensive policy. Peacekeeping operations cannot,
and should not, attempt to resolve every problem. In
deploying peacekeeping operations and in formulating
and reviewing peacekeeping mandates, the Council
should enhance its political guidance, ensure that
the mandates correspond to the actual needs of host
countries and clarify priority priorities, targets and
specific focuses for various stages. At the same time,
we should review the results of the implementation of
peacekeeping operations in a phased manner, and, in
keeping with the changing environment, we should
make adjustments to the mandates of the missions and
the deployment of forces. Peacekeeping operations
should, in accordance with the changing environment
and the will and consent of host countries, determine
timely exit strategies.
Thirdly, peacekeeping operations should respect
the sovereignty of the host countries. With regard to
protecting civilians, host countries have the primary
responsibility for protecting their own civilians.
Peacekeeping operations should conform to Council
mandates and international law and should assist
host countries in implementing the responsibilities
for protecting civilians. The scope and conditions of
the protection-of-civilians mandate should be clearly
defined and should be recognized and supported by
host countries and the international community in
order to prevent misunderstandings and animosity from
the local people. Peacekeeping operations should also
be equipped with the necessary resources in terms of
personnel, equipment and logistics.
Fourthly, peacekeeping operations should strengthen
their capacity-building and scientific management.
China attaches great importance to the challenges
facing peacekeeping operations in an asymmetrical
security environment. We hope that the Secretariat
and peacekeeping missions will collaborate closely
with troop-contributing countries and host countries
to come up with tailor-made standards governing the
safety of installations, in keeping with the changing
security situation in mission areas, and with detailed
rules for the organization, training and management of
United Nations peacekeeping personnel.
At the same time, there is a need to strengthen the
scientific planning and management of peacekeeping
missions in order to optimize our financial resources.
We should utilize the existing resources more efficiently
and avoid unnecessary duplication and waste.

15-18174

17/06/2015

United Nations peacekeeping operations

China firmly supports and actively takes part in
United Nations peacekeeping operations. At present
there are more than 3,000 Chinese peacekeepers on
duty in about 10 peacekeeping operations in countries
such as the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali
and South Sudan. The Chinese infantry unit assigned
to the United Nations Mission in the Republic of
South Sudan is fully deployed. This is the first time
that China has sent an infantry unit to United Nations
peacekeeping operations. China has also decided to
send a helicopter squadron to the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. This will be the
first time that the Chinese Air Force will join the Blue
Helmets. China is willing to send more peacekeeping
police and police affairs experts to be part of United
Nations peacekeeping operations.
We will continue to support African countries in
strengthening their capacity-building and to promote
the United Nations support of the African Union, as
well as other regional organizations, in conducting
peacekeeping operations. We are ready to work with the
international community to contribute positively to the
healthy development of United Nations peacekeeping
operations and to make new and positive contributions
to the noble cause of maintaining international peace
and security.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank all
of the Force Commanders for their briefings and for
their service. I also thank Under-Secretary-General
Ladsous for assembling the Force Commanders here.
This is a critical annual gathering and an important rite
of passage.
As we mark the seventieth anniversary of the
United Nations, the founders of the Organization would
never have conceived of the assortment of 16 Force
Commanders gathered here today, nor the operating
environments into which they deploy. The risk that
they and the men and women under their command take
are a powerful testament to the spirit that animates the
United Nations. Their work, their leadership and their
sacrifice could not be more important.
I wish also to take this occasion to extend my
country’s deep appreciation to all countries on the
Council and beyond in the United Nations that deploy
troops and police to United Nations missions in very
difficult environments. Peacekeepers deserve the
support and attention of the Security Council, and we in
turn rely on the candour and expertise of Commanders

S/PV.7464

to help us to better address the challenges facing
peacekeeping.
Before asking several questions, I will focus on
three essential aspects of what the Force Commanders
have just touched upon, specifically the imperative
of appropriate training, the importance of expanding
the pool of troop-contributing countries (TCCs) and
the kinds of contributions they make, and the critical
question of how the system handles exceptions to the
rules of engagement.
First, as has been said, we must prepare
peacekeepers for the missions in which they serve, as
they are increasingly dangerous missions. As many
here know, the United States recently conducted a study
in Mali through the United States Army’s Asymmetric
Warfare Group. I am sure that it will come as no surprise
to experienced Force Commanders, but the findings
made it abundantly clear that tailored pre-deployment
training for peacekeepers headed to Mali is the most
important and the largest gap in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), and that, of course, was underscored
here today by the MINUSMA Force Commander.
We must do everything possible to avoid sending
men and women unprepared into environments
where violent extremists operate. We owe it to our
peacekeepers and the people they protect to do better,
and we extend special condolences to Chad, which has
lost more soldiers in MINUSMA, I believe, than any
other contingent.
While the Asymmetric Warfare Group’s findings
were specific to Mali, this need for contextualized
training, including scenario-based protection-ofcivilians training, goes far beyond any one mission.
No one size fits all, needless to say. The context of
protecting internally displaced persons during the rainy
season in South Sudan while cohabitating with them
in United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
sites is very different from protecting civilians against
rebels who wear army uniforms and melt into the jungle
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, or, for that
matter, against banditry and militias in the Central
African Republic. These are very, very different and
specific contexts and specific threat environments.
This leads me to my second point, on expanding
the scope of troop-contributing countries and the
kinds of contributions they make. We all agree that
we need to continue to broaden and deepen the pool of

15-1817413/31

S/PV.7464

United Nations peacekeeping operations

17/06/2015

troop-contributing countries and increase contingents
with niche capabilities to operate in challenging
environments. Some of those niche capabilities have
been discussed today.

out through the mission’s chain of command, with full
respect for the mission’s mandate. Those unwilling to
abide by the Force Commander’s directives or to fulfil
the mandate should not deploy.

To assist in this endeavour, the Secretariat has
published a paper detailing the capabilities required
for current United Nations peacekeeping operations.
President Obama will host a peacekeeping summit
during the General Assembly high-level week with the
goal of working with the Secretary-General and other
troop-contributing countries and financial supporters
of peacekeeping to ensure that the United Nations can
draw on the resources of contributing nations to fulfil the
essential role played by United Nations peacekeeping,
to make it more responsive, more effective and safer for
civilians as well as for the peacekeepers who compose
such missions.

Finally, I would be remiss if I did not address the
recent terrible allegations of sexual exploitation and
abuse being committed at the hands of international
forces, including some United Nations peacekeepers.
While the vast majority of peacekeepers serve
honourably, and make, again, tremendous sacrifices,
I must say unequivocally that this alleged conduct is
unacceptable and that any personnel who commit
such acts must be brought to justice by their national
authorities. There is no room in United Nations
peacekeeping or in any regional or national mission for
those who would prey on the most vulnerable, whom
they are there to protect. This should be a principle that
all of us can rally around at the United Nations.

But increased and smarter contributions will not
be enough to help modern peacekeeping operations
meet the challenges they face. Responsive planning
and support to missions must also improve. The legacy
structure of sustainment planning and logistics support
is currently not adequate to back peacekeepers who face
these modern threats. When a peacekeeper in a mission
is wounded, be it in Mali, Darfur or elsewhere, it is
unconscionable that he or she cannot receive immediate
medical care, including evacuation.
Thirdly, I should like to turn quickly to caveats.
Force Commanders need to have confidence that
contingents will follow their leadership. A recent study
from the global peace operations initiative on operational
partnerships in United Nations peacekeeping found
that restrictive national caveats placed undue burdens
on those TCCs that have not put such restrictions in
place and that have to pick up the slack. We heard about
that here with the specifics of the Golan in mind.
Secret caveats, which are declared only when a
crisis breaks out, pose a particular risk to all mission
personnel, including the peacekeepers themselves who
have the caveats. In emergencies, commanders need to
know that orders will be carried out fully and without
pushback. But even open caveats, which are made
known to mission leadership from the start, are deeply
concerning when they restrict the ability of contingents
to undertake mission-critical tasks.
Decisions on how peacekeepers respond to a threat
or how to engage to protect civilians should be left to the
Force Commander and mission leadership and carried

14/31

Before I give up the floor, I just have a few questions
for our briefers.
First, it would be helpful to hear from General Yohannes,
as we have about MINUSMA, what the biggest training
gaps are among troops who arrive as part of UNMISS
and within the Mission headquarters staff. What are the
gaps that he would like to see filled? We would welcome
any insight he has as to how we, as the Council, might
help address these gaps.
I should like also to know what General Finn’s
standard operating procedure is when a contingent
comes to him and informs him that it has certain caveats
on his operation. We heard his concerns about caveats,
but when he receives that information, does he discuss
this, then, with the contingent Commander? Does
he inform Department of Peacekeeping Operations
headquarters? Is this reported to the Security Council
in any manner? It is not, to my knowledge, but it may be
that information is circulated that we are not aware of.
Could we think constructively and productively about
procedural changes that might help us mobilize the
will to overcome this challenge, which he eloquently
described?
I would also ask Under-Secretary-General Ladsous
what is needed from Member States, what is needed
within the Secretariat, what is needed in the missions to
improve support to peacekeepers with regard to medical
evacuations? This is an issue that, of course, every
troop-contributing country and police-contributing

15-18174

17/06/2015

United Nations peacekeeping operations

country probably would like to have more assurance on
before they deploy into harm’s way.
I would ask the same question of the Force
Commanders, as they are dealing with the mechanics
of medical evacuation in the field. Concretely, are there
things that they are missing or steps that they think we
could be taking to ensure this most basic care for the
troops and police under their command?
Mr. Bosah (Nigeria): I thank you, Mr. President,
for having organized this very important briefing. I
welcome the briefers, Lieutenant General Tesfamariam,
Major General Lollesgaard and Major General Michael
Finn. The clarity and incisiveness of their perspectives
on the issues under consideration bear out the wisdom
and importance of this interaction, which is aimed at
fostering greater synergy between the field and the
Security Council. Let me commend them in particular
for their immeasurable sacrifices in leading their
various peace missions.
It is of global concern that civilians are often
deliberately targeted in armed conflicts and frequently
subjected to blatant violations of their rights under
international law. The Council has since 1999 responded
to this challenge by prioritizing the protection of
civilians in theatres of conflict. In furtherance of this
quest, Security Council resolution 1894 (2009) called
for dedicated resources for the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. That underlines the compelling
necessity to protect the rights of civilians in theatres
of conflict and highlights the urgency of continued
efforts to improve strategies to address this arduous
task. We believe that enhanced cooperation among
the United Nations, troop-contributing countries,
police-contributing countries and the hosts in the
beneficiary States, particularly in areas of mandate
formulation and implementation, could achieve this
objective.
In a briefing by the Head of Mission of the United
Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan, Ellen
Margrethe Løj, to the Council last month (see S/PV.7444),
the widespread human rights abuses and killing of
civilians in Unity state of South Sudan was highlighted.
It necessitated the evacuation of humanitarian workers,
thereby aggravating the suffering of civilians in the
state. We note the challenges sustained in these camps
and would appreciate the comments of Lieutenant
General Tesfamariam on measures being taken to
ensure their long-term viability.

S/PV.7464

As we reflect on modalities for sustained
protection-of-civilian sites under such challenging
circumstances, we want to reiterate that clarity of
mandates on the protection of civilians, and accord
among peacekeeping contingents on implementation
strategies, are both essential to safeguarding civilians
in conflict areas. As peacekeepers strive to implement
such mandates, they must at all times endeavour to
remain transparent in their actions, as incidents of
misconduct — particularly those that border on violence
and sexual exploitation of women and children — are
inexcusable. Nigeria condemns such acts whenever
and wherever they occur. We believe that a speedy and
impartial investigation into allegations of such heinous
acts and imposition of appropriate sanctions on errant
personnel will serve to establish accountability as a
hallmark of peacekeeping operations.
The increasing asymmetric attacks on peacekeepers
in conflict areas have generated much concern. The
casualty rates, especially those in the Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, have taken
on unacceptable proportions. We propose that the
international community increase its assistance to
peacekeeping missions and other regional arrangements
involving anti-terrorism operations. That could be
achieved through the provision of much-needed
equipment designed to mitigate the devastating effect
of improvised explosive devices.
Also of great concern is the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons, especially among non-State
actors. That exacerbates conflicts and threatens the
well-being of civilians in conflict situations. It also
poses challenges to the effective implementation of
peacekeeping mandates, especially when non-State
actors carry out asymmetric attacks against
peacekeepers. That is why denying non-State actors
sanctuary and forces is of the utmost importance.
We are witness to the evolving nature of conflicts in
a contemporary world. This underscores the imperative
for the Council to demonstrate greater flexibility
in adjustment of peacekeeping mandates without
necessarily waiting for their expiration. Such flexibility
will enable prompt and appropriate responses to threats
on the ground.
I would like to conclude by affirming our
commitment to collective security as enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations, while paying tribute to
those who have paid the ultimate price in the line of

15-1817415/31

S/PV.7464

United Nations peacekeeping operations

duty so that others might live in peace. Let us take this
opportunity to renew our resolve as peacekeepers to
respecting and preserving the fundamentals of United
Nations peacekeeping.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Malaysian delegation of for
organizing today’s meeting. We are also grateful to the
Force Commanders of the military components of the
missions in South Sudan, Mali and the Middle East for
their very comprehensive briefings. We believe that
this type of meeting format — by now traditional in
nature — is most useful. It allows us to better grasp
problems facing United Nations contingents on the
ground and to understand operational issues concerning
the activities of missions. This dialogue is especially
important in its consideration of the new challenges
and threats facing today’s United Nations peacekeeping
operations, whose mandates are increasingly complex
and comprehensive.
One of the most dangerous trends is the growth of
non-traditional, non-State actors jeopardizing the safety
of peacekeepers. That places additional responsibilities
on the Security Council, which formulates the mandates
of peacekeeping operations. Currently, the majority of
peacekeeping operations are tasked with the protection
of civilians in situations of armed conflict. We are
convinced that the effectiveness of their implementation
is based on unswerving compliance with the provisions
of international humanitarian law and the Security
Council’s mandates, which, in turn, must be clear and
not subject to multiple interpretations.
The deployment of United Nations peacekeeping
operations is a harbinger of hope for States in situations
of conflict. The population expects support to be
provided from the Organization, as well as measures
to suppress violence. That is why inaction on the part
of missions — just like the excessive use of force that
goes beyond the parameters set by the provisions of the
mandates — has a negative impact on the standing of the
United Nations and undermines the local population’s
trust in the United Nations presence. In that context, the
imperative is to forge constructive daily cooperation
between peacekeepers and local authorities and to
promote capacity-building by host States, which
bear direct responsibility for the protection of their
own population. That applies, first and foremost, to
missions where the protection of civilians is a primary
objective. For example, the Security Council initially
entrusted the United Nations Mission in South Sudan

16/31

17/06/2015

(UNMISS) with a fairly strong mandate to protect the
civilian population. Unfortunately, however, as a result
of various factors, including systemic shortcomings in
terms of political and military analysis and forecasting
and operational planning in South Sudan, the Mission
was not always ready to tackle the tasks that had been
set. We expect that a careful analysis of the experience
of the leaders of UNMISS, the provision of regular
information to the Security Council about the situation
on the ground, as well as the allocation of substantial
additional resources to the Misison will have a positive
bearing on its effectiveness.
Of significant concern are the asymmetric threats
that have arisen in areas where United Nations
peacekeeping operations are deployed. Among
these were a string of violent acts targeting the
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) peacekeepers, which led to
numerous casualties. In that regard, we note some work
on past mistakes made by the leadership of the Mission.
It has become clear that the effective implementation of
sanctions within the framework of Security Councilgranted broad mandates is feasible only if peacekeepers
are perfectly prepared and specially trained and
psychologically hardened, as well as supplied with the
appropriate modern equipment and transport assets.
Contingency deployment locations must be fortified in
military and engineering terms. Proper coordination
and exchange of operational data are also essential.
That process should involve host States and their
security forces, with strict respect for their sovereignty
and that of neighbouring and other interested States
and, if present, that of other foreign military presences
on the ground.
We think that the implementation of the aforementioned
tasks is impossible without appropriate and clear
command structures. However, the concept of military
responsibility is not limited to giving orders, but also
includes responsibility for the safety and security
one’s subordinates. That is why a careful analysis of
emerging threats to United Nations personnel must
be an indispensable component in the planning of
operations. Achieving objectives should not take place
to the detriment of United Nations Blue Helmets. The
timeliness of the issues being discussed is borne out
by the fact that they were also clearly reflected in
yesterday’s presentation to the Secretary-General by
the experts of the High-Level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations of their report and recommendations,
which need to be carefully analysed and discussed.
15-18174

17/06/2015

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): Spain would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for having organized this meeting, which we frankly
find very useful. We would also like to thank UnderSecretary-General Ladsous and the three Force
Commanders — of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS), the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
and the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization
(UNTSO) — for their briefings.
Spain would like to take this opportunity once again
to reiterate its appreciation of the work done by the
peacekeeping missions. We also thank the contingents
and the troop-contributing countries for their generosity
and commitment to maintaining international peace and
security. This year is particularly important because
of the review of peacekeeping operations that is being
conducted, to which Spain has contributed with a view
to strengthening the missions and improving their
effectiveness and security. I should like to make three
general comments.
First, we must work together to prevent a gulf from
opening between the mandates and their implementation
on the ground. To that end, we must not only be
extremely careful in defining the mandates but also
try and improve the effectiveness with which they are
implemented, since the failure of such implementation
fosters doubts and affects the credibility of the missions
themselves.
Secondly, mandates must always go hand in hand
with the necessary capabilities. Contingents must
receive adequate, specific training, equipment and
resources to increase their reaction capability, their
mobility and the use of new technologies.
Thirdly, for Spain, the work being done by
peacekeeping operations to protect civilians is essential,
although we must not forget that such protection is
principally the responsibility of the States. MINUSMA
is operating in extremely difficult conditions
paradigmatic of the new volatile environments in
which missions are operating today. I can assure Major
General Lollesgaard that MINUSMA is the subject of
the Security Council’s constant concern and attention.
One of his predecessors, Major General Kazura, stated
that MINUSMA was operating
“in a terrorist-fighting situation without an
anti-terrorist mandate or adequate training,

S/PV.7464

equipment, logistics or intelligence to deal with
such a situation” (S/PV.7275, p. 33).
Subsequently, in November 2014, the Security
Council held an interactive dialogue to address the
appropriateness of the mandate of MINUSMA in view
of the asymmetric attacks on the Mission. The concept
of operations, which dated from 2013, was revised to
take into account the new political and security climate,
and a series of measures was taken to purge elements
that we might describe as irregular.
Fourthly, the Secretary-General’s latest report
(S/2015/426) includes proposals to improve the
flexibility, reaction capability and effectiveness of the
Mission in an environment that is, let us remember,
asymmetric. In other words, far from being inactive,
the Security Council has been very attentive to
developments on the ground. Unfortunately, however,
the number of casualties and victims among the Blue
Helmets of MINUSMA remains very high and the
difficulties faced by the Mission in carrying out its
mandate are enormous. Spain wishes to condemn the
intentional attacks on the Mission’s staff, a situation that
we consider absolutely unacceptable. We must explore
accountability mechanisms and the Government of Mali
must cooperate with us on this matter. As we all know,
the main challenge remains the discrepancy between
the diagnosis of the situation, which is that of a political
crisis, and the reality of an asymmetric environment
characterized by jihadi terrorism, organized crime
networks and, above all, the overwhelming isolation of
MINUSMA in the north of the country.
We need to find a balance between the security
of the contingents and the fulfilment of the mandates,
but all involved are obliged to ensure that the staff can
carry out their functions with security standards that
are appropriate given the threats and circumstances
and allow them to implement their mandate. The
introduction of new technologies is essential for the
effective performance of these tasks and the security of
the contingents themselves.
With regard to UNMISS, we wish to reiterate our
support for a Mission that has also been operating in a
very complex environment since last year. The work done
to provide shelter for 118,000 refugees and internally
displaced persons is extraordinary and has defined the
Mission’s day-to-day situation. Although each United
Nations operation is a separate world, as Mr. Ladsous
pointed out in his briefing, we must recognize that the

15-1817417/31

S/PV.7464

United Nations peacekeeping operations

shift from essentially a peace consolidation operation
to one focused on protecting civilians represents a
radical change that poses tremendous challenges. In
our opinion, the joint efforts of the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative for South Sudan, the Force
Commander and the troop-contributing countries must
be evaluated to make the Mission more proactive and
robust. At the same time, we must seek to improve
the Mission’s effectiveness in the implementation of
its mandate, including the projection of its presence
outside the refugee camps.
Let us remember that UNMISS is an integrated
Mission and that coordination and coherence among all
of its components is therefore supposed to exist. Without
such coordination and coherence, the Mission will fail.
It is very important that the United Nations continue
monitoring and observing the human rights situation in
South Sudan. I would recall that, when the mandate of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo was renewed,
the Security Council took an important step forward by
requesting the Secretary-General to provide updates on
the ways in which the Mission was fulfilling its mandate
to protect civilians and on the measures it was taking
to transform itself and perform its mandates more
efficiently and effectively. At the proposal of Spain,
such a requirement was also introduced for UNMISS
because we consider it a good practice that should be
followed in all the other missions.
With regard to UNTSO and the question of caveats,
we believe that the troop-contributing countries can
legitimately impose caveats on the deployment of
their troops under certain conditions, provided that
such caveats are expressed in the appropriate way and
with the appropriate respect for the chain of command.
It is precisely when a peacekeeping operation is
obliged to operate in a crisis situation — in a hostile
environment — that the maintenance of the chain
of command acquires critical importance and must
be respected without interference from the national
authorities involved.
Even when caveats are worded in compliance with
the established procedures, however, they can of course
complicate the fulfilment of mandates, particularly when
an operation is forced to deploy in hostile conditions,
for example when the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF) was obliged to withdraw
to the Alpha line in September 2014. Fortunately,
Observer Group Golan, which consists of UNTSO

18/31

17/06/2015

observers, was able to maintain a number of positions
on the Bravo line in the Mount Hermon area, where,
unless military observers carry on working, it would be
very difficult for UNDOF to continue to implement its
mandate. At their new positions on the Alpha line, the
UNTSO observers continued their work in very difficult
conditions, illustrated by various incidents in late April
and early May that resulted in four of the contingent
being injured and the evacuation of observation post
51. I would like to thank Major General Finn and all
the UNTSO observers deployed with UNDOF for the
admirable work they continue to do in very difficult
conditions. Today the ability to patrol with guarantees
or deploying to agreed observation points continues to
be far from reality. That is producing violations of the
terms of resolution 350 (1974) for both sides. Armed
groups, including the Al-Nusra Front, which is on the
list of terrorist groups, are present in the area. That may
be the greatest violation of the separation agreements,
but it is not the only one.
I would like to ask Major General Finn, can the
UNTSO observers carry out their tasks in their present
positions while complying with the minimum levels of
operability?
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Ladsous and the Force
Commanders, whom we commend for the frankness of
their assessments, as befits the seasoned professional
leaders they clearly are.
I would also like to acknowledge and pay tribute
to all who serve the United Nations, especially those
in high-risk environments. Today we have again been
reminded that some United Nations soldiers make the
ultimate sacrifice, giving their lives in the performance
of their duty. This phenomenon of dead United Nations
soldiers is extraordinarily confronting. Whatever the
reality of the new threat environment, it should not be
happening. United Nations peacekeepers should not
even be targets, let alone casualties. The fact that it is
happening is at the core of the three briefings we have
had today. It is also at the core of why some countries
find it so difficult to contribute troops to United Nations
operations.
Yesterday, the High-Level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations told us that all peacekeepers — civilian,
military and police — must do all they can to ensure
that civilians are not harmed. That is clearly right, yet as
we have been reminded today by General Tesfamariam,
living up to that principle, which flows so easily off the
15-18174

17/06/2015

United Nations peacekeeping operations

tongue, is extraordinarily difficult. The challenge for
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan is indeed
extraordinary — a complete breakdown of civilian
Government, with our poor soldiers left to protect
the civilians whose Government and leaders have
abandoned them. It is unacceptable that the force is
having to contend with direct harassment and repeated
violations of the status-of-forces agreement. We believe
that the Security Council must keep a very close eye on
South Sudan and the situation there.
I would also like to congratulate Major
General Lollesgaard on the frankness of his assessment.
He has told us bluntly that the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali is not properly equipped to operate in the
asymmetric threat environment prevailing in northern
Mali. That is something that the Organization must
listen and respond to. We wholeheartedly support his
plea that troops who are sent to Mali are indeed trained
and equipped to deal with the situation in which they
must operate. We welcome the progress the General
was able to point to, particularly in the development
of an intelligence capability. We acknowledge the
importance of intelligence for enhancing situational
awareness, in assisting force protection and supporting
the protection of civilians. I would like to ask him
whether he sees a role for an all-sources information
forces unit capability in the Mission to assist in the
conduct of an information operations campaign.
I would also like to ask him a question that continues
to challenge me when I think about the operations that
the United Nations must now work in. Can a force that is
equipped with the armour and other equipment needed
to operate safely in a serious threat environment at the
same time make the connections to the local population
that are necessary to engender the trust that we know is
essential to the fulfilment of their mission?
I would like to commend Major General Finn
for laying out so clearly the challenge he has had to
confront in dealing with the caveats imposed by
various troop contributors to the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization (UNTSO). In a similar spirit
of candour, I want to acknowledge that the reason for
some of those caveats is related to a concern that the
United Nations operation was not sufficiently equipped,
directed and supported to ensure the protection of the
soldiers operating there. We do not like caveats, and
we certainly agree with the Ambassador of the United
States that if caveats are imposed, they should be

S/PV.7464

imposed openly and must not come as a surprise to the
Force Commander. New Zealand has withdrawn the
caveats it had in place on military observers serving
in UNTSO, based on improved medical support, the
rehearsal of casualty evacuation plans and the inclusion
in the mission of a team to counter improvised explosive
devices. But the issue is a serious one, and we believe
there must be an open and honest conversation between
the troop contributors, the Secretariat and the Council
about the caveats and the reasons for them, and how we
might find a way of minimizing and preferably doing
away with them entirely.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I welcome this
opportunity for a candid and constructive discussion
with the Force Commanders. I wish to thank
Mr. Ladsous and the three Generals for their briefings.
I look forward to their responses to our questions.
I would first like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to all the Force Commanders for their service
and leadership, and to the men and women who serve in
and support the United Nations peace operations. They
are all at the sharpest edge of the Security Council’s
efforts to preserve international peace and security,
putting their lives on the line in the most challenging
environments. And sadly, as we have seen in places
such as Mali and South Sudan, that dedication comes
at a tragic cost.
The Commanders’ insights into the reality on the
ground and the constraints they face are invaluable to
the Council’s decision-making on their mandates and,
ultimately, to the promotion of international peace
and security, and I would therefore encourage them to
always be open and frank so that we can provide them
with the best possible support.
That need for ever-greater transparency and
accountability was also a prominent feature of
yesterday’s peace operations review panel and, as was
said then in relation to allegations of sexual exploitation
and abuse, zero tolerance must mean zero tolerance. All
troop-contributing countries must robustly follow up
any such allegations involving their troops and report
back to the United Nations. More broadly, we favour
honest and open communications, including through
meetings such as this one, to create ever-greater
openness about peacekeeping more broadly.
The protection of civilians is an issue that the United
Kingdom cares deeply about. In the darkest moments of
conflict, people all over the world look to the United

15-1817419/31

S/PV.7464

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Nations and its peacekeepers for reassurance and
protection, and we all have a responsibility to deliver.
To do so, it is critical that United Nations peacekeepers
be prepared to use force, where necessary and within
their mandates, to protect civilians under immediate
threat. The principle of the protection of civilians
is now widely supported by the United Nations and
Member States, yet the question of how peacekeepers
make the decision to intervene and how they choose
to do so still poses huge problems. We therefore need
the Force Commanders’ honest assessments of what is
working and what is not, and of what is possible and
what is not. In turn, we will be honest with them about
the resources and equipment we can provide.
I would like to ask the Generals what they and other
Force Commanders need from the Council to enable
their missions to protect civilians effectively. What
more can we do beyond providing more resources,
and how can we work with them to keep their host
Governments accountable for protecting their civilians,
particularly in cases such as that of South Sudan,
whose Government has so clearly failed to provide that
protection so far? A few weeks ago, Rwanda launched
an initiative to encourage all troop-contributing
countries to agree on a set of pledges to better protect
civilians. The United Kingdom considers the initiative
a great step forward, but I would be interested to hear
the Force Commanders’ views and those of other Force
Commanders in the Chamber.
Let me turn now to the threat posed by asymmetric
environments, set out so clearly by the Force
Commander of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali. As new
challenges to international peace and security emerge,
new technology will have to play a greater role. But,
in order to be effective, that new technology must be
supported by training and exercises and must be used
by troops that come ready and willing to meet evolving
threats. Predeployment training is crucial, particularly
in cultivating the right mindset and skills to confront
asymmetric threats, so that troops stand their ground
when protecting civilians. I am interested to hear the
views on how we can better instil the necessary proactive
and creative mindset needed by all peacekeepers
deployed to modern peacekeeping missions.
In the spirit of openness and transparency, I believe
that it is time for us to have a more honest conversation,
like that begun today, about the national caveats of
troop-contributing countries. I welcome the comments

20/31

17/06/2015

by Major General Finn. Like it or not, caveats exist
and we need to work and plan around them. That can
happen only if we are clear from the outset about what
we are prepared to allow our troops to do. We must
also be up front about changes in caveats over time,
particularly as the nature of the mission or conflict
changes. Caveats often do not become apparent until
the situation deteriorates, leaving Force Commanders
unclear about what their troops can and cannot do. It
is that uncertainty that leads to problems. In the worst
circumstances, it can lead to command and control
failures that put the lives of troops and civilians at risk.
Let me conclude by asking all the Force
Commanders in the Chamber today what more the
Council and the Secretariat can do to reduce those
caveats and to ensure that they and the mission leaders
are aware of the caveats that remain from the outset.
What more can we do to reinforce the importance of the
chain of command?
I again thank the Generals for their briefings today,
and all the other Force Commanders for coming to
today’s meeting. I look forward to hearing their views.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Venezuela would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important
informative briefing. We also thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Ladsous for his comments and thank the
Force Commanders of the peacekeeping operations for
briefing us in the Council today.
On behalf of my country, I would like to begin by
recognizing the personal commitments and sacrifice
of the officers, troops and staff of United Nations
peacekeeping missions. On a daily basis, they risk
their lives in carrying out their tasks. We would like to
honour those who have lost their lives in carrying out
their mission.
We would like to focus on an issue suggested by
you, Mr. President, which requires deep discussion
within the United Nations, the issue of the protection of
civilians, concerning which we would like to emphasize
the following points.
First, we reiterate the urgent need to protect civilians
under imminent threat of physical attack, as defined by
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations,
which is the only body empowered to develop policies
and doctrines regarding peacekeeping operations, in
accordance with international law and respect for the
sovereignty of the States concerned. Peacekeeping
15-18174

17/06/2015

United Nations peacekeeping operations

operations must emphasize the prevention of violence,
using their political capital to intercede and negotiate
with the parties in conflict, bearing in mind that the
political settlement of the conflicts must be the primary
objective of their actions.
We favour strengthening the deterrent capability
of peacekeeping operations in the protection of
civilians. In that regard, we support the development
of rapid deployment and standby force capabilities
for the protection of civilians. The military personnel
of peacekeeping operations must be able not only to
mobilize quickly to the host country or countries, they
should also be able to deploy swiftly within a given
territory. The staff therefore need adequate resources.
We reaffirm the importance of respecting and
maintaining the principles that guide peacekeeping
operations in protecting civilians, such as the consent of
the parties, impartiality and the non-use of force except
in situations of legitimate defence and in compliance
with the mandate. Peacekeeping operations must not be
used to impose peace. For Venezuela, the key role of
peacekeeping operations must be to support the host
Government, which has the primary responsibility to
protect civilians. We must also provide our support
to developing the institutional capacity of the State
in order to work towards a sustainable solution to the
conflict.
However effective a mission is in protecting
civilians, it can never substitute for the role of the State.
In that regard, we support the zero-tolerance policy
when it comes to sexual abuse against women and
children, which has taken place in some missions. Such
acts are unacceptable, and those who are responsible
should be brought to justice. Therefore, we also support
the need to increase the presence of women in the
management and composition of mission contingents,
as we have discussed previously in the Council.
Turning to the issue of asymmetric threats,
our country wishes to make the following points.
It is increasingly common to deploy peacekeeping
operations in political and security environments
dominated by fragility and violence, where there is no
peace to keep or no political process to support. That
has resulted in a substantial increase in the number of
kidnappings and killings of United Nations personnel
in targeted attacks. Those are unacceptable. The use
of peacekeeping operations in tasks to impose peace
and to combat terrorism and international organized

S/PV.7464

crime will only increase the risk of asymmetric threats
and attacks against peacekeepers, including civilian
personnel and partner organizations. Therefore, we
must establish mandates and expectations for the
peacekeeping operations that are achievable, on the
basis of a clear-sighted analysis of the conflict and a
long-term political strategy.
Regarding the establishment of safeguards or
caveats by the troop-contributing countries for the
deployment of their contingents, we would like to note
that, given the immense risk to life and limb to which
personnel in today’s peacekeeping operations are
exposed, all troop-contributing countries should have
the right to discuss the objectives and purposes of the
mission they are accepting. In that context, we reaffirm
the importance of troop-contributing countries being
able to actively participate in the Security Council’s
decision-making process related to the functioning of
the relevant operations involving their personnel, in
accordance with Article 44 of the Charter of the United
Nations.
In conclusion, we wish to reaffirm that peace and
the sustained well-being of peoples can be achieved
through the political resolution of conflicts and
addressing their root causes. Those should be the
guiding principles of our efforts within the framework
of the Organization.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Mr. President, for the opportunity for us to take
part in this very constructive discussion. I would also
like to thank the Force Commanders of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, as well as the Chief of Staff of the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization, for their briefings.
As many speakers have said, peacekeeping
operations have undergone major changes over the
past few years in order to keep up with security and
political changes and to adapt to new environments
in host States — environments that are often complex
and complicated in nature in which there is sometimes
no peace to keep, and no peace to build. Those
developments include the creation of rapid intervention
forces as part of many peacekeeping operations, such
as the force present in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, as well as the ever more frequent use of force
by peacekeepers, which poses a challenge to the most
basic principles of peacekeeping.

15-1817421/31

S/PV.7464

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The primary challenge remains how to respond
to non-State actors, who are present in many armed
conflicts in the areas where United Nations peacekeeping
operations are deployed. Such groups often operate in
the absence of clear rules of engagement, use force
without respect for international legal frameworks and
hide among the civilian population. Their command
structure is often complex, diffuse and multipronged.
The linkage among armed conflict, terrorism and
organized crime has grown in a large number of
countries, which requires peacekeeping operations
to adapt rapidly and wisely to the new political and
security environment that has taken hold throughout
the world.
We have observed that such emerging threats have
forced peacekeeping operations to implement such
principles under pressure and constraints, outside
the framework of their mandates and without the
foundations of a clear strategy. That principle has been
followed for the past few years without developing
the concepts and necessary principles within the
framework of peacekeeping operations mandates, and
without awareness or understanding of the dynamic
of peacekeeping operations on the ground or the root
causes of conflicts that would lead to appropriate
responses or put an end to the phenomenon that
strengthens extremism, terrorism and transnational
organized crime.
Furthermore, it is essential to think about the use
of force to maintain the mandates of peacekeeping
operations within the framework of Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations in a transparent
way that respects international law and international
humanitarian law while continuing peacekeeping
operations and protecting them from attacks, especially
those forces active under Chapter VII.
The activities of rapid intervention forces mean
that civilian employees of peacekeeping operations
sometimes become the targets of those asymmetric
attacks and the victims of asymmetric threats.
The Council must therefore develop a common
understanding, in consultation with Member States
and troop-contributing countries, for devising ways
to address that problem and to uphold the legality of
measures undertaken in that regard, as well as to
implement mandates in an appropriate way to address
unconventional, asymmetric challenges and threats.
Furthermore, it is essential to closely look into
the partnerships between the United Nations and
22/31

17/06/2015

international and regional organizations and to review
peacekeeping mandates to ensure that they can have
recourse to force as required, as well as to strengthen
their intelligence-gathering capabilities. In that regard,
we hope that the High-Level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations will come up with recommendations
that will enable the Organization to tackle current
challenges such as the ones I have just mentioned,
which while they may not threaten certain countries,
pose a threat to the whole world.
The protection of civilians is discussed in an
idealistic way within the framework of peacekeeping
operations, which is the main thrust of their action.
However, the guiding principles for the forces on
the ground do not cover the protection of civilians
in a systematic and comprehensive way. Very often,
the guidelines have been based on the protection of
military forces more than on the protection of civilians.
That is understandable. However, there is a gap that
needs to be considered in defining the mandates for
peacekeeping operations so as to guarantee a balance
between the ability to protect civilians and to protect
the mandate of the mission itself with respect to the use
of force to defend the mandate and to address emerging
challenges.
There can be no doubt that peacekeeping operations
play an important role in the protection of civilians.
However, because they do so in a temporary way, a
permanent solution with respect to the protection of
civilians lies first and foremost with the host State.
That requires work to be carried out through two
processes. The first includes security sector reform,
strengthening the rule of law and greater responsibilty
for violations of human rights law and international law.
The second process must also guarantee responsibilty
and national ownership of host States in order to
create a solid foundation for the protection of civilians
and to guarantee that it is lasting in nature. Indeed,
the protection of civilians must take into account
the strategic and tactical aspects of peacekeeping
operations.
That leads directly to the other elements that impact
peacekeeping operations, namely, the constraints
imposed by troop-contributing countries, whether they
be military or police contingents, on the operations
in which they play an active part. Those troops often
obey the orders of their national hierarchies rather than
heeding the commanders of the operation itself, which
impacts the way orders are followed and executed.

15-18174

17/06/2015

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Therefore, it is vital to take into account the legal
responsibility of the United Nations. It is essential to
underscore the need to put in writing the cooperation
between United Nations and troop-contributing
countries to develop and strengthen the guiding
principles of the operational mechanisms of armies and
police to guarantee planning and permanent contacts
between them, by clearly defining the hierarchies and
the lines of command and control in peacekeeping
operations.
By way of conclusion, we would like to reiterate
that Jordan, as an active contributor to 10 of the 16
peacekeeping operations throughout the world, will
continue to support the efforts of the international
community and the United Nations to develop a
clear vision that offers viable solutions to address
contemporary challenges and that enables us to be
as prepared as possible to respond with wisdom and
flexibility so as to effectively and firmly manage both
the current and future challenges facing peacekeeping
operations.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Hervé Ladsous, as well as the Force Commanders
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA), the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan and the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization for their briefings and, of course, for their
work. I shall very briefly touch upon the three topics
that were presented to us.
The first concerns the protection of civilians,
which is increasingly at the very heart of our mandates.
This trend was not a self-evident one, but following the
tragedies experienced by the international community,
notably in Africa and the Balkans, it has become a
necessity, in the name of the principle of humanity,
which lies at the heart of the Charter of the United
Nations. The High-Level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations just recognized this, while endeavouring not
to give rise to impossible expectations. We wish to pay
tribute to the Blue Helmets, who face this demanding
work on a daily basis.
We do not underestimate the difficulty of these
mandates in crisis situations across vast territories,
often devoid of infrastructure, where the population is
faced with the violence of ruthless armed groups. Such
implementation entails comprehensive action, which
involves political settlement of crisis, prevention,
support for the restoration of the State’s authority

S/PV.7464

and, sometimes, when necessary, the use of force. Our
challenge today is to tailor peacekeeping operations
in all their aspects to the implementation of these
mandates for the good of the civilian population, who
are the first victims of armed conflicts.
In that respect, the human aspect is of the utmost
importance. Missions must be able to establish close
ties with the populations they are to protect. From this
point of view, the use of the French language must be
fully taken into account, and I would like to recall here
again that we need more French-speakers in current
peacekeeping operations — from privates right up to
the Special Representatives of the Secretary-General,
including in New York. This is a precondition for
operational effectiveness.
Finally, the protection of civilians should not be
limited to ensuring their physical security. Respect for
human rights and the protection of women and children
are of course at the centre of our priorities. We will
have an opportunity to touch upon this issue tomorrow
during the open debate on children and armed conflict.
But it is absolutely clear in that regard that the
behaviour of Blue Helmets must be irreproachable, and
zero tolerance must be applied to any actions that could
sully the standing of the United Nations.
The second topic concerns action in an asymmetric
environment. Blue Helmets are confronted with
new threats that sometimes target them directly. In
that context, we must respond with trained troops,
appropriately equipped, including by providing
missions with the necessary multiplier effects: ​​
air
assets but also sanitary support and logistics and the
engineering, combat and work units they often lack.
We encourage Member States that have such capacity
to fill these gaps, and we encourage the exchanges
of training and education among Member States. The
Force Commander of МINUSМA could provide details
on the status of his force regarding these aspects, and
the lessons to be learned for other theatres, such as in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Lebanon,
where similar challenges exist.
We also have to open peacekeeping operations
to modern technology, as is proposed by the report
of the Expert Panel on Technology and Innovation
in United Nations Peacekeeping dated February
2015. By bolstering our capabilities in terms of
information-processing and the protection of Blue
Helmets, technology allows us to better understand the
environment we are active in, to anticipate and to act

15-1817423/31

S/PV.7464

United Nations peacekeeping operations

upstream of peaks of violence to protect people in the
best possible security conditions.
Moreover, the new type of challenges we face
requires an optimal mobilization of operational and
logistical resources available. The operational margin of
manoeuvre of a force cannot be impeded by a logistical
organization that is unadapted to the theatre. On the
other hand, it must be based on the rapid deployment
of support capacities, including emergency measures
needed for infrastructure work.
Therefore — with regard to the third topic, namely,
the issue of caveats — we have the responsibility to ensure
that our operations possess the necessary resources for
their success and that they are used efficiently, which
entails two basic requirements. One is to adapt the
modus operandi of the peacekeeping operations to their
mandates. Mobile, dynamic, reactive and responsive
forces close to the populations are needed in relation
to those who seek to derail peace processes and who
target civilians and peacekeepers. A proactive attitude
is the best way to respond to this dual objective, the
protection of civilians and force protection. It would be
useful to hear the three Force Commanders share their
experiences regarding constraints linked to caveats.
The second requirement is to avoid any ambiguity
during the force generation undertaken by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations. Fraught as it
is with the risk to the force and the civilian population,
we cannot allow contingents, for national reasons,
to avoid carrying tasks ordered by commanders. An
effective upstream consultation process is essential to
dispel such ambiguities.
The report of the High-Level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations, submitted to the Secretary-General
yesterday, notes these problems facing peacekeeping
operations. France will remain engaged regarding
these issues and will carefully consider the numerous
recommendations set out in the report.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate France’s deeprooted commitment to United Nations peacekeeping,
to which we fully contribute with Blue Helmets — for
example, within the framework of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon, as well as in our national
capacity and under the European Union — in support of
peacekeeping operations, including in Mali, the Central
African Republic and Côte d’Ivoire. Today, 7,800 French
soldiers are engaged in foreign operations, including
nearly 1,000 directly in the service of the United

24/31

17/06/2015

Nations and 6,000 under a United Nations mandate.
Since January 2013, 13 of our countrymen have paid for
that commitment with their lives. The most recent was
Mr. Damien Dustrit in 2014 in Lebanon. I would like to
pay tribute here to their memory, as well as that of all
their Blue Helmet comrades fallen on the battlefield to
bring to life the ideals espoused by the United Nations.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I would like to thank
today’s invitees for their insightful, thought-provoking
and detailed briefings.
As we heard earlier today, Lithuania also welcomes
this once-a-year opportunity to hear from United
Nations Force Commanders about the most pressing
challenges in today’s peacekeeping. Given the changing
peacekeeping environment and the ever more complex
challenges that peacekeepers face, an exchange of this
kind once a year is the very least we can do. Let me
take this opportunity to express our appreciation to
all of the Force Commanders, whose sound judgment
and decisions under increasing fire are critical for the
successful implementation of mandates, as well as
for the lives of peacekeepers and those they serve to
protect.
The primary responsibility to protect civilians,
as we often say, rests with the national Governments.
However, as seen in various crises, there is often a tragic
lack of the national capacity needed to protect one’s
own populations, and at times even a lack of political
will. The protection of civilians under imminent threat
therefore remains a key priority for peacekeeping
missions. Mission leadership is crucial, as it must
ensure that the protection of civilians, including women
and children, is considered an essential task by the
mission as a whole. That is a key element of the “one
mandate, one mission, one force” approach, which we
strongly support.
In the current environment, a static presence is far
from sufficient; peacekeeping has progressed along a
much more kinetic line. Peacekeepers must be ready to
demonstrate their willingness and the courage to act in
a proactive manner — to fight insecurity and protect
civilian lives and themselves. Within the mission, all
must be fully committed to the mandate, prepared and
ready to defend it by force if necessary. Implementing
protection mandates requires clear focus, improved
situational awareness, intelligence and analysis,
adequate structures, logistics and materiel, training
and resources.

15-18174

17/06/2015

United Nations peacekeeping operations

In South Sudan, the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) took an extraordinary step
to accommodate thousands of internally displaced
persons at its sites, saving countless lives. However,
acknowledge the challenges such a step poses to
the Mission. As a political solution remains distant,
the numbers of those in need of protection can only
keep growing. All parts of the United Nations should
work together to find suitable solutions to address the
situation. Closer interaction with local populations, as
some of the Force Commanders noted earlier today, and
better cooperation with the Government of South Sudan
are required, especially when it comes to securing a
safe environment to facilitate the voluntary return of
internally displaced persons. However, continuous
violations of the status of forces agreement do not help
and are a cause of serious concern.
In that context, I would like to inquire whether
Force Commander Tesfamariam could elaborate on the
practical impact of such violations on the protection
mandate and on the Mission’s own provisions and
supplies. Other questions to the Force Commander
would be: To what extent would an arms embargo
help UNMISS in its task to protect civilians? How
do peacekeepers themselves feel in that complex
environment? What measures have been taken to ensure
their safety under the current circumstances? What is
the perception of the operating climate in terms of the
Mission, at present?
Turning to operations in an asymmetric environment,
it is important to recognize that a number of countries
hosting United Nations peacekeeping operations are
countries where the levels of threats from militant and
terrorist groups are among the highest. The United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) is one of the missions
that is operating in an exceptionally challenging
environment, where local populations seem to expect it
to substitute for the Government and provide services
for which the Government is responsible, while at
the same time they are interpreting its role as biased
in favour of one or another side to the conflict. All
of that is taking place in the presence of a persistent
terrorist threat and growing interconnections between
trans-border organized crime, terrorist networks and
traffickers — as a result, MINUSMA has become one
of the deadliest missions.

S/PV.7464

Attacks on peacekeeping personnel in Mali
have taken a significant toll on the Mission’s efforts:
28 peacekeepers have lost their lives. We pay our
respects to all of those that have lost their lives in that
noble Mission.
The recent mine attack of 28 May in the region
of Tombouctou on the MINUSMA convoy in which
the Force Commander and Police Commissioner were
travelling is yet another reminder that the Mission has
become a primary target of attacks by extremist groups.
In our view, the lack of accountability in that case, as in
many others involving the deaths of peacekeepers, has
certainly become a big challenge.
With regard to the operational environment, the
Force Commander has spoken about the importance
of intelligence gathering and better intelligence
analysis. We can only concur with that, and on the
use and importance of adequate modern technologies
in operations in ensuring a safer environment and
facilitating preparations for the adequate protection of
civilians.
As another delegation has already asked, we too
would like to know how the Security Council could
better enable Force Commanders to lead and command
their forces. What are the current command and control
structures, and are they flexible enough to operate in
a highly dynamic threat environment? What else can
we do, as Council members, to facilitate the work of
the Force Commanders? What training and additional
equipment would be most needed? If one had to indicate
one item, what would it be? What additional measures
must be considered to ensure the protection of the force
itself? Is the increase in the ceiling of the missions
under the current circumstances sufficient? Would an
additional increase be necessary?
Finally, on national caveats, the safety and security
of peacekeepers is, and must remain, among the top
United Nations priorities, as well as one of the key
factors for troop- and police-contributing countries to
continue providing the forces necessary in the field.
In a rapidly changing security environment, even
long-functioning traditional peacekeeping missions
are facing asymmetric and unconventional threats.
Countries therefore resort to using caveats to minimize
the risks to their contingents. As has been described
before and as the information note indicates, that
practice may become a challenge to command and

15-1817425/31

S/PV.7464

United Nations peacekeeping operations

control, and hence to mission performance, and is of
course of concern to Force Commanders.
In that respect, mutual commitments between the
United Nations and the troop-contributing countries
are necessary. The United Nations must ensure that the
utmost will be done to ensure safe and secure mandate
implementation, as well as the safety and security of
peacekeepers. We in the Council must support those
efforts by ensuring that missions are adequately supplied
and trained and that accountability for attacks against
United Nations personnel is pursued with all due vigour.
At the same time, the troop-contributing countries
should recognize the need for efforts to flexibly adjust
a mission’s posture and tasks in an environment that is
evolving daily, as well as the growing need for robust
peacekeeping operations that are a departure from the
long-standing static peacekeeping tradition. That issue
is naturally linked to the peacekeeping operations
review process and should be further discussed in the
light of the new report and recommendations by the
High-Level Independent Panel on Peace Operations.
Lastly, many delegations have spoken about
accountability for sexual crimes and a zero-tolerance
policy regarding sexual crimes without regard to
the perpetrator. Certainly, my delegation adds its
voice to all of those concerns expressed and calls for
accountability and strict implementation of the zerotolerance policy.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Malaysia.
At the outset, I join other colleagues in thanking
Under-Secretary-General Ladsous and the Generals
for their respective briefings, which my delegation
followed with much interest. At the same time, Malaysia
wishes to express its appreciation to all of the Force
Commanders and Heads of the military components
of United Nations operations and of the African Union
Mission in Somalia, for joining us in the Security
Council today.
We believe that this briefing is timely, particularly
in light of the completion of the review work of the
High-Level Independent Panel on Peace Operations and
the submission of its report to the Secretary-General
just yesterday. As much ground has been covered by
previous speakers, with views and comments with
which we can associate ourselves, my remarks will be
fairly brief.

26/31

17/06/2015

Malaysia concurs with the assessment that over
time the protection of civilians has emerged as a central
purpose and core mandate of contemporary peacekeeping
operations. We note that, at present, 10 of the existing
16 peacekeeping missions are mandated to undertake
protection-of-civilians mandates. The challenges to
civilian protection are vast, ranging from needs on
the ground and a challenging security environment,
to a lack of infrastructure. Peacekeepers are often
responsible for protecting large populations spread out
over vast areas, but they usually lack material resources
to effectively execute the mandate.
We strongly believe that, in order to implement the
mandate to protect civilians, peacekeepers themselves
must be held to the highest standard. In that regard, any
allegations of impropriety on the part of peacekeepers
or the civilian components of United Nations missions
must be addressed in a timely, transparent and impartial
manner with a view to maintaining, among other
things, the integrity and credibility of the institution as
a whole. A zero-tolerance policy must be observed and
adhered to fully.
We take this opportunity to once again express our
deepest sympathies and condolences to the loved ones
of the peacekeepers who have sacrificed their life.
The ongoing conflict in Mali clearly outlines the
complexity of the crisis, in which the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali has been placed at the forefront, particularly with
regard to addressing intersecting challenges, including
the nexus between local conflict dynamics, organized
crime and jihadist extremism.
The United Nations has been able to take innovative
steps in other conflict situations to better improve the
deployment of peacekeepers on the ground and to adapt
to a hostile environment, such as in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. At a technical level, the
deployment of intelligence units and the procurement
of improvised explosive device-resistant equipment,
including armoured and mine-protective vehicles, has
helped to enhance the capabilities of peacekeepers to
operate more safely in an asymmetrical environment.
With regard to the briefing on caveats, we concur
with the observation that the inclusion of so-called
national caveats could complicate or hamper the smooth
running of United Nations peacekeeping operations
and missions with regard to issues such as parallel
chains of command, the linking of field contingents to

15-18174

17/06/2015

United Nations peacekeeping operations

national headquarters main command, and personnel
performance. We are fully aware that effective command
and control is paramount to the successful pursuit of a
mandate. In our view, this parallel command structure
should be dealt with by addressing troop-contributing
countries well before formulating a mandate. We also
understand that the High-Level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations has also seriously considered this
issue in its recent report to the Secretary-General and
has made certain recommendations for addressing it.
As a troop- and police-contributing country,
Malaysia looks forward to working closely with
other Council members and all interested partners
and stakeholders on improving the efficiency and
effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping, as well
as on safeguarding the safety, security and well-being
of our peacekeepers.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to Lieutenant General Tesfamariam
to respond to the comments and questions raised.
Lieutenant General Tesfamariam: The first
question I will address concerns the major challenge that
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
is facing. We face major challenges in addition to the
presence of internally displaced persons (IDPs), which
is not common in United Nations peacekeeping history.
We have a shortage of resources. As I tried to indicate,
we have what I consider a United Nations mindset issue
within the existing manpower, but more than that, the
most critical issue is the continual fighting in South
Sudan since December 2013. Because of that we have
continual displacement and civilians are suffering. It is
a serious challenge for the Mission.
I remember the Council’s visit to South Sudan and
its visit to the IDP site in Malakal. The singular message
of the IDPs to the members of the Security Council was
very clear. They requested the Council to help them by
silencing the guns. I consider that very challenging. It
is a challenge to the Mission, to the civilians, to the
mandate and to us. It is really worrying, and it is the
cause behind our IDP sites and protection sites, which
are still increasing in number gradually.
I believe we have the right approach with regard to
the protection of civilians. Given the reality in South
Sudan, our approach is to be more proactive and to try
to reach the civilians and not wait for them to come
seeking assistance or protection. On the other hand, we

S/PV.7464

have the IDP issue and we have civilians waiting for
protection from physical threats and for humanitarian
assistance. That kind of situation is still a dilemma,
even to the Mission, and has affected our priorities.
Our resources are obviously limited, compared
with the reality on the ground. The 4.6 million people
in need of humanitarian assistance are also in need
of protection. The issues of humanitarian assistance,
life-saving assistance and the protection of civilians
exist at the same time in South Sudan. There is also a
geography issue and an infrastructure issue. In addition,
we have the status of forces agreement issues. The
option we have is to maximize the resources in hand for
the Mission with regard to the status of forces agreement
issue. That issue is causing a serious challenge to the
Mission, including through the violations; restrictions
on our patrols; our spending unnecessary time dealing
with checkpoints; and the detainment of our contingentowned equipment, sometimes for close to two months;
and the difficulties of movement on the ground and by
air. I want to be more clear: out of all the major challenges
in South Sudan, the critical challenge is that the guns
are not yet silent, and civilians are paying the price for
that. We are doing our level best at the Mission through
communication and physical deployment, but because
of the lack of respect for the ceasefire agreement, we
face significant challenges. What the civilian IDPs
said in Malakal was that their priority was not positive
peace, their priority was negative peace — to silence
the guns under all circumstances.
The other issue concerns the limitations, in
particular the force-multiplier capabilities. In addition
to the status of forces agreement and the restrictions, I
know from Headquarters that serious efforts have been
made to engage the parties, but still we have a serious
gap in capabilities. We depend too much on infantry.
Aviation capabilities to control the security situation
within our area of responsibility are still seriously
lacking in UNMISS.
Another issue is the training gap. I tried to indicate
that the technical and tactical training was there. I
am happy with the commitment of the forces. I am
happy with the technical and tactical skills. However,
the protection of civilians is about serving and
defending civilians. They should be our focus. I feel
that there is a gap in terms of knowledge, preparation
and skills. Within the forces, we are not yet aware
of the particularity of protecting civilians and what
makes it different from the general knowledge of

15-1817427/31

S/PV.7464

United Nations peacekeeping operations

peacekeeping on the part of the soldier on the ground
and the commander at the operational level. It is about
civilians, about people and about going into the middle
of the conflict. Obviously, there will be risks. I do not
think that troops are adequately trained to know about
the risks and that there is a solution to those risks. It is
not just about risk, but paying the price for that risk and
ensuring a solution.
I am happy to hear that it is a dual mission,
defending yourself and defending civilians at the
same time when it comes to the protection of civilians,
because the nature of the conflict is not that predictable.
When it threatens you and threatens civilians, it is not
easy to predict. So it requires, I believe, knowledge,
training and preparation, taking into consideration the
particularities of the protection-of-civilians mandate
and tasks. What is required is a force with a particular
quality of commitment, one that is knowledgeable on
how to be proactive and that more or less understands
what to do in whatever the circumstances might be,
because not everything can be controlled; not everything
can be dealt with by saying, “Do this, do not do that”.
Tactical commanders are enablers themselves; so are
are operational commanders. It is also a time-sensitive
engagement. So with respect to the skill and knowledge
of how to be proactive and how to take the initiative,
always keeping in mind that the reason why we are there
is to save civilians, I am not sure if this is fully included
in our training systems, including before deployment.
So there are a few problems in this regard. With
respect to my views on the issue of caveats, let me say
that caveats exist, although some troop-contributing
countries say that they do not have them. This shows
that there are differences. A force is there for one
mandate, one task, one vision, one area of operations.
Division within a uniformed force is not good; it affects
performance. In my understanding, addressing the
concerns expressed is the solution, because we need
a force that is not divided. This is in addition to the
impact of operations.
Finally, in UNMISS, until recently we had the
original mandate, and now we have a revised mandate.
It is a shift that takes into consideration the realities on
the ground and existing challenges. We have realigned
ourselves with the support of Headquarters; that is why
I am happy with the support and attention we receive,
as well as its frequency. We have realigned ourselves
decisively. We have completed the process of realigning
ourselves with the new mandate and the new tasks; the

28/31

17/06/2015

Mission is trying to do its level best to adapt to the
situation.
The President: I thank Lieutenant General Tesfamariam
for the clarifications he has provided.
I now give the floor to Major General Lollesgaard
to respond to the comments made and questions raised.
Major General Lollesgaard: Mr. President, I
thank you for all the support from the members of the
Council and for the questions posed; I will try to be
brief in my responses.
First, with respect to the question posed by
the representative of Chad, on how we can prevent
asymmetric threats, I think that that is a very difficult
question. I do not think that we are capable, with this
mandate, of preventing it, but we can deter it through the
effective use of our forces; with increased cooperation
with Operation Barkhane, which is working in the area;
and, of course, with the help of the local security forces
from Mali. So that is what we will be stepping up after
the signing of the peace agreement. I have given my
guidance for the next quarter, and clearly the focus is
on northern Mali.
I think that the issue regarding the intervention
brigade is a very complex one, because we would step
that up and then get the anti-terrorist mandate, which
would make things extremely complicated for the
Mission. I do not think we are set up for that or that
we are ready for that. We do not have the intelligence,
the equipment or the mobility to do that. I believe that
having this mandate and having an intervention brigade
under us would complicate things. So, again, I think
that this issue need to be dealt with in closer cooperation
with Barkhane and the security forces of Mali.
In terms of minimizing the risk, yes, we are
doing that; we are doing everything we can. We are
improving all of the bases now with a shorter timeline
than originally envisaged. I am also happy to learn that
Chad is bringing in more protective vehicles for their
forces.
The representative of Chile asked a question about
intelligence. I think that the sharing of intelligence
is extremely important, and I look forward to the
upcoming report on intelligence. Intelligence-sharing
in United Nations missions is complicated. We know
from previous experience that even in smaller alliances,
intelligence-sharing is complicated, and it is even more
complicated in the United Nations. I think we need

15-18174

17/06/2015

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV.7464

to find a good way to approach this issue, and I look
forward to the report, which may be able to help us in
that respect.

training and verify that it is scenario-based and also
that we are taking the right approach and understand
the environment in which we are going to work.

Has the availability of intelligence increased
security? Yes, definitely. I can cite several situations in
which we have saved lives by having good intelligence.
I can also cite several cases in which we lost civilian
lives because we did not have the necessary intelligence.
I think, therefore, that we need to do more.

In response to the French representative, let me
say that I will provide some lessons learned on what
I believe my particular Mission needs in terms of
training. We will develop that during the next couple
of months, so that information will be shared with both
the Secretariat and the troop-contributing countries.

In answer to the United States representative’s
question on what we can do with respect to the issue of
casualty evacuations, the answer is: more helicopters.
That is quite easy. We are quite limited; we have limited
night capability for casualty evacuations. In connection
with the the issue of caveats, certain Member States now
actually request that their forces be within a one-hour
reach of a helicopter. This puts a lot of pressure on my
helicopter capabilities before I can put certain troops on
the ground. So, definitely, more helicopters with night
capabilities is the best way of mitigating this issue.

There are many questions on the issue of the
caveats, and I asked what the Council could do. We
need to encourage contributors not to set too many
caveats. I understand, however, that there are national
issues related to operations in such environments. I
can live with caveats, as long as I know what they are
and they do not come up the day after I have issued
a task call. If they are fully clear and we know about
them beforehand, we can work around them. Of course,
it would be preferable if countries did not insist on
caveats.

To the representative of New Zealand, I would say a
few things about the information campaign. I think that
on the conceptual level and on the Force level, I am in a
good position. With the assistance that I have now, the
staff can provide me with the necessary input for my
information operations. I need to train and teach within
my organization; we are working on that, and I have
asked a few experts to devise a concept for us. But I
might come back, maybe, with additional requirements
in that respect.

That was a quick run-through, although there is
much more to say. Lunch hour is drawing near. I will
conclude here on the lessons learned, and I fully agree
with France. And I also apologize for my poor French,
among other things, but I am trying to improve. That is
also a lesson learned.

When it comes to the protection of vehicles, I
have made it a rule in the Mission that we do not drive
through a village without stopping and talking to
civilians. This is a common operational tactic. This is
very easy, because in Mali it always 100 kilometres to
the nearest place; so you drive 100 kilometres and stop
in the village and talk to the people. Then you drive
another 100 kilometres and so on. This is a bit of an
exaggeration, of course. But this is the way we are
doing it, so as to get out of these armoured boxes.
In terms of the many issues relating to training, I
think that we need to step up training. I think that the
training programme provided by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations is rather good, but perhaps
we need to align it more with the thinking of the troopcontributing countries (TCCs). I think that we should
also be more receptive of actually having evaluation
teams coming into the TCCs to look at the final

The President: I thank Major General Lollesgaard
for the clarifications that he has provided.
I now give the floor to Major General Finn to
respond to comments and questions raised.
Major General Finn: I thank you, Mr. President,
and the other members of the Security Council for
your statements and supportive comments. I think, in
relation to the queries raised, that I can perhaps stay
with them and make a few general comments, starting
with the United States query regarding how troopcontributing countries notify us of their caveats. By
the way, a caveat for myself is the Force Commander
of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF), who is the operational commander in the
Golan. I hope that I do not step on his toes in any way.
In relation to caveats, we should recall that UNDOF
existed for many years in a very benign situation, with
both parties to the agreement, Israel and Syria, largely
abiding by the terms of the Disengagement Agreement,
a situation that completely changed from 2012 to 2013.
We had issues of observation posts being overrun, car-

15-1817429/31

S/PV.7464

United Nations peacekeeping operations

jackings, observers — even UNDOF members — being
detained for short periods, and deficiencies in medical
evacuation and casualty evacuation. That was well
described by the representative of New Zealand, which
was one of the countries that imposed caveats, and
has been raised by all the countries that have imposed
caveats.
It is completely understood what drove the
imposition of those restrictions. In short, UNDOF
underwent a big reorganization, and by the end of 2013
and in early 2014, it had become a much more assertive
force with a robust force reserve and capability.
As mentioned by the representative of New Zealand,
countries with UNDOF and the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO), have
mitigated the problems to a large extent with better
medical evacuation facilities, contingency planning,
armoured vehicles, strict movement control and special
surveillance, among other elements. The conditions
were such that the Secretary-General in his reports
to the Security Council was able to point out those
mitigating measures and encourage troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) to lift their caveats. There were also
many briefings to TCCs by UNDOF and to UNTSO
TCCs by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
Thankfully, countries like New Zealand and many
others did lift those caveats, but, as I said, there are still
some that did not. With regard to how the caveats were
reported, there were no major sudden notifications.
They were done in a reasoned way, I think, through
the Permanent Representatives to the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations.
The representative of Spain asked a question as
to what extent we can still carry out our mandate.
Observer Group Golan is doing that to the best of its
ability, meeting the tasks set by the Force Commander
of UNDOF. It is still manning observation points on the
Alpha line, and it has taken up additional temporary
observation posts — all of which, to some extent, fill the
gaps created by having to leave the area of separation.
In that regard, Observation Group Golan and UNDOF
are well placed to continue to carry out the mandate as
best as they can, within the constraints that currently
exist, while not being able to position themselves within
the area of separation to the extent that we would want.
I think that that more or less covers what I wanted
to say in response.
The President: I thank Major General Finn for the
information that he has provided.
30/31

17/06/2015

I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous to respond to
the comments.
Mr. Ladsous: The lunch hour is getting close, so I
will be brief, but I would like to make a few comments
on some of the issues discussed at length today.
First, on the protection of civilians, it is very
much at the core of all our contemporary mandates,
and we need to continue to do a better job of it. Of
course, we cannot have a peacekeeper behind every
citizen of the country concerned. We therefore have to
manage expectations. At least, within the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, we have put together an
action plan for the next two years that places a very
strong emphasis on training — a much more intensive
effort — training that trains peacekeepers both prior to
and immediately after deployment, so as to ensure that
they are fully aware of what is expected of them.
In the light of that, it is important to recall that
the protection of civilians is in the first instance the
responsibility of the host State. If they cannot do it
themselves, for any number of reasons, that should
not impede the work that we are trying to do. In that
connection, I ask the Council to consider South Sudan,
a country where we felt that we needed to do a better
job to protect civilians. We needed attack helicopters.
That request was denied. We needed unarmed aerial
vehicles. My request was denied personally three times
by the President last year. We also required the ability
to move around, the freedom of movement. That was
denied. Not only did the Government deny us freedom
of movement, but the Sudan did the same numerous
times. If we factor into that the fact that Juba, for
instance, declared members of our senior personnel
personae non grata and that yesterday it was announced
that from now on any United Nations personnel who
took pictures would be considered spies, that raises a
number of concerns. I wanted to highlight that problem.
On caveats, one has to be realistic. No one is
questioning the legitimacy of a troop-contributng
country having good reasons, which have to do with its
sovereign rights, for imposing restrictions on the use of
its personnel. I would nevertheless say thata we have
to be made aware of those restrictions in advance. We
cannot first find out about them at the moment when
things take a turn for the worse. When the situation on
the Syrian side of the Golan Heights became dangerous,
some countries refused to remain there. That is of course
their right and privilege. We cannot, however, tolerate
what has happened in other theatres — including
15-18174

17/06/2015

United Nations peacekeeping operations

South Sudan — where we discovered suddenly that a
particular contingent was taking orders from its capital,
circumventing the Force Commander and the entire
chain of command. We cannot accept that, and if such a
problem arises, we need, at the very least, to be aware.
If the Force Commander can manage those caveats,
that is fine, but we should try to avoid being put in a
situation of fait accompli, ex post facto. If that does
occur, my policy is clearly to send the contingent in
question back home to its troop-contributing country,
because we simply cannot rely on it.
I think that we must continue to do all we can to
enhance the protection of the force. The safety and
security of our peacekeepers is an absolute priority.
General Lollesgaard enumerated a number of points
that are being considered, including intelligence. The
purpose of intelligence is to better protect our people,
in addition to helping them do a better job. It all fits into
the wider picture.
The representative of the United States raised the
issue of medical evacuation. This is an area in which
change is very rapid: for a long time we could rely on
the concept of the “golden hour” in smaller theatres
where facilities were available reasonably quickly and
the force was relatively compact. Nowadays, we need
much more mobility and there is more fractioning
of contingents. When one battalion is spread across
five, six or seven positions, as happens in the Central
African Republic, for instance, we need to factor
in the medical element at the level of the basic unit,
which means level-1 facilities in every deployment, if
possible. The more contemporary 10-1-2 guideline is
the way forward, but it requires not only medical means

S/PV.7464

but also helicopters with night-flying capabilities and,
once again, the consent of the host Government. Not
so long ago, in the Sudan, a peacekeeper died of his
wounds because the request for a helicopter flight to
pick him up was refused.
In terms of more generic messages, General
Maqsood Ahmed, the Military Adviser for Peacekeeping
Operations, and I have decided to emphasize
performance at this year’s conference of chiefs of
military components, even more than in previous years,
because that is the expectation of the Security Council
and the membership of the United Nations, and we must
continue to do better.
With regard to the issue of sexual exploitation
and abuse, I completely agree that any act of sexual
misconduct is unacceptable and that one act is too
many. A zero-tolerance approach is required from all
concerned, not only the Secretariat but also the Member
States. It was, after all, the Member States that decided
to retain the capacity to prosecute and ultimately pass
judgment on those responsible for such terrible acts.
We must all do our duty in that regard and must not
forget the problem of the victims, who must be helped.
We are working on the matter.
As the generals present today know, military
capability is about leadership, and all of them are
displaying that quality. I want to thank them for that
and tell them that we and the Security Council stand by
their side, as reflected in today’s debate.
The President: I thank Mr. Ladsous for the
clarifications he has provided.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

15-1817431/31
