VI.

9. Further requests the Secretary-General to
strengthen the information activities and to provide the
secretariat of the International Year of Disabled Persons with all the resources and personnel necessary for
carrying out its work;
10. Welcomes the progress already made in the
drafting of a long-term world plan of action and approves the procedure and time-scale for its adoption
proposed by the Advisory Committee for the International Year of Disabled Persons at its second session:"'
11. Requests the Secretary-General to convene a session of the Advisory Committee in 1981;
12. Requests the Advisory Committee to examine
the possibilities of continuing the activities of the International Institute for the Rehabilitation of Disabled
Persons in Developing Countries in the light of the experience of the International Year of Disabled Persons;
13. Invites all heads of State or Government, the
President of the thirty-fifth session of the General
Assembly and the Secretary-General to issue special
messages at the beginning of the International Year of
Disabled Persons;
14. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-sixth session the item entitled "International
Year of Disabled Persons" and, in view of its importance, recommends that this item should be considered
by the General Assembly in plenary meeting, in observance of the Year;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session on the implementation of the present resolution.

92nd plenary meeting
I I December I 980

35/134.

International Research and Training Institute
for the Advancement of Women

The General Assembly,

Recalling its resolution 34/ 157 of 17 December 1979,
in which it expressed the desire that the consultations
concerning the agreement with the Government of the
host country would be expeditiously concluded and requested the Secretary-General to consult Member States
with a view to nominating the Director of the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women as soon as possible,
Having received the report of the Board of Trustees of
the Institute on its session held at Geneva from 22 to
26 October 1979, "7
Having also received the report of the SecretaryGeneral, 68
I. Urges the Secretary-General to appoint the Director of the International Research and Training Institute
for the Advancement of Women, taking fully into account the consultations held with Member States to that
end;
2. Expresses its desire that the necessary consultations concerning the agreement with the Government of
the Dominican Republic will be expeditiously concluded;
""A/35/444, annex.
"' E/ 1980/23.
"A/35/94.

189

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

3. Expresses also its desire that the Institute will start
to function in the Dominican Republic and that its installation in the host country will not be unduly delayed;
4. Reiterates the guidelines set out in Economic and
Social Council resolution 1998 (LX) of 12 May 1976
regarding the activities of the Institute, in particular the
need for close collaboration with the regional institutes
which have similar objectives;
5. Invites Governments to contribute to the United
Nations Trust Fund for the International Research and
Training Institute for the Advancement of Women, both
financially and in kind;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Economic and Social Council at its first regular session
of 1981 on the implementation of the present resolution.

92nd plenary meeting
I I December I 980

35 / 135.

Refugee and displaced women

The General Assembly,
Having considered the resolutions adopted by the
World Conference of the United Nations Decade for
Women and the recommendations contained in the
Programme of Action for the Second Half of the United
Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development
and Peace relating to refugee and displaced women,'•''
which are of concern to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
Recognizing that the problems of refugees and displaced persons affect every continent and place special
burdens on developing countries,
A ware that the increasingly serious situations of
refugees and displaced persons place heavy social and
economic burdens on those countries which provide
asylum, relief or rehabilitation,
Noting with great concern that women and children
constitute the majority of refugees and displaced persons in most areas,
Recognizing that the needs of refugee and displaced
women as mothers and as women who have sole responsibility for the support of their families require constructive recognition by all parties to their relief and rehabilitation,
Recognizing also the particular vulnerability of
refugee and displaced women to intimidation, exploitation and physical and sexual abuse,
A ware that the special problems of refugee and displaced women have to date not been fully studied,
Strongly emphasizing the need for increased support
from the international community for the large number
of refugees and displaced persons,
I. Requests all States to co-operate with the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in order to
assure full protection of the well-being of women and
children in particular. in accordance with their fundamental rights under international law and national legislation;
2. Calls upon all States and donors providing immediate relief to refugees and displaced persons to en-

"'' See Report of the World Conference of the United Nations Decade
for Women: Equality, Development and Peace. Copenhagen. 14-30 July
19?/0 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.80.IV.3 and corrigendum). chap. I.

190

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

deavour to lessen the special vulnerability of women in
these circumstances, by ensuring their access to emergency relief and to health programmes, and their active
participation in decision making in centres or camps for
refugees or displaced persons;
3. Urges the international community to provide
urgent and adequate assistance to all refugee and displaced women and to developing countries providing
asylum or rehabilitation, especially the least developed
and most seriously affected countries;
4. Further calls upon all States and donors assisting
in the rehabilitation, resettlement or repatriation of
refugees and displaced persons to recognize the pivotal
role of the mother in the family, and thus in the provision of family welfare, to ensure women's rights to
physical safety and to facilitate their access to counselling services and material assistance;
5. Urges the High Commissioner to work with host
country Governments to encourage the participation of
women, including refugee women, in the administration of refugee assistance programmes, notably the
provision of essential food, shelter and medical services
in countries of asylum and to promote their participation in training and orientation programmes in countries of asylum and resettlement;
6. Urges the High Commissioner to draw upon the
expertise of all United Nations bodies concerned and, in
consultation with the countries concerned, to carry out
detailed studies and research to determine the extent to
which refugee and displaced women are especially vulnerable and to formulate and implement programmes
and projects based upon the results of these studies;
7. Recommends that the Office of the High Commissioner should co-ordinate with the United Nations
agencies and non-governmental organizations concerned
the collection and analysis of data and the conduct of
research and case studies on the critical needs of refugee
and displaced women;
8: Further recommends that the High Commissioner
should ensure that the number of women at all levels on
his staff, particularly in the field, is increased and that a
high-level staff position is designated as a co-ordinator
for women's programmes.

92nd plenary meeting
11 December 1980
35/136.

World Conference of the United Nations
Decade for Women

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3520 (XXX) of 15 December
1975, in which it proclaimed the period from 1976 to
1985 United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace and decided to convene a world
conference at the mid-term of the Decade,
Recalling also its resolution 34/ 158 of 17 December
1979 on the World Conference of the United Nations
Decade for Women,
Recalling further its resolution 34/ 180 of 18 December
1979, the annex to which contains the text of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women,
Reaffirming the principles and objectives set forth in
the Declaration of Mexico on the Equality of Women
and Their Contribution to Development and Peace,

1975, 111 and in the World Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Objectives of the International
Women's Year,''
Bearing in mind its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of I May 1974, containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of
12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation,
Bearing in mind further the consensus achieved on the
text of the International Development Strategy for the
Third United Nations Development Decade, 72 in particular on the implementation of the objectives of the
United Nations Decade for Women within the framework of the Strategy,
Having considered the Report of the World Conference
of the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality. Development and Peace, 11
Convinced that the Conference, by adopting the
Programme of Action for the Second Half of the United
Nations Decade for Women and other relevant decisions and resolutions," has made an important and
positive contribution to the attainment of the objectives
of the Decade and permitted the maintenance of a policy
framework to deal with the concerns of women,
Recognizing the need for the active participation of
women in the achievement of a just and lasting peace
and social progress, the establishment of the new international economic order, complete respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms and the integration of
women into the development process so that the
equality of men and women may be affirmed and their
situation improved,
Reaffirming that the realization of equal rights for
women at all levels and in all areas of life will contribute to the struggle for the elimination of colonialism,
neo-colonialism, all forms of racism and racial discrimination and apartheid,
Considering that the recommendations made in the
Programme of Action and in other relevant decisions
and resolutions adopted by the Conference should immediately be translated into concrete action by States,
the organizations of the United Nations system and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the Report of the
World Conference of the United Nations Decade for
Women: Equality, Development and Peace;
2. Endorses the Programme of Action for the
Second Half of the United Nations Decade for Women,
as adopted at the Conference;
3. Recognizes that the Conference made an important and constructive contribution by appraising the
progress achieved and the obstacles encountered in the
implementation of the objectives of the Decade and by
preparing and adopting a programme for the next five
years:
4. Affirms that the implementation of the Programme of Action should result in the complete in0
'
See Report of the World Conference of the International Women's
Year. Mexico City, 19 June-:! July /975 (United Nations publication.
Sales No. E.76.IV.1 I. chap. I.
·: Ibid .. chap. 11. sect. A.
·, See sect. V. resolution J:i/56, annex.
'United Nations publication. Sales No. L.80.IV.J and corrigendum.
., Ibid .. chap. I.
