240

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

Power to take all necessary steps to strengthen and diversi­
fy the economy of the Territory, with a view to. reducing
the Territory's economic dependence on the admm1stenng
Power;
9. Reiterates the view that one obstacle to economic
development, particularly in the agricultural sector, stems
from the fact that large tracts of land are held by the feder­
al authorities and calls upon the administering Power, in
co-operation with the local authorities, to continue the
transfer of land to the people of the Territory;
l 0. Reiterates its call upon the administering Power, in
co-operation with the territorial Government, to take
measures aimed at removing constraints to growth in the
areas of commercial fishing, agriculture and the transpor­
tation industry and to ensure their development to the
fullest extent;
11. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation
with the territorial Government, to continue to take effec­
tive measures to safeguard and guarantee the right of the
people of Guam to their natural resources and to establish
and maintain control over their future development and
requests the administering Power to take all necessary
steps to protect the property rights of the people of the
Territory;
12. Takes note of the steps taken by the administering
Power to develop and promote the language and culture of
the Chamorro people, who are the indigenous population
of the Territory, and reaffirms the importance of further
efforts in that field;
13. Considers that the possibility of sending a further
visiting mission to Guam at an appropriate time should be
kept under review;
14. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
examination of this question at its next session, including
the possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to Guam
at an appropriate time and in consultation with the admin­
istering Power, and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its fortieth session.
87th plenary meeting
5 December 1984

39/33. Question of Bermuda
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Bermuda,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 12
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Inde­
pendence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all other
resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to
Bermuda, including in particular its resolution 38/43 of 7
December 1983,
Taking into account the statement of the representative
of the administering Power relating to the Territory, 13 in
which he said that his Government would fully respect the
wishes of the people of Bermuda in determining the future
constitutional status of the Territory,
Conscious of the need to ensure the full and speedy
implementation of the Declaration in respect of the
Territory,
12 Ibid., chaps. IV, V, VI and XX.
13 Ibid.. Thirtv-ninth Session. Fourth Committee, I 6th meeting, paras.
45-50.

Welcoming the continued co-operation of the adminis­
tering Power in the work of the Special Committee in
regard to Bermuda, which contributes to informed consid­
eration of conditions in the Territory, with a view to accel­
erating the process of decolonization for the purpose of the
full implementation of the Declaration.
Recalling all relevant resolutions of the United Nations
relating to military bases and installations in colonial and
Non-Self-Governing Territories, and aware of the presence
of military bases and installations of the administering
Power and other countries in Bermuda,
Noting that the economy of the Territory continues to be
based on revenue generated from tourism and the registra­
tion of foreign companies, which creates a heavy depen­
dence on those activities,
Noting also that Bermuda has been somewhat isolated
from its Caribbean neighbours,
Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical
location and economic conditions of the Territory and
bearing in mind the necessity of diversifying and strength­
ening further its economy as a matter of priority in order
to promote economic stability,
Mindful that Umted Nations visiting missions provide
an effective means of ascertaining the situation in the
small Territories, acquiring first-hand information on the
situation prevailing in those Territories and ascertaining
the views of the peoples concerning their future political
status,
I. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implemen­
tation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Bermuda; 14
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of Ber­
muda to self-determination and independence in conform­
ity with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
3. Reiterates the view that such factors as territorial
size. geographical location, size of population and limited
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy exer­
cise by the people of the Territory of their inalienable right
to self-determination and independence, in conformity
with the Declaration contained in General Assembly reso­
lution 1514 (XV), which fully applies to Bermuda;
4. Urges the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, as the administering Power, taking into
account the freely expressed will and desire of the people
of Bermuda, to continue to take all necessary steps to
ensure the full and speedy implementation of General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
5. Reiterates that it is the obligation of the administer­
ing Power to create such conditions in the Territory as will
enable the people of Bermuda to exercise freely and with­
out interference their inalienable right to self-determina­
tion and independence in accordance with General Assem­
bly resolution 1514 (XV) and, in that connection, reaffirms
the importance of fostering an awareness among the
people of Bermuda of the possibilities open to them in the
exercise of that right;
6. Reaffirms that, in accordance with the relevant pro­
visions of the Charter of the United Nations and the Dec­
laration contained in General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV), it is ultimately for the people of Bermuda them­
selves to decide on their future political status;
14 fi>id.. Th1m·-ninth Semon. S11pp/m1cnt Vo. l.i (A!39:23). chap. XX.

VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

7. Reaffirms its strong conviction that the presence of
military bases and installations in the Territory could con­
stitute a major obstacle to the implementation of the Dec­
laration and that it is the responsibility ·of the administer­
ing Power to ensure that the existence of such bases and
installations does not hinder the population of the Terri­
tory from exercising its right to self-determination and
independence in conformity with the purposes and princi­
ples of the Charter of the United Nations;
8. Urges the administering Power to continue to take
all necessary measures not to involve the Territory in any
offensive acts or interference directed against other States
and to comply fully with the purposes and principles of the
Charter, the Declaration and the resolutions and decisions
of the General Assembly relating to military activities and
arrangements by colonial Powers in Territories under their
administration;
9. Welcomes the recent exchanges and visits under­
taken by the territorial Government with its Caribbean
neighbours and recommends that further regional contacts
be pursued;
10. Urges once again the administering Power, in co­
operation with the territorial Government, to continue to
take all effective measures to guarantee the right of the
people of Bermuda to own and dispose of their natural
resources and to establish and maintain control of their
future development;
11. Strongly urges the administering Power, in consul­
tation with the Government of Bermuda, to make every
effort to diversify the economy of Bermuda, including
increased efforts to promote agriculture, fisheries and the
manufacturing sector, which will benefit the people of the
Territory;
12. Welcomes the role being played in the Territory by
the United Nations Development Programme in provid­
ing assistance in the fields of agriculture, forestry and fish­
eries and urges the specialized agencies and all other
organizations of the United Nations system to continue to
pay special attention to the development needs of
Bermuda;
I 3. Reiterates its call upon the administering Power, in
co-operation with the local authorities, to continue to
expedite the process of "bermudianization" in the Terri­
tory and, in that connection, urges that particular attention
be paid to greater localization of the managerial, executive
and professional positions of the public service and the
private sector;
14. Calls upon the Government of the United King­
dom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to receive a
visiting mission in the Territory at an appropriate time;
15. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
examination of this question at its next session, including
the possible dispatch of a visiting mission to Bermuda at
an appropriate time and in consultation with the adminis­
tering Power, and to report thereon to the General Assem­
bly at its fortieth session.
87th plenary meeting
5 December 1984

39/34. Question of the British Virgin Islands
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the British Virgin
Islands,
15 Ibid., chaps. IV and XXI.
16 Ibid., Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/31/23/Rev.l). vol. IV,
chap. XXVIII, annex, para. 162.

241

Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries anq Peoples. 15
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Inde­
pendence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all other
resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to
the British Virgin Islands, including in particular its reso­
lution 38/44 of 7 December 1983,
Taking into account the statement of the representative
of the administering Power relating to the Territory, 13 in
which he said that his Government would fully respect the
wishes of the people of the British Virgin Islands in deter­
mining the future political status of the Territory,
Conscious of the need to ensure the full and speedy
implementation of the Declaration in respect of the
Territory,
Noting with appreciation the continued active participa­
tion of the administering Power in the work of the Special
Committee in regard to the British Virgin Islands, thereby
enabling it to conduct a more informed and meaningful
examination of the situation in the Territory, with a view
to accelerating the prooess of decolonization for the pur­
pose of the full implementation of the Declaration,
Reaffirming the responsibility of the administering Pow­
er for the economic and social development of the
Territory,
Taking note of the fact that the economy of the Territory
has continued to grow, particularly in the real estate, con­
struction, tourist and banking industries, although at a
slower pace, due to the world recession,
A ware of the special circumstances of the geographical
location and economic conditions of the Territory and
bearing in mind the necessity of diversifying and strength­
ening further its economy as a matter of priority in order
to promote economic stability,
Recalling the recommendation of the United Nations
visiting mission dispatched to the British Virgin Islands in
197 6 16 that the administering Power should facilitate the
participation of the Territory as an associate member in
various organizations of the United Nations system as part
of the overall strategy of accelerating the decolonization
process,
Mindful that United Nations visiting missions provide
an effective means of ascertaining the situation in the
small Territories and expressing its satisfaction at the
willingness of the administering Power to receive visiting
missions in the Territories under its administration,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implemen­
tation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the British
Virgin Islands; 17
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of the
British Virgin Islands to self-determination and indepen­
dence in conformity with the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, con­
tained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
3. Reiterates the view that such factors as territorial
size, geographical location, size of population and limited
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy exer­
cise by the people of the Territory of their inalienable right
to self-determination and independence in conformity
17 /hid., Thirty-ninth Sesswn. Supplement No 23 (A/J9/23). chap. XXI.
