UN'IED NAI'ONS
GENERAL
A S S E M B LY

Dletr.
GENERAT

a/6ttt

L5 Jtne a95'{

ENGI,IgH

ORISIIIAL: mr$SIAN
r,Etrsn DATFD lt JUNE 196? I'ROM TEE pSirMAl{ENT REPnESENfATI\IE or
TEE UMO}I OF SOVTET SOCIALIST AEP{,]BIJTCS TO TTIE UNITED MTf,ONS
ADDBXSSSD EO III{E SECRT,TARY-GENERAL

I have tbe honour to forltsJd hererrith a letter fror0 l,!r. A.A. Grornyko,
I,linlster for Foreign Affalrs of the US$, conceming the lnnedia'le convenlng of
an eElexgency speclal sessLon of the General Assenbly to consj.der the question of
l1quld"atlng the coneequences of lsraeltg agg"ession agalnst the Arab States and
the Jnrnedtate wlthdraraal of Israel trooDs behind. the affliBtice lines.

Gfgegl N. rsDonwi{c

67-L1728

t/6tu

Engllsh
Fage 2

U June 196?
Despite the Security Councilr s decisions concerning the cessation of
hostilities betseen lsrael and the Arab states, rsrael is contlnu!,ng its piratlcal
aggression' rn flagrant defiance of the seculity council d€matlis for a cease-flte
adopted on 6, 7 and 9 June, rsrael- has Beized further territories belonging to the
Unlt,ed Arab RepubLic, Jordan and Sy-ria.
fhe Soviet Government considels it essentlal that the United Natioas General
Assenbl'y, in accordance rai th Article rl of the united lvatlonE charber, shouLd
consider the sltuation which has arisen and sirouid adopt a decision designed. to
bring about the liquidation of the consequences of aggression and the iruedlate
rdithdra$al of Israel forces behind the autistice 1ines.
The Soviet Government cal1s for the lfilrediate convening of an energency
speciaL session of the united Nations ceneral Asseobly for these pu4)oses. The
soviet Government proposes that an erergency special session should be convened
w1thin twentr'- four hours.
The Sorriet Government reguests you to take $hatever step8 are necessary for
the convening of ouch a session and to notify it as pronptly as possible of the
exact date of opening of the General Asseulyt s sesslon, The Soviet Governnent
would infolu you thab it wi}l send a dleLegation including leading state$nen
of the Soviet Union to the General Asse$bly,
Kindly regarti this lettef, as an extr)Ianatory menorandus within the meaning of
rule 2O of the rules of procetlure anil circulate lt wl thout delay as an official
dosmenN of the United Nations General Assenbly,

(signea) A. GnoMfKo
Minister for lorelgn Affairs of the USSR

His Excellency U Thant,
secreta"y;c€neral of the united Nations
