IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

watercourses and on jurisdictional immunities of States
and their property, taking into account the replies to the
questionnaires addressed to Governments as well as information furnished by them;
(/) Continue its work on the status of the diplomatic
courier and the diplomatic bag not accompanied by diplomatic courier, with a view to the possible elaboration
of an appropriate legal instrument;
5. Recommends further that the International Law
Commission should continue its study of the second
part of the topic of relations between States and international organizations;
6. Endorses the decisions of the International Law
Commission requesting observations and comments on
the provisions adopted on first reading of the draft articles on succession of States in respect of matters other
than treaties, 29 on treaties concluded between States and
international organizations or between international organizations30 and on responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts; 3 '
7. Urges Governments to respond as fully and expeditiously as possible to the requests of the International Law Commission for comments and observations on its draft articles and questionnaires and for
materials on topics on its programme of work;
8. Welcomes the considerations and recommendations contained in the report of the International Law
Commission on questions having a bearing on the
nature, programme and methods of work of the Commission and the organization of its sessions with a view
to the timely and effective fulfilment of the tasks entrusted to it;
9. Reaffirms its previous decisions concerning
research projects and studies required by the work of the
International Law Commission and the increased role of
the Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs
of the Secretariat, as well as those concerning the need
for continuing provision of summary records of the
Commission's meetings;
lO. Expresses confidence that the International Law
Commission will continue to keep the progress of its
work under review and to develop the methods of work
best suited to the speedy completion of the tasks entrusted to it;
l l. Reaffirms its wish that the International Law
Commission will continue to enhance its co-operation
with legal organs of intergovernmental organizations
whose work is of interest for the progressive development of international law and its codification;
12. Expresses the wish that seminars will continue to
be held in conjunction with sessions of the International
Law Commission and that an increasing number of
participants from developing countries will be given the
opportunity to attend those seminars;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the
International Law Commission, for its attention, the
records of the debate on the report of the Commission at
the thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly and to
prepare and distribute a topical summary of the debate.

95th plenary meeting
I 5 December I 980
"Ibid., Supplement No. /0 (A/35/10). para. I 5.
rn Ibid., para. 55.
.
" Ibid., para. 31.

35/164.

263

Report of the Special Committee on the Chart er of the United Nations and on the
Strengthening of the Role of the Organization

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its support for the purposes and principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling its resolutions 686 (VII) of 5 December
1952, 992 (X) of 21 November 1955, 2285 (XXII) of
5 December 1967, 2552 (XXIV) of 12 December
1969, 2697 (XXV) of 11 December 1970, 2968 (XXVII)
of 14 December 1972 and 3349 (XXIX) of 17 December
1974,
Recalling also its resolutions 2925 (XXVII) of
27 November 1972, 3073 (XXVIII) of 30 November
1973 and 3282 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974 on the
strengthening of the role of the United Nations,
Recalling especially its resolution 3499 (XXX) of
15 December 1975. by which it established the Special
Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on
the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization,
and its resolutions 31 /28 of 29 November 1976, 32/45 of
8 December 1977, 33/94 of 16 December 1978 and
34/147 of 17 December 1979,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee, 12
Noting that significant progress has been made in fulfilling the mandate of the Special Committee,
Noting also the progress of the debate held during the
thirty-fifth session on the item entitled "Peaceful settlement of disputes between States", included in the
agenda in pursuance of General Assembly resolution
34/102 of 14 December 1979, especially concerning the
consideration of the draft Manila declaration on the
peaceful settlement of international disputes,.11
Recognizing the importance and usefulness of the
µ.epertoire of the Practice of the Security Council and the
Repertory of Practice of United Nations Organs as the
principal sources of records for the analytical studies of
the application and interpretation of the provisions of
the Charter and of the rules of procedure made thereunder,
Noting the importance that pre-session consultations
among the members of the Special Committee and other
interested States may have in facilitating the fulfilment
of its task,
Considering that the Special Committee has not yet
completed the mandate entrusted to it,
1. Takes note of the report of the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the
Strengthening of the Role of the Organization:
2. Decides that the Special Committee should continue its work in pursuance of the following tasks with
which it is entrusted:
(a) To list the proposals which have been made or
will be made in the Committee and to identify those
which have awakened special interest;

(b) To examine proposals which have been made or
will be made in the Committee with a view to according
priority to the consideration of those areas on which
general agreement is possible and to make recommendations thereon;
"Ibid., Supplement No. 33 (A/35/33 and Corr.!).
'' Ibid., para. 159.

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

264

3. Requests the Special Committee at its next session:
(a) To accord priority to its work on the proposals
regarding the question of the maintenance of international peace and security, with a view to listing and examining all proposals, including those relating to the
functioning of the Security Council;
(b) To consider proposals made by Member States
on the question of rationalization of existing procedures of the United Nations and, subsequently, any
proposals under other topics;
4. Further requests the Special Committee, in the
l~ght of the progress it has achieved concerning the ques~1on of the peaceful settlement of disputes, to continue
its work on this question with a view to developing and
recommending a means of bringing the work to an appropriate conclusion on the basis of the list prepared by
the Committee in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 33/94;
5. Also requests the Special Committee to continue
the elaboration of the draft Manila declaration on the
peaceful settlement of international disputes with a view
to submitting it for consideration to the General
Assembly at its thirty-sixth session;
6. Requests the Special Committee to be mindful of
the i!llportai:ice_ ?f reaching general agreement whenever 1t has s1gntf1cance for the outcome of its work:
7. Urges members of the Special Committee to participate fully in its work in fulfilment of the mandate entrusted to it;
8. _Invites Governments to submit or to bring up to
date, 1f they deem it necessary, their observations and
proposals in accordance with General Assembly resolution 3499 (XXX);
9. Requests the Secretary-General to render all
a~sistance to the Special Committee, including the provis10n of summary records; 14
_10.. Requests the Secretary-General to give high
pnonty to the preparation and publication of the suppleme~ts to the Repertoire of the Practice of the Security
Council _and the Repertory of Practice of United Nations
Or$ans m order_ to bring those publications up to date as
quickly as possible and to submit a progress report on
the _matter to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth
session;
11. Requests the Special Committee to submit a
r~port on_its work to the General Assembly at its thirtysixth session;
. 12.. De~ides to \nclude in the provisional agenda of
its t~1rty-s1xth ~ess1on the item entitled "Report of the
Special Committee on the Charter of the United
Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the
Organization".

95th plenary meeting
I 5 December 1980

35/165.

Report of the Committee on Relations with the
Host Country

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
Relations with the Host Country,"

Recalling Article 105 of the Charter of the United
Nations, the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations 30 and the Agreement between the United Nations and the United States of
America regarding the Headquarters of the United
Nations, n
Recalling further that the problems related to the privileges and immunities of the missions accredited to the
United Nations, the security of the missions and the
safety of their personnel are of great importance and
concern to the Member States, as well as the primary responsibility of the host country,
Having noted with deep concern the recent increase in
acts of terrorism against the premises and personnel of
missions accredited to the United Nations, noting the
assurances given by the competent authorities of the
host country and recognizing that effective measures
should be taken in view of recent developments, in particular to avoid any acts violating the security of missions and the safety of their personnel,
Expressing its sympathy for the victims of the acts of
terrorism perpetrated against accredited missions and
their personnel,
I. Endorses the recommendations of the Committee
on Relations with the Host Country contained in
paragraph 31 of its report; i;
2. Strongly condemns the acts of terrorism perpetrated against missions accredited to the United Nations
and their personnel:
3. Requests the Secretary-General to remain actively engaged in all aspects of host country relations
with the United Nat ions, in particular with regard to
the need for effective measures to be taken by the host
country in view of recent developments, and to follow
deve_lopments in these areas in co-operation with the
Chairman of the Committee on Relations with the Host
Country;
4. Requests the Committee on Relations with the
Host Country to continue its work, in conformity with
General Assembly resolution 28 I9 (XXVI) of 15 December 1971;
_5. pecides t~ include !n the provisional agenda of its
th1rty-s1xth session the item entitled "Report of the
Committee on Relations with the Host Country".
95th plenary meeting
15 December 1980
35 / I 66.

Consolidation and progressive development of
the principles and norms of international economic law relatin~ in particular to the legal
aspects of the new mternational economic order

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that, in accordance with the Charter
of the U_ni_t~d Natio~s, the General Assembly is called
upon to m1tiate studies and make recommendations for
the purp_ose of ~ncouraging the progressive development of mternat1onal law and its codification,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of I May 1974, containing the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic

"See sect. VIII, resolution 35/10 B. para. 2 (e).

'' Official Records of the General Assemblv. Thirty-fijih Session.
Supplement No. 26 (A/35/26).
·

"' Resolution 22 A (I).
·· Resolution 169 (II).
